COUNTY OF DUBOIS, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-3 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-12, passed 9-15-2025 and
Res. 2023-11, passed 7-3-2023; and
State legislation current through Indiana Legislative Service, 2025 Acts,
Pamphlet No. 3
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2021-22
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR DUBOIS COUNTY, INDIANA,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, COMPILING, AND CODIFYING THE EXISTING ORDINANCES
OF DUBOIS COUNTY, INDIANA DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF
ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, I.C. 36-1-5-3 requires the legislative body of counties to codify
its ordinances into a complete and simplified code;
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of Dubois County,
Indiana are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form
and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety
and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its
affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Indiana empower and
authorize the Dubois County, Indiana to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
   WHEREAS, the Board of Commissioners of Dubois County, Indiana has authorized
a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
Dubois County, Indiana of a general and permanent nature and publication of
such ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of Dubois
County, Indiana and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
   NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED AND ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF
DUBOIS COUNTY, INDIANA AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of Dubois County, Indiana as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of Dubois County, Indiana."
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
    10.   General Provisions
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
    30.   County Council and Board of Commissioners
    31.   Employees and Officials
    32.   Organizations
    33.   Emergency Management
    34.   Fees, Finances
    35.   Taxation
    36.   General Administrative Policies
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
    50.   Water
    51.   Waste, Sanitation
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
    70.   General Provisions
    71.   Recreational Vehicles
    72.   Traffic Schedules
    73.   Parking Schedules
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
    90.   Health and Sanitation
    91.   Recreation and Leisure
    92.   Nuisances; Property Maintenance
    93.   Animals
    94.   Fair Housing
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
    110.   Cable Television Rate Regulations
    111.   Retail Food, Bed and Breakfast Establishment
    112.   Sexually-Oriented Businesses
    113.   Tattoo, Body Piercing Businesses
   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
    130.   Offenses Against Public Peace
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
    150.   Building Regulations; Construction
    151.   Subdivision Standards; Platting
   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
    I.   Franchises and Agreements
    II.   Annexations and Disannexations
    III.   Vacations
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
    References to Indiana Code
    References to Resolutions
    References to Ordinances
   INDEX
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Board of Commissioners of Dubois County and the Auditor of
Dubois County, Indiana is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such
Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Auditor.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.   
Section 6.   This ordinance shall be effective from and after adoption by the
Board of Commissioners of Dubois County and completion of any other legal
requirements, all in the manner as provided by law.
   PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Board of Commissioners of Dubois County at a
regularly scheduled public meeting held on this, the 7th day of June, 2021.
   __________________________________________
   CHAD BLESSINGER, President
   __________________________________________
   ELMER BRAMES, Commissioner
   __________________________________________
   NICK HOSTETTER, Commissioner
 
ATTEST:
__________________________________________
SANDRA L. MORTON, AUDITOR OF
DUBOIS COUNTY, INDIANA
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the county, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component codes,
titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known, and designated, as the “Dubois
County Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances”, or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously-existing laws, amendments
thereto, and newly-enacted laws. Any previously-existing law, or amendment
thereto, reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously-existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters, or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered by
the compilers of this, or any subsequent, codification in any official
publication to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning,
application, or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only, and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary, and
usual sense. Technical words and phrases, having a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law, shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The Board of Commissioners of the county.
      COUNCIL. The County Council.
      COUNTY. The County of Dubois, Indiana.
      COUNTY CLERK. The Clerk of the County Council.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads, and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to, and includes, person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver, and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following, or next preceding,
that in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      STATE. The State of Indiana.
      TOWNSHIP. The township or townships in which the county is located.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Includes printing, lithographing, or other modes
of representing words and letters. Where the WRITTEN SIGNATURE of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or the person’s
mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions under state law, see I.C. 1-1-4-5
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code as now or later amended or its application
to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section or
application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division, or part of every section, is
severable. If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with, and
so dependent upon, the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code, regardless of
whether enacted before or after the passage of this section.
   (D)   The repeal of a section or amendment stating that the chapter,
subchapter or section are severable as provided in division (B) above does not
affect the operation of division (B) with respect to that chapter, subchapter
or section.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section a reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend, and apply, to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this county exercising
the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of
any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the County
Council or Board of Commissioners refers to any board, bureau, commission,
division, department, officer, agency, authority, or instrumentality of any
government, and that name designation is incorrectly stated; on the effective
date of that ordinance or following the effective date, the rights, powers,
duties, or liabilities placed with that entity are, or were, transferred to a
different entity; then the named board, bureau, commission, department,
division, officer, agency, authority, or instrumentality, whether correctly
named in the ordinance at its effective date or not, means that the correctly
named entity, or the entity to which the duties, liabilities, powers, and
rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word, or words, necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word, or words, to which no
meaning can be attached; or the use of a word, or words, when another word, or
words, was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be
corrected and the word, or words, supplied, omitted, or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time, or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act, or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday, or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   (A)   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former
section or law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section
or law is not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any
section shall not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture, or liability
incurred under the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides.
   (B)   The section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the
purposes of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of
the penalty, forfeiture, or liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations, or any requirement of notice,
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings, and prosecutions for
causes arising, or acts committed, prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code, shall remain in full force
and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof, as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(I.C. 36-5-2-2)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced, and imposed, as if this code had not been
enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway
rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers, shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent violations,
except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and parking.
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   COUNTY COUNCIL AND BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
      
31.   EMPLOYEES AND OFFICIALS
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
34.   FEES, FINANCES
      
35.   TAXATION
      
36.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: COUNTY COUNCIL AND BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
Section
   
30.01   County Board of Commissioners, County Council districts
   
30.02   Meeting decorum; Board of Commissioners
   
30.03   Meeting decorum; County Council
   
30.04   Electronic meetings policy
§ 30.01 COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, COUNTY COUNCIL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   County Board of Commissioners. The county is divided into three County
Board of Commissioner election districts, designated numerically as follows:
      (1)   District One. Consists of all of Boone, Columbia, Harbison,
Madison, and Patoka Townships;
      (2)   District Two. Consists of all of Bainbridge Township; and
      (3)   District Three. Consists of all of Cass, Ferdinand, Hall, Jackson,
Jefferson, and Marion Townships.
   (B)   County Council. The county is divided into four County Council
election districts, designated numerically as follows:
      (1)   District One. Consists of the following voting precincts:
Bainbridge 3W, 5N, 6N and 7, Boone 1, Boone Jasper, Harbison 1 and 2, Madison 1
and 2, and Madison Jasper 1 and 2;
      (2)   District Two. Consists of the following precincts in Bainbridge
Township: 2E, 2W, 3E, 4N, 4S, 5S, and 6S;
      (3)   District Three. Consists of the following precincts: Columbia,
Ferdinand 1, 2 and 3, Hall, Jackson 1 and 2, Jefferson 1 and 2, and Marion 1
and 2; and
      (4)   District Four. Consists of the following precincts: Bainbridge 1,
Cass 1, 2 and 3, and Patoka 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6.
(Ord. 2021-34, passed 10-12-2021; Ord. 2025-04, passed 6-2-2025)
§ 30.02 MEETING DECORUM; BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
   The County Board of Commissioners hereby adopt the following rules which
shall apply to all individuals attending public meetings of the County Board of
Commissioners. The Chair of the Board of Commissioners may waive any of the
following rules for part or all of the meeting to accommodate an open
discussion.
   (A)   Members of the general public in attendance at a public meeting of the
Board of Commissioners have no rights with reference to the meeting except as
otherwise provided by law.
   (B)   Although members of the general public have no right to speak during a
public meeting, the Commissioners, at their sole discretion, may provide for a
public comment period, during which time individuals may be given an
opportunity to address the Commissioners.
   (C)   During any public comment period, individuals wishing to speak will be
required to sign a speaker registration sheet and provide the speaker’s name,
address, and issue or topic they wish to address. Individuals will be called to
speak in the order of which they have signed the speaker registration sheet.
   (D)   Individuals who wish to speak and have signed the speaker registration
sheet may waive their opportunity to speak once called upon; however, an
individual who waives their opportunity to speak may not be permitted to speak
at a later time.
   (E)   Once called upon, all speakers shall first state their name, their
county of residence, and the issue upon which they wish to speak. Speakers may
only speak from a podium and must speak loudly and clearly so those in
attendance may hear.
   (F)   Any speaker wishing to provide documents to the Commissioners at the
meeting shall provide one copy for each of the three Commissioners; however,
speakers are encouraged to bring additional copies of any documents they intend
to distribute during the meeting.
   (G)   Each speaker may only speak once and will be given a maximum of three
minutes to speak unless a shorter period of time is set forth by the
Commissioners at the start of the public comment period. Time may not be
reserved or yielded to other speakers and once an individual is finished
speaking, that individual’s remaining time, if any, is waived.
   (H)   Each speaker will be notified when their allotted time to speak is
exhausted and any speaker that does not immediately conclude their remarks at
the expiration of their allotted time will be deemed out of order and the
speaker will be asked to stop.
   (I)   Comments which are duplicative or repetitive will be deemed out of
order and the speaker will be asked to stop.
   (J)   Any speaker who is discourteous, argumentative, accusatory, or
insulting will be deemed out of order and asked to stop.
   (K)   Once a speaker is deemed out of order for any reason, that speaker’s
remaining time, if any, will be forfeited and the speaker will not be granted
an opportunity to make any further comment or presentation.
   (L)   All members of the general public attending a public meeting will be
expected to adhere to these rules and, any person failing to do so will be
deemed out of order.
   (M)   The Commissioners are authorized, and have sole discretion, to request
any person deemed out of order leave the meeting and once requested to leave, a
person must immediately leave the meeting room.
   (N)   In extreme cases, if a person refuses to leave the meeting after being
asked to do so and that person continues to disrupt the proceedings in a way
that is obviously hostile to the purpose of the meeting, the Commissioners may
order that the person be removed by members of the County Sheriff’s Department.
   (O)   During its public meetings, the Commissioners will take all measures
necessary under the circumstances to maintain order. In exercising this
discretion, the Commissioners will be guided by a judicious appraisal of the
circumstances, including the conduct and decorum of members of the general
public in attendance.
(Res. 2021-04, passed 2-18-2021)
§ 30.03 MEETING DECORUM; COUNTY COUNCIL.
   The County Council hereby adopt the following rules which shall apply to all
individuals attending public meetings of the County Council. The President or
Acting Chair of the County Council may waive any of the following rules for
part or all of the meeting to accommodate an open discussion.
   (A)   Members of the general public in attendance at a public meeting of the
Council have no rights with reference to the meeting except as otherwise
provided by law.
   (B)   Although members of the general public have no right to speak during a
public meeting, the Council, at their sole discretion, may provide for a public
comment period, during which time individuals may be given an opportunity to
address the Council.
   (C)   During any public comment period, individuals wishing to speak will be
required to sign a speaker registration sheet and provide the speaker’s name,
address, and issue or topic they wish to address. Individuals will be called to
speak in the order of which they have signed the speaker registration sheet.
   (D)   Individuals who wish to speak and have signed the speaker registration
sheet may waive their opportunity to speak once called upon; however, an
individual who waives their opportunity to speak may not be permitted to speak
at a later time.
   (E)   Once called upon, all speakers shall first state their name, their
county of residence, and the issue upon which they wish to speak. Speakers may
only speak from a podium and must speak loudly and clearly so those in
attendance may hear.
   (F)   Any speaker wishing to provide documents to the Council at the meeting
shall provide one copy for each of the seven Council members; however, speakers
are encouraged to bring additional copies of any documents they intend to
distribute during the meeting.
   (G)   Each speaker may only speak once and will be given a maximum of three
minutes to speak unless a shorter period of time is set forth by the Council at
the start of the public comment period. Time may not be reserved or yielded to
other speakers and once an individual is finished speaking, that individual’s
remaining time, if any, is waived.
   (H)   Each speaker will be notified when their allotted time to speak is
exhausted and any speaker that does not immediately conclude their remarks at
the expiration of their allotted time will be deemed out of order and the
speaker will be asked to stop.
   (I)   Comments which are duplicative or repetitive will be deemed out of
order and the speaker will be asked to stop.
   (J)   Any speaker who is discourteous, argumentative, accusatory, or
insulting will be deemed out of order and asked to stop.
   (K)   Once a speaker is deemed out of order for any reason, that speaker’s
remaining time, if any, will be forfeited and the speaker will not be granted
an opportunity to make any further comment or presentation.
   (L)   All members of the general public attending a public meeting will be
expected to adhere to these rules and, any person failing to do so will be
deemed out of order.
   (M)   The Council are authorized, and have sole discretion, to request any
person deemed out of order leave the meeting and once requested to leave, a
person must immediately leave the meeting room.
   (N)   In extreme cases, if a person refuses to leave the meeting after being
asked to do so and that person continues to disrupt the proceedings in a way
that is obviously hostile to the purpose of the meeting, the Council may order
that the person be removed by members of the County Sheriff’s Department.
   (O)   During its public meetings, the Council will take all measures
necessary under the circumstances to maintain order. In exercising this
discretion, the Council will be guided by a judicious appraisal of the
circumstances, including the conduct and decorum of members of the general
public in attendance.
(Council Res. 2021-07, passed 2-22-2021)
§ 30.04 ELECTRONIC MEETINGS POLICY.
   (A)   (1)   The provisions of I.C. 5-14-1.5-1 et seq. (the Act), including
definitions, apply to this section.
      (2)   This section shall be known as the "Electronic Meetings Policy" of
the Board of Commissioners and County Council of Dubois County, Indiana (Board
of Commissioners; County Council) and applies to the Board of Commissioners and
County Council.
   (B)   (1)   Subject to divisions (C) and (E), any member may participate in
a meeting by any electronic means of communication that:
         (a)   Allows all participating members of the governing body to
simultaneously communicate with each other; and
         (b)   Other than a meeting that is an executive session, allows the
public to simultaneously attend and observe the meeting.
      (2)   A member who participates by an electronic means of communication:
         (a)   Shall be considered present for purposes of establishing a
quorum; and
         (b)   May participate in final action only if the member can be seen
and heard.
      (3)   All votes taken during a meeting at which at least one member
participates by an electronic means of communication must be taken by roll call
vote.
   (C)   (1)   At least 50% of the members must be physically present at a
meeting at which a member will participate by means of electronic
communication. Not more than 50% of the members may participate by an
electronic means of communication at that same meeting.
      (2)   A member may not attend more than 50% of the meetings in a calendar
year by an electronic means of communication, unless the member's electronic
participation is due to:
         (a)   Military service;
         (b)   Illness or other medical condition;
         (c)   Death of a relative; or
         (d)   An emergency involving actual or threatened injury to persons or
property.
      (3)   A member may attend two consecutive meetings (a set of meetings) by
electronic communication. A member must attend in person at least one meeting
between sets of meetings that the member attends by electronic communication,
unless the member's absence is due to:
         (a)   Military service;
         (b)   Illness or other medical condition;
         (c)   Death of a relative; or
         (d)   An emergency involving actual or threatened injury to persons or
property.
   (D)   The minutes or memoranda of a meeting at which any member participates
by electronic means of communication must:
      (1)   Identify each member who:
         (a)   Was physically present at the meeting;
         (b)   Participated in the meeting by electronic means of
communication; and
         (c)   Was absent; and
      (2)   Identify the electronic means of communication by which:
         (a)   Members participated in the meeting; and
         (b)   Members of the public attended and observed the meeting, if the
meeting was not an executive session.
   (E)   No member of the Board of Commissioners or County Council may
participate by means of electronic communication in a meeting at which the
Board of Commissioners or County Council may take final action to:
      (1)   Adopt a budget;
      (2)   Make a reduction in personnel;
      (3)   Initiate a referendum;
      (4)   Impose or increase a fee;
      (5)   Impose or increase a penalty;
      (6)   Exercise the Board of Commissioners' or County Council's power of
eminent domain; or
      (7)   Establish, impose, raise or renew a tax.
   (F)   (1)   If an emergency is declared by: (a) the governor under I.C. 10-
14-3-12; or (b) The Board of Commissioners or County Council of Dubois County
under I.C. 10-14-3-29; members are not required to be physically present for a
meeting until the emergency is terminated.
      (2)   Members may participate in a meeting by any means of communication
provided that:
         (a)   At least a quorum of the members participate in the meeting by
means of electronic communication or in person.
         (b)   The public may simultaneously attend and observe the meeting
unless the meeting is an executive session.
         (c)   The minutes or memoranda of the meeting must comply with
division (D) above.
      (3)   All votes taken during a meeting at which at least one member
participates by an electronic means of communication must be taken by roll call
vote.
(Res. 2021-23, passed 6-7-2021; Res. 2021-27, passed 6-28-2021)
CHAPTER 31: EMPLOYEES AND OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   Personnel Policies Handbook; adopted by reference
   
31.02   Purchasing agents
   
31.03   Office of Treasurer; public official bond
   
31.04   Office of Auditor; Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992
   
31.05   Office of Auditor; employee’s retirement fund
   
31.06   Procedure, serving as volunteer firefighters; county employees
   
31.07   Retention of duty weapon; retired Sheriff’s employees
   
31.08   Employees; emergency call-backs of the County Highway
   
31.09   Gifts and gratuities
§ 31.01 PERSONNEL POLICIES HANDBOOK; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The county’s Personnel Policies Handbook, as amended, is adopted by
reference as if set out in full herein. A copy of the handbook is available in
the county office
(Adopted by Commissioners 12-9-2016, effective 1-1-2017)
§ 31.02 PURCHASING AGENTS.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners hereby determines that it is the purchasing
agency for the county.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners hereby designates the following persons to
serve as purchasing agents for the county:
      (1)   Each elected county official;
      (2)   Each circuit, superior, and County Court Judge;
      (3)   The County Highway Superintendent;
      (4)   The Courthouse Custodian;
      (5)   The County Health Department Administrative Director;
      (6)   The County Communications Director;
      (7)   The County EMS Director; and
      (8)   Other county employees as are designated by this Board from time to
time, in writing.
   (C)   No purchasing agent for the county shall be entitled, or empowered, to
make any single purchase, or engage in any service, which exceeds $2,500
without the expressed authority of the purchasing agency.
(Ord. 98-4, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 03-05, passed 10-27-2003)
§ 31.03 OFFICE OF TREASURER; PUBLIC OFFICIAL BOND.
   The Commissioners of Crawford, Dubois, Orange, Perry, and Spencer Counties
are hereby authorized to hold harmless whoever fills the office of Treasurer
for Indiana 15 Regional Planning Commission.
(Res. 90-1, passed 1-23-1990)
§ 31.04 OFFICE OF AUDITOR; CABLE TELEVISION CONSUMER PROTECTION AND COMPETITION
ACT OF 1992.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners approved the filing of FCC Form 328 on
October 4, 1993.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners herewith designates the County Auditor as
the designee of the county to execute all documents and/or correspondence
required as necessary to carry out the intentions of the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the regulations
promulgated by the FCC and the Board of Commissioners thereunder.
   (C)   The Auditor may appoint, and designate, a county employee to receive
consumer complaints, which may be filed with the county pursuant to the Cable
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, being Public Law
102-385, or may personally receive the complaints.
(Ord. 93-7, passed 11-15-1993)
§ 31.05 OFFICE OF AUDITOR; EMPLOYEE’S RETIREMENT FUND.
   The Auditor of the county is hereby designated as the representative of the
county to respond to all inquires from the State Public Employees’ Retirement
Fund, including, but not limited to, verification of years of creditable
service of employees of the county.
(Res. 84-4, passed - -)
§ 31.06 PROCEDURE, SERVING AS VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS; COUNTY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Any employee who is a member of a volunteer fire department must
notify the County Auditor of such membership.
   (B)   Any such member shall not be entitled to leave his or her work station
or location for the purpose of responding to fire or emergency calls without
having prior authorization from that employee’s supervisor, which authorization
may be on an event or continuing basis, as determined by such supervisor.
   (C)   Any such member absent from work because of injury suffered while
engaged in a firefighting or emergency event shall be entitled to be absent
from work, without compensation, for not in excess of six months, conditioned
upon submission of a written statement from the emergency supervisor evidencing
injury while on emergency activity, and a physician’s written statement showing
treatment received and cause of injury.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the fact that the county is not obligated to pay any
compensation to members of fire departments who are absent due to responses for
fire or emergency runs, the county shall pay such employee his or her regular
compensation during such county-authorized responses, provided, however, for a
period not to exceed ten hours per year; and further provided, that in exchange
for such compensation, the County Auditor shall deduct from such regular
compensation paid for periods of absence due to an emergency service an amount
equal to payments which said employee is entitled to receive from the emergency
agency for the period of such absence. During periods of authorized responses
when county compensation is not paid, an employee may seek, but the county
shall not be required to pay, remuneration for emergency absences by use of
vacation leave, personal time, or compensatory time off, if applicable, and, if
such absence is due to injury which occurred while engaged in an emergency
response, may seek sick leave.
(Ord. 2016-04, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 31.07 RETENTION OF DUTY WEAPON; RETIRED SHERIFF’S EMPLOYEES.
   When a merit deputy of the county retires in good standing after at least 20
years of service as a merit department employee, and when the County Sheriff,
who has served the county in such office for at least five years, and leaves
such office in good standing, he or she hereby is authorized to retain his or
her issued duty weapon (handgun), with presentation case, issued shotgun, and
receive a “retired” badge and an identification that provides his or her name
and rank, signifies that he or she is retired, and notes that he or she is
authorized to retain his or her issued duty weapons. Further, the County
Sheriff hereby is authorized, in his or her sole discretion, to allow the Chief
Deputy or the Jail Matron, who have served the county in such position for at
least five years, and who leaves his or her respective position in good
standing, to retain his or her issued duty weapon (handgun), with presentation
case, and receive a “retired” badge and an identification that provides his or
her name and rank, signifies that he or she is retired, and notes that he or
she is authorized to retain his or her issued duty weapon.
(Ord. 2005-4, passed 3-7-2005)
§ 31.08 EMPLOYEES; EMERGENCY CALL-BACKS OF THE COUNTY HIGHWAY.
   When an hourly employee who has completed his or her normal work day and
been released for the day, or who on a Saturday or Sunday non-work day has been
called back to work prior to the beginning of the next work day because of an
emergency declared by the Board of Commissioners, the supervisor, assistant
supervisor, or a 911 operator, shall be paid at a rate of one and one-half
times his or her regular rate of pay, computed to the nearest quarter hour, for
each hour worked outside the normal work day.
(Res. 2011-01, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 31.09 GIFTS AND GRATUITIES.
   (A)   Employees are encouraged to maintain good relations with suppliers and
others with whom the county conducts business. However, the practice of
accepting gifts and/or gratuities may be contrary to the public interest.
Employees shall not accept unreasonable gifts or gratuities from firms,
organizations, agents, or other individuals who furnish, or propose to furnish,
materials, goods, or services to the county.
   (B)   To comply with federal and state regulations, the Board of
Commissioners hereby establishes a definition of UNREASONABLE, as used in
division (A) above, for all county officials and employees. Wherein county
officials and employees are bound by the duties of their office or employment
to avoid any and all conflicts of interest, the dollar threshold of $200 for
any single event, meeting, or function, and $500 per vendor, per annum, is
hereby established as UNREASONABLE, below which any financial interest or value
of any gratuity is not considered UNREASONABLE.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 3-6-2017)
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Advisory council; polling places
   
32.02   County Health Department
   
32.03   County Tourism Commission
   
32.04   N.C.I.C./I.D.A.C.S. Governing Board
   
32.05   County Weed Board
Department of Parks and Recreation
   
32.20   Purpose
   
32.21   Appointment of members
   
32.22   Term expiration
   
32.23   Appointing authority
   
32.24   Vice President
   
32.25   Duties and power
   
32.26   Advisory council
   
32.27   Annual budget
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 ADVISORY COUNCIL; POLLING PLACES.
   (A)   There is hereby established an advisory council to assist the County
Board of Commissioners in the inspection of polling places in the county to
ascertain the accessibility of each such polling place for all voters at such
location; and the Board of Commissioners shall appoint members of said council,
not less than two of which shall represent representatives of the disabilities
community and elderly voters of the county.
   (B)   Said council shall periodically inspect each proposed voting place
within the county and report to the County Board of Commissioners the
accessibility status of each such location.
(Ord. 2003-6, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 32.02 COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The County Health Department is hereby established, pursuant to I.C.
16-20-1-2.
   (B)   Said County Health Department shall be managed by the County Board of
Health, which shall consist of seven members, all in the manner prescribed in
I.C. 16-20-2-5.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 8-5-1991)
§ 32.03 COUNTY TOURISM COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is hereby established the County Tourism Commission.
   (B)   Said Commission shall be composed of seven members, of which no more
than a single majority may be affiliated with the same political party.
   (C)   Members of said Commission shall be appointed in the following manner:
      (1)   Three members by the Board of Commissioners;
      (2)   One member by the County Council; and
      (3)   Three members by the Mayor of the City of Jasper, two of whom must
be engaged in the hotel or motel business within the county.
   (D)   The term of office of each member shall be two years, beginning
January 1; except, however, that one of the initial appointments of the County
Board of Commissioners, and one the initial appointments of the Mayor of Jasper
shall be designated to serve for only a one-year period, in order that terms of
office may thereafter be staggered.
(Ord. 91-12, passed 1-1-1992; Ord. 97-7, passed 1-1-1998)
§ 32.04 N.C.I.C./I.D.A.C.S. GOVERNING BOARD.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners of the county do hereby create a N.C.I.C./
I.D.A.C.S. Governing Board.
   (B)   The N.C.I.C/I.D.A.C.S. Governing Board shall consist of the County
Communications Director, the County Sheriff, the Chief of Police of the City of
Huntingburg, and the Chief of Police of the Town of Ferdinand.
   (C)   Said Board shall serve in concert with the 911 Advisory Board.
   (D)   Said Board shall advise the Board of Commissioners, as well as the 911
Advisory Board, of issues relative to the operations of the N.C.I.C./I.D.A.C.S.
system.
   (E)   Said Board is created, from among other things, for purposes of
compliance with 240 I.A.C. 5-2-10.
(Res. 91-6, passed 9-3-1991)
§ 32.05 COUNTY WEED BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby established a County Weed Control Board pursuant to
I.C. 15-16-7-3 for the purpose of controlling certain weeds as defined by the
statute.
   (B)   The Board shall consist of the following members, to-wit:
      (1)   One township trustee of the county;
      (2)   One Soil and Water Conservation District Supervisor;
      (3)   One representative from the agricultural community of the county;
      (4)   One appointee of the County Board of Commissioners; and
      (5)   A cooperative extension service agent from the county as a non-
voting advisory capacity.
   (C)   The members of the Board shall be appointed for a term of four years
to be appointed by the County Board of Commissioners, as well as the
replacement for vacancies on the Board.
(Ord. 1981, passed 9-8-1981)
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 32.20 PURPOSE.
   There is an established County Department of Parks and Recreation composed
of the Park and Recreation Board (“Board”), a superintendent, and such other
personnel as the Board may determine.
(Council Ord. 2019-02, passed 12-30-2019)
§ 32.21 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Board shall be appointed as follows:
      (1)   The County Executive shall appoint two members. The members must be
affiliated with different political parties;
      (2)   The County Fiscal Body shall appoint two members. The members must
be affiliated with different political parties;
      (3)   The County Circuit Court Judge shall appoint one member; however
the County Circuit Court Judge may not appoint a member of the County Fiscal
Body or the County Executive Body to serve on the Board; and
      (4)   The County Extension Educator may serve as an ex-officio member of
the Board.
   (B)   All members of the Board appointed under division (A) above constitute
the Board and have the same rights, including the right to vote. A vacancy in
the seat of a member shall be filled by the appointing authority to serve for
the remainder of the unexpired term.
   (C)   A municipal executive, a member of a county fiscal body, a member of
the County Executive Body, or a member of a municipal fiscal body may not serve
on the Board.
   (D)   Upon the enactment of this subchapter, the terms of members initially
appointed under division (A) above shall be as follows:
      (1)   The County Executive’s appointments are for two- and four-year
terms respectively;
      (2)   The County Fiscal Body’s appointments are for two- and four-year
terms respectively;
      (3)   The County Circuit Court Judge’s appointment is for a one-year
term;
      (4)   An appointing authority shall make initial appointments within 90
days after the enactment of this subchapter; and
      (5)   In making initial appointments under this division (D), an
appointing authority, in order to provide continuity of experience and
programs, shall give special consideration to the appointment of members from
previous Park and Recreation Boards.
(Council Ord. 2019-02, passed 12-30-2019)
§ 32.22 TERM EXPIRATION.
   (A)   As a term expires, each new appointment is for a four-year term. All
terms expire on the first Monday in January, but a member continues in office
until the member’s successor is appointed.
   (B)   If an appointment is not made by the first Monday in April, the
incumbent member shall serve another four-year term.
(Council Ord. 2019-02, passed 12-30-2019)
§ 32.23 APPOINTING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   In making appointments under §
32.21(A), an appointing authority shall appoint members on the basis of his or
her interest in, and knowledge of, parks and recreation.
   (B)   It is the desire, but is not mandatory, that the members appointed
under §
32.21(A) are a representative of each area school district within the county.
(Council Ord. 2019-02, passed 12-30-2019)
§ 32.24 VICE PRESIDENT.
   At its first regular meeting in each year, the Board shall elect a President
and a Vice President. The Vice President shall have authority to act as the
President of the Board during the absence or disability of the President. The
Board may select a secretary either from within, or without, its own
membership.
(Council Ord. 2019-02, passed 12-30-2019)
§ 32.25 DUTIES AND POWER.
   The Board shall have the general power to perform all acts necessary to
acquire and develop sites and facilities, and to conduct such programs as are
generally understood to be park and recreation functions. In addition to all
other powers necessary to achieve the general objectives of the Board, the
Board shall have, for park and recreation purposes, all the powers and duties
set forth in I.C. 36-10-3-10 and I.C. 36-10-3-11.
(Council Ord. 2019-02, passed 12-30-2019)
§ 32.26 ADVISORY COUNCIL.
   The Board may create an advisory council and special committees composed of
citizens interested in parks and recreation in accordance with I.C. 36-10-3-17.
(Council Ord. 2019-02, passed 12-30-2019)
§ 32.27 ANNUAL BUDGET.
   (A)   The Board shall prepare and submit an annual budget in the same manner
as other departments of county government, as prescribed by the State Board of
Accounts.
   (B)   The Board may accept gifts, donations, and subsidies for park and
recreation purposes.
(Council Ord. 2019-02, passed 12-30-2019)
CHAPTER 33: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
33.01   Definitions
   
33.02   Liberal construction of powers
   
33.03   Non-supersession of powers of Sheriff, other powers
   
33.04   Emergency Management Advisory Council
   
33.05   Organization of the Emergency Management Department
   
33.06   Director of Emergency Management; powers
   
33.07   Deputy Director
   
33.08   Powers, duties of Commissioners
   
33.09   Emergency management volunteers
   
33.10   Personnel
   
33.11   Budget, finance
   
33.12   Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan
   
33.13   Countywide emergency management
   
33.14   Applicability
   
33.15   Pre-disaster responsibilities
   
33.16   Special emergency powers, duties of principal executive officers
   
33.17   Emergency meeting of the Commissioners
   
33.18   Special emergency powers in absence of Board quorum, Commissioners,
Director
   
33.19   Designation of local travel advisory
   
33.20   Duties of county officers, employees during emergency
   
33.21   Limitation of liability
   
33.22   Priority of emergency orders, rules, regulations
 
   
33.99   Penalty
§ 33.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVISORY COUNCIL. The County Emergency Management Advisory Council, as
established under §
33.04.
   COMMISSIONERS. Elected public officials who serve on the County Board of
Commissioners.
   COUNTY. The County of Dubois, Indiana.
   DIRECTOR. The County Director of Emergency Management, as established and
appointed pursuant to §
33.06.
   EMERGENCY. A condition resulting from enemy attack, or other hostile action,
or from natural disaster, human-made or technological disasters, which cannot
be handled by normal operating personnel or facilities.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for, and the execution of, all
emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are
primarily responsible, for protection against, and to minimize and repair
injury and damage resulting from, enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile
action, or by natural and human-made disasters.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT VOLUNTEER. Any person who serves without compensation
in the Department of Emergency Management, including persons and private
agencies, or governmental units offering services to the county during
emergency situations, or mutual aid to other emergency agencies who request
assistance.
   HUMAN-MADE DISASTERS. Any condition human-made, such as riots, strikes,
insurrections, or other civil disturbances.
   NATURAL DISASTER. Any condition affecting or threatening the public health,
welfare, or security as a result of flood, drought, tornado, snow, or other
natural cause.
   PARTICIPATING EMERGENCY SERVICE.
      (1)   Any county department or agency designated by the Board of
Commissioners of the county to participate in emergency activities pursuant to
§
33.05(B); and
      (2)   Any department or agency of the state, another county, a
municipality, or other municipal corporation, or a volunteer organization
designated to participate in the county’s emergency management programs and
activities pursuant to a cooperative or mutual aid agreement entered into
pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-16, and §
33.06(C)(5).
   PERSONNEL. County officers and employees, and emergency management
volunteers, unless otherwise indicated.
   PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE COUNTY. As referred to in I.C. 10-14-
3 for purposes of declaring a local disaster emergency, and as referred to
hereinafter, shall mean the presiding officer of the Board of Commissioners.
The presiding officer shall be the regularly-designated President of the Board,
provided, however, if he or she is absent or incapacitated, and the Board has a
regularly-designated President Pro Tempore, then the Vice President of the
Board shall be the PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER. If both the President and the
Vice President are absent or incapacitated, then the remaining Commissioner
shall be the presiding officer.
   TECHNOLOGICAL DISASTER. Incidents such as severe fire, explosions, hazardous
material spills, radiological exposure, or other technological problems which
are beyond the control of regular forces.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.02 LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION OF POWERS.
   The general intent of this chapter is to provide for all necessary and
dispensable powers and procedures reasonably needed to prevent, cope with, or
make more tolerable emergency conditions. All powers, both ministerial and
discretionary, as conferred herein, shall be liberally construed as intending
to supplement and augment, and not to limit, any other powers or reasonable
exercise of discretion which may ordinarily pertain to county officers,
employees, departments, and agencies.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.03 NON-SUPERSESSION OF POWERS OF SHERIFF, OTHER POWERS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to supersede or limit any
statutory powers of the County Sheriff to determine, respond to, and provide
for the control of public disasters and other emergency situations under the
provisions of I.C. 10-16-7-9 and 10-16-7-10, as amended.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to supersede or delimit the powers
of any political subdivision under I.C. 10-14-3 to adopt and implement
emergency plans, and promulgate and enforce special emergency regulations and
procedures in the advent of an actual emergency affecting a political
subdivison.
   (C)   However, pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-22, such regulations and procedures,
as promulgated by the political subdivision, may not be inconsistent with the
county emergency regulations and procedures.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.04 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ADVISORY COUNCIL.
   (A)   In accordance with I.C. 10-14-3-17, there is established and confirmed
a County Emergency Management Advisory Council which shall consist of the
following individuals or their designees, as appointed by the Board of
Commissioners for two-year terms, as follows:
      (1)   The President of the Board of Commissioners;
      (2)   The President of the County Council;
      (3)   The Mayor of each city located in the county;
      (4)   An individual representing the legislative bodies of each town in
the county who shall be appointed by the Commissioners after receiving
recommendations from such legislative bodies;
      (5)   Representatives of such private and public agencies or
organizations, such as the County Sheriff, which can be of assistance to
emergency management as the Commissioners consider appropriate, or as may be
added later by the Advisory Council; and
      (6)   The Commander of the local Civil Air Patrol Unit in the county, if
existing, as appointed by the Commissioners, or the Commander’s designee.
   (B)   Members of the Advisory Council shall serve at the pleasure of the
appointing authority. Individuals who are members of the Advisory Council at
the time this chapter takes effect may remain as members and may continue to
serve on the Advisory Council until their present terms expire. The Advisory
Council shall exercise general supervision over the Emergency Management
Program in the county.
   (C)   The Advisory Council shall select, or cause to be selected, with the
approval of the Board of Commissioners, a County Emergency Management Director
who shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and
operation of the Emergency Management Program in the county, and who shall be
responsible for the Emergency Management Advisory Council.
   (D)   The Advisory Council shall meet at least once quarterly.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.05 ORGANIZATION OF THE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established, and confirmed, a Department of Emergency
Management within the executive branch of the county government for the purpose
of utilizing, to the fullest extent possible, the personnel and facilities of
existing county departments and agencies to prepare for, and meet, any
emergency as defined in §
33.01. The Director of Emergency Management shall be responsible for its
organization, administration, and operation.
   (B)   The Department shall consist of the following:
      (1)   An executive head of the Department of Emergency Management, who
shall be known as the Director of Emergency Management, appointed in accordance
with §
33.06;
      (2)   A Deputy Director who shall be appointed by the Director with the
approval of the Advisory Council;
      (3)   Emergency management volunteers, as deemed necessary and appointed
by the Director, in accordance with §
33.09;
      (4)   The employees, equipment, and facilities of all county departments
and agencies suitable for, or adaptable to, emergency management and designated
by the County Board of Commissioners to participate in the emergency management
activity;
      (5)   Staff officers with responsibility for emergency support functions
as established in the County Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan including
warning, communications, radiological, health, emergency care, police, fire,
and light rescue, public education, and transportation, who may be appointed by
the Director but which positions shall be, so far as possible, additional duty
assignments to existing personnel; and
      (6)   Such assistants, clerical help, and other employees, as deemed
necessary to the proper functioning of the Department, who may be appointed by
the Director.
   (C)   However, notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no
compensated position may be established within the Department of Emergency
Management, nor any person appointed to such position, without the
authorization of the County Board of Commissioners and County Council, pursuant
to I.C. 36-2-5-3(a), and the making of sufficient appropriations to pay such
compensation. This provision does not give the County Council any power of
approval over particular candidates for any positions, but refers only to their
general statutory powers to determine the number of officers, deputies, and
employees of county departments, classify positions, and adopt schedules of
compensation. In addition, it is also the intent of this section that emergency
management and disaster assignments shall be as nearly consistent with normal
duty assignments as possible.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.06 DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT; POWERS.
   (A)   The Director of Emergency Management shall be appointed by the
Advisory Council subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners.
Qualifications for Director will be determined by the Advisory Council subject
to approval from the Board of Commissioners. In the event the individual
selected by the Advisory Council is not approved by the Board, the Advisory
Council shall select another individual to serve as the Director, and the same
process will be repeated until the approval of the Director is obtained from
the Board.
   (B)   The appointment of the Director shall be permanent, however, the Board
may dismiss the Director for cause upon determining the Director to be
inadequate to fulfill his or her responsibilities, which shall include, but not
limited to, dereliction of duties, malfeasance in office, incompetence,
insubordination, or deliberate disregard of the directives of the superior
county authorities, or physical or mental incapacity to perform his or her
duties.
   (C)   The Director, subject to the supervision, direction, and control of
the Advisory Council, shall be executive head of the Department of Emergency
Management, and shall have responsibility for the organization, administration,
and operation, including the following specific powers and duties:
      (1)   The Director shall be responsible for public relations,
information, and education regarding all phases of emergency management;
      (2)   The Director shall be responsible for the development of a County
Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan, and upon adoption, shall be
responsible for such implementation and revision of the Plan as to maintain it
on a current state of readiness at all times. The Plan shall include all major
cities within the county;
      (3)   The Director shall coordinate, with the county political
subdivision, all activities for emergency management, and shall maintain
liaison and coordinate with all other affected agencies, public and private;
      (4)   The Director shall coordinate the recruitment and training for
volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the
county for emergency management purposes;
      (5)   The Director may seek, negotiate, and enter into, with the approval
of the Board and to the extent consistent with the State Department of Homeland
Security Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan, mutual aid arrangements with
other public and private agencies for emergency management purposes, and take
all steps in accordance with such arrangements to comply with, or take
advantage thereof, in the event of an actual emergency affecting the parties;
      (6)   The Director may, when such offer has been approved by the Governor
and the Board, accept any offer from the federal government to provide for the
use of the county any services, equipment, supplies, materials, or funds for
emergency management purposes by way of gift, grant, or loan;
      (7)   The Director may, with the approval of the Board, seek and accept
from any person, firm, or corporation, any gratuitous offers to provide
services, equipment, supplies, materials, funds, or licenses, or privileges to
use real estate or other premises, to the county for emergency management
purposes; and
      (8)   The Director may issue proper insignia and papers to emergency
management workers and other people directly concerned with emergency
management.
   (D)   The Director, in addition to the powers and duties expressly provided
in division (C) above, shall be construed to have all powers and duties of a
local Emergency Management Director as provided under I.C. 10-14-3.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.07 DEPUTY DIRECTOR.
   If a Deputy Director has been appointed pursuant to §
33.05(B)(2), he or she shall, during normal times, assist the Director in the
performance of his or her duties. During an emergency, the Deputy Director
shall assist the Director and fulfill the duties of the Director in the absence
or inability of the Director to serve.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.08 POWERS, DUTIES OF COMMISSIONERS.
   The powers and duties of the County Board of Commissioners, pertaining to
emergency management in the time of normal county operations, are to:
   (A)   Maintain general supervision and knowledge of the planning and
administration for the Department of Emergency Management;
   (B)   Adopt the Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan;
   (C)   Coordinate the emergency management activities and make assignments of
emergency management duties to county forces in order to meet situations not
covered in the normal duties and powers of such agencies. In addition, the
County Board of Commissioners may take all necessary action to conduct tests of
the emergency management plans. Emergency management tests may be conducted at
any time with, or without, prior notification. All emergency tests conducted
within the boundaries of the county shall be coordinated with the Department of
Emergency Management and the County Sheriff’s Department; and
   (D)   Perform all other powers and duties reserved or assigned to them under
this chapter, and under I.C. 10-14-3.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.09 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT VOLUNTEERS.
   (A)   The Director shall determine that all emergency management volunteer
personnel meet the following qualifications before he or she is sworn in as a
member:
      (1)   Be at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   Not convicted of a felony; and
      (3)   Complete, and have on file, an application form.
   (B)   Upon satisfaction of the requirements and approval by the Director,
the applicant is officially a member of the County Department of Emergency
Management.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.10 PERSONNEL.
   In general, any paid employees of the Department of Emergency Management
shall have the same employment status, and shall be governed by the same
personnel policies, rules, and procedures that apply to other county employees.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.11 BUDGET, FINANCE.
   The Advisory Council shall advise the Director in the preparation of the
budget. The County Council shall appropriate such funds as it may deem
necessary for the purpose of emergency management. All funds appropriated, or
otherwise available, to the Department of Emergency Management shall be
administered by the Director, subject to the approval of the County Board of
Commissioners, in the same manner as provided by law or ordinance for other
county funds, except as otherwise provided under §
33.18(B)(1)(i) through (B)(1)(k).
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.12 COMPREHENSIVE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Consistent with the requirements of federal preparedness assistance,
the county does hereby adopt and establish the National Incident Management
System (NIMS) as developed and administered by the Secretary of the Department
of Homeland Security standard for incident management. The county, by doing so,
will seek a coordinated effort from all agencies to effectively, and
efficiently, provide the highest level of incident management. Furthermore, the
county recognizes the need to utilize standardized terminology, organizational
structures, interoperable communications, consolidated action plans, unified
command structures, uniform personnel qualifications, uniform standards for
planning, training, and exercising, comprehensive resource management, and
designated incident facilities during emergencies or disasters.
   (B)   In a manner consistent with NIMS, a County Comprehensive Emergency
Management Plan shall be developed by the Director and the Advisory Council,
and submitted to the Board for consideration and approval.
   (C)   The Plan shall be developed so as to be in compliance, and consistent,
with the requirements of applicable state and federal law and regulations. In
the preparation of the Plan, as it pertains to county organizations, it is the
intent that the services, equipment, facilities, and personnel of all existing
departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent possible.
   (D)   In addition, all participating emergency service agencies that develop
internal plans shall coordinate those plans with the Emergency Management
Department in order to include such plans with the County Comprehensive
Emergency Management Plan. When approved, the county departments and agencies
shall perform the functions and duties assigned by the Plan and maintain their
portion of the Plan in a current state of readiness at all times.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.13 COUNTYWIDE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
   Except as provided by §
33.03, the jurisdiction of the County Department of Emergency Management, the
jurisdiction and applicability of the County Comprehensive Emergency Management
Plan, as adopted pursuant to §
33.12, and the exercise of any powers of the principle executive officer of the
county and the County Board of Commissioners under this chapter, shall be
comprehensive and inclusive countywide, and effective in both the incorporated
and unincorporated areas of the county.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.14 APPLICABILITY.
   Sections
33.15 through
33.22 apply whenever:
   (A)   A disaster emergency affecting all, or part, of the county has been
declared by the Governor pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-12 or I.C. 10-14-3-13;
   (B)   A disaster emergency affecting all, or part, of the county has been
declared by the principle executive officer pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-29;
   (C)   A presumptive state of emergency is deemed to exist affecting all, or
part, of the county causing the Director to invoke and implement emergency
plans and procedures in accordance with §
33.10; or
   (D)   When the Board of Commissioners has implemented a test of the county’s
emergency plans and procedures in accordance with §
33.08.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.15 PRE-DISASTER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Department of Emergency Management’s primary pre-disaster responsibility
shall be the planning function as prescribed in the County Comprehensive
Emergency Management Plan as prescribed for the entire county, including all
cities and towns.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.16 SPECIAL EMERGENCY POWERS, DUTIES OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICERS.
   In the event of actual or threatened disasters affecting the county, the
principal executive officer may declare a local disaster emergency pursuant to
I.C. 10-14-3-29 for any period not to exceed seven days. The declaration shall
be in writing, and indicate the nature of the disaster and the conditions which
have brought it about, and the area, or areas, threatened, and to which the
state of emergency applies (which may include the entire county, or only
designated parts thereof). The declaration shall be filed in the offices of the
County Clerk, and the Clerk of any incorporated municipality included in the
declaration. The declaration is neither invalidated nor ineffective if any of
the filing and dissemination requirements cannot be complied with due to the
prevailing adverse circumstances. Such a declaration is not necessary if the
Governor, pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-12 and 10-14-3-13, has already proclaimed a
statewide or area wide state of emergency, including the county.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.17 EMERGENCY MEETING OF THE COMMISSIONERS.
   (A)   As soon as possible after a disaster emergency affecting the county is
declared either by the Governor or by the principle executive officer, the
principle executive officer shall convene a meeting of the County Commissioners
to perform their legislative and administrative functions as the situation may
demand. If the principle executive officer fails, or is unable, to perform the
above duty, the meeting shall be convened by some other member of the Board of
Commissioners, or by the Auditor or the successively empowered county officers,
in accordance with I.C. 36-2-2-8(a).
   (B)   Any such meeting of the Board shall automatically be deemed an
emergency meeting subject only to such procedural provisions of law as govern
emergency meetings of the County Board of Commissioners, including relaxation
of any applicable notice requirements pursuant to I.C. 5-14-1.5-5(d), and may
be held in any convenient and available space. The meeting shall continue
without adjournment for the duration of the disaster emergency, but may be
recessed for reasonable periods of time as necessary and permitted by the
circumstances.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.18 SPECIAL EMERGENCY POWERS IN ABSENCE OF BOARD QUORUM, COMMISSIONERS,
DIRECTOR.
   (A)   In the event that a quorum of the Board of Commissioners cannot be
assembled for purposes of the meeting required under §
33.17, the principle executive officer of the county shall have all powers, and
may take all actions, of the full Board under divisions (B)(1)(b) through (B)
(1)(m) below until the assemblage of a quorum is possible.
   (B)   (1)   At the meeting convened under §
33.17, the Board may exercise any of their normal executive and legislative
powers to the extent related to the emergency and necessary to deal therewith.
In addition, however, they may also exercise any of the following special and
extraordinary powers:
         (a)   The Board may extend the period of a state of emergency declared
by the principle executive officer pursuant to §
33.16 to last more than seven days if necessary;
         (b)   The Board may terminate the state of emergency, except for a
state of emergency proclaimed by the Governor;
         (c)   The Board may order the activation and implementation of the
County Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan that has been adopted pursuant
to §
33.12, or such several component parts thereof as may be relevant to the
emergency;
         (d)   The Board may assemble and utilize emergency management forces,
including personnel of the Department of Emergency Management, participating
emergency service agencies, and any other forces at the disposal of the Board
hereunder for emergency management purposes;
         (e)   The Board may order volunteer forces to the aid of the county,
state, or political subdivisions thereof, as soon as practicable. Such
volunteer forces will be under the direction of the Department of Emergency
Management;
         (f)   The Board may, to the extent permitted by I.C. 10-14-3-31, and
subject to its provisions, command services from, and/or requisition the use
of, equipment, facilities, supplies, or other property belonging to other
organizations, corporations, or private persons as necessary to control the
emergency, and protect and provide for the public safety and welfare. Pursuant
to I.C. 10-14-3-31, compensation for property shall be paid only if the
property was commandeered, or otherwise used, in coping with a disaster
emergency, and its use or destruction was ordered by the Governor or a member
of the disaster emergency forces of the state. Any person claiming compensation
for the use, damage, loss, or destruction of such property shall make a claim
for it. This claim shall be filed and adjudicated as provided in I.C. 32-24;
         (g)   The Board may order the evacuation of all or part of the
population from stricken areas of the county, and prescribe routes, modes of
transportation, and destinations for such evacuation;
         (h)   The Board may make provision for availability and use of
temporary emergency housing, which housing need not necessarily comply with any
minimum housing standards, building, or zoning regulations, and the like, which
would govern the use and locations of premises for housing purposes during
normal times;
         (i)   The Board may suspend, for the duration of the state of
emergency (or for a lesser period as they determine), any provisions of, or
procedures prescribed by, ordinances of the county if they would be impractical
during the emergency, would interfere with the implementation and carrying out
of emergency plans, or would be inimical to actions necessary to protect the
public safety and welfare; provided, however, that except in accordance with
division (B)(1)(j) below, the Board may not suspend any provisions of
ordinances or procedures which are mandated by statute;
         (j)   When the state of emergency has been proclaimed by the Governor,
the Board may waive any procedures or requirement of statute, or of county
ordinances, reflecting statutory requirements and mandates, in accordance with
I.C. 10-14-3;
         (k)   The Board may assign special emergency duties and functions to
any county offices, departments, and agencies irrespective of their usual
duties and functions, and any unexpected and unencumbered monies budgeted and
appropriated (major object classification), may be utilized and expended for
the purpose of carrying out such special emergency duties and functions;
         (l)   The Board may make and promulgate such emergency regulations as
may be deemed necessary to protect life and property, preserve order, conserve
critical resources, or implement and carry out the provisions of the county’s
or state’s disaster plans, including, but not limited to, the power to order
the roads closed, establish curfews, close business, or any action that they
deem necessary to save lives and recover from a declared emergency. This power
also includes the power to supplement, modify, or suspend any general
contingency regulations which may have been incorporated as part of the
county’s previously adopted Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan. Any
emergency regulations adopted under this division (B)(1)(l) shall not be
effective until promulgated, which promulgation shall be by written filing in
the offices of the County Clerk, as required by I.C. 10-14-3-22; provided,
however, that should such filing be impossible because of the emergency
situation, such regulations shall have the full force of law and shall be
enforceable by any police officer in accordance with I.C. 10-14-3; and
         (m)   The Board may request the state or the United States, or their
agencies and political subdivisions, to send aid (including financial
assistance).
      (2)   All actions and regulations under this section may be made by
executive order, and need not be made or adopted by ordinance or resolution,
but shall be consistent with, and subordinate to, any actions, orders, or
regulations made by the Governor, or a state agency implementing the State
Department of Homeland Security Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Director to make recommendations and
advise the Board of Commissioners, or the principle executive officer, on any
actions which it would be necessary or desirable to take under division (B)
above in the event of an emergency.
      (2)   In the event that an emergency clearly exists or is imminent within
the county, and a state of emergency has not been declared by the Governor, nor
is any person having the powers of the principle executive officer present to
declare such an emergency pursuant to §
33.16, the Director may temporarily presume the existence of a state of
emergency even though not officially declared and may, as his or her own
judgment dictates, invoke, implement, and carry out such provisions of the
county’s adopted Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan as are necessary to
cope with the emergency and protect the public safety and welfare, and shall be
construed to have all powers necessary and dispensable to doing so, to the
extent not specifically limited by statute or specifically limited herein,
until such time as the principle executive officer becomes available.
      (3)   This section also applies to the Deputy Director to the extent that
the Deputy Director is required to assume the duties of the Director, as
provided by §
33.07, in the latter’s absence or incapacitation during the emergency.
Assistance from the Department of Emergency Management may be rendered without
a declaration of an emergency in order to assist local emergency services in
time of need.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.19 DESIGNATION OF LOCAL TRAVEL ADVISORY.
   If the principle executive officer of the county issues a local travel
advisory as part of an emergency declaration under this chapter, the principle
executive officer shall designate the travel advisory in accordance with I.C.
10-14-3-29.5.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.20 DUTIES OF COUNTY OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES DURING EMERGENCY.
   All officers and employees of the county shall cooperate with, and give
active support to, the County Board of Commissioners and to the County
Emergency Management Director in all emergency management operations, and shall
comply with all orders of the Board and County Emergency Management Director
issued pursuant to §§
33.15 through
33.22.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.21 LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.
   During an emergency management test or declared disaster emergency, the
county, the county’s assigned personnel, participating emergency services, and
rostered emergency management volunteers shall be immune from liability to the
full extent provided by I.C. 10-14-3, and any other applicable law.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.22 PRIORITY OF EMERGENCY ORDERS, RULES, REGULATIONS.
   At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated,
pursuant to §§
33.15 through
33.21, shall be in effect, they supersede all existing ordinances, orders,
rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever §§
33.15 through
33.22 applies, as provided in §
33.14, it shall be unlawful and a penal ordinance violation for any person to:
         (a)   Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay the Board, the Director of
Emergency Management, participating emergency service agencies, authorized
emergency management volunteers, or other authorities from implementing,
carrying out, and enforcing emergency plans and procedures;
         (b)   Fail to observe, abide by, and comply with any emergency
management duties, orders, regulations, and procedures as made applicable to
such person by the appropriate authorities; and/or
         (c)   Falsely wear or carry identification as a member of the County
Department of Emergency Management, or to otherwise falsely identify or purport
himself or herself to be a county emergency management authority.
      (2)   Any regular or reserve police officer of the state, or any of its
political subdivisions, or any member of the County Department of Emergency
Management, or a participating emergency service agency, is hereby empowered to
issue and serve a civil citation against any person found to be committing an
offense described in divisions (B)(1)(a) through (B)(1)(c) above. Any person
who commits an offense as described in divisions (B)(1)(a) through (B)(1)(c)
above shall be liable to a fine of $2,500; such fine to be subject, however, to
the discretion of the court of jurisdiction. A person who knowingly,
intentionally, or recklessly violates I.C. 10-14-3 commits a Class B
misdemeanor pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-34.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016)
CHAPTER 34: FEES, FINANCES
Section
Fees
   
34.01   Copying, printing public documents, maps
   
34.02   Bulk copies; public records
   
34.03   Reserved
   
34.04   Real estate endorsement, deeds
   
34.05   Duplicates of accident, incident reports
   
34.06   Yard waste, tree trimmings
   
34.07   Electronic map data
   
34.08   Sex, violent crime offenders change of address
   
34.09   Emergency system telephone fee
Funds
   
34.25   Rainy Day Fund
   
34.26   Loss, shortage of funds; Solid Waste Management District Board
   
34.27   Police Pension Fund
   
34.28   Supplemental jurors
   
34.29   County Misdemeanant Fund
   
34.30   Community Corrections Commissary Fund
   
34.31   Pretrial Diversion Program Fund
   
34.32   County Recorder’s Enhanced Access Fund
   
34.33   ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Fund
Finances
   
34.45   Co-payment by inmates; medical services
   
34.46   Dues of county officers
   
34.47   Fixed Asset Capitalization Policy
   
34.38   County contract requirements
 
   
34.99   Penalty
FEES
§ 34.01 COPYING, PRINTING PUBLIC DOCUMENTS, MAPS.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners, having reviewed the actual costs involved
in the operation of copying and facsimile equipment located in the various
offices maintained by the county, excluding the costs of labor and overhead,
does hereby establish the schedule of fees per page for providing copies of
public records:
      (1)   Copy machine, per page: $0.25; and
      (2)   Facsimile machine, per page including cost of any long-distance
charge: $3.
   (B)   The County Council, pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3-8, having reviewed the
actual costs involved in the operation of the printing equipment located in the
Auditor’s office, excluding the costs of labor and overhead, does hereby
establish the schedule of fees per page for providing color copies, color maps,
and photocopies:
      (1)   Eight and a quarter by 11 inches, and eight and one-half by 14
inches color map, per page: $1;
      (2)   Eleven by 17 inches color map, per page: $2; and
      (3)   Photocopies: $0.10.
   (C)   The County Council, pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3-8, having reviewed the
actual costs involved in the operation of the printing equipment located in the
Clerk’s office, excluding the costs of labor and overhead, does hereby
establish the following schedule of fees:
      (1)   Black and white copies 11 by 17 inches or smaller, per page: $1;
and
      (2)   Black and white copies larger than 11 by 17 inches, per page: $5.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 8-2-1999; Council Res. 18-01, passed 1-29-2018; Council Res.
2019-04, passed 11-18-2019; Ord. 2022-13, passed 8-29-2022)
§ 34.02 BULK COPIES; PUBLIC RECORDS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BULK USER. An individual, a corporation, a partnership, a limited
liability company, or an unincorporated association that receives bulk form
copies under a contract with the County Recorder.
      BULK USER COPY. An aggregation of:
         (a)   Copies of all recorded documents received by the County Recorder
for recording in a calendar day, week, month, or year;
         (b)   The indices for finding, retrieving, and viewing all recorded
documents received by the County Recorder for recording in a calendar day,
week, month, or year; or
         (c)   Both divisions (a) and (b) above.
      COPY. A reproduction, including an image of a recorded document or
indices created by:
         (a)   Duplicating electronically-stored data onto a disk, tape, drum,
or any other medium of electronic data storage; or
         (b)   Reproducing on microfilm.
      INDICES. All of the indexing information used by the County Recorder for
finding, retrieving, and viewing a recorded document.
      RECORDED DOCUMENT. A writing, a paper, document, plat, map, survey, or
anything else received at any time for recording or filing in the public
records maintained by the County Recorder, or the County Recorder’s designee.
   (B)   Manner and form of production. It is hereby established that the
County Recorder shall provide bulk form copies to a bulk user only by
electronically transmitting the copies using an electronic transfer process.
   (C)   Procedure for requesting bulk form copies. 
      (1)   A bulk user must submit a written request to the County Recorder
that identifies the requested bulk form copies with reasonable particularity.
Unless the request is refused under division (D) below, upon receipt of a valid
written request, the County Recorder, or the County Recorder’s designee, shall
provide the bulk form copies to the bulk user by the method, or methods,
established by ordinance. The bulk form copies shall be provided within a
reasonable time after the following events:
         (a)   The Recorder’s archival process is complete and bulk form copies
become available in the County Recorder’s office; and
         (b)   The bulk form user executes a contract that meets the
requirements of division (E) below with:
            1.   The County Recorder; and
            2.   If the County Recorder uses a third party to provide bulk copy
services, the County Recorder’s designee.
      (2)   The County Recorder, or the County Recorder’s designee, shall work
with reasonable diligence to ensure that bulk form copies are timely produced
to the bulk user.
   (D)   Fees charged for bulk form copies.
      (1)   Based on a cost study dated March 22, 2019, and performed by the
County Recorder (which is incorporated herein by reference), this Board finds
and determines that the costs incurred by the County Recorder of producing bulk
form copies (including applying a watermark or other protective feature) exceed
both the standard fee of $0.10 per page, or per recorded document, fixed by
I.C. 36-2-7-10.1(d), and the fee hereafter fixed. Accordingly, the following
fee schedule is hereby adopted:
         (a)   Twenty cents per page for a copy of a recorded document,
including the instrument’s book and page, if applicable; and
         (b)   Twenty cents per recorded document for a copy of the indices
used by the County Recorder for finding, retrieving, and viewing a recorded
document.
      (2)   The fees charged by the County Recorder are subject to the
following requirements:
         (a)   The County Recorder shall pay the fees into the county treasury
at the end of each calendar month;
         (b)   The fees prescribed and collected under this section supersede
all other fees for bulk form copies required by law to be charged for services
rendered by the County Recorder to bulk users;
         (c)   All revenue generated by the County Recorder under this division
(D) shall be deposited in the County Recorder’s Records Perpetuation Fund, and
used by the Recorder in accordance with I.C. 36-2-7-10(f); and
         (d)   The Recorder shall periodically update and verify the cost study
referred to in division (D)(1) above.
   (E)   Bulk user contract; termination.
      (1)   (a)   A bulk user must enter into a contract with the County
Recorder, and if the County Recorder uses a third party to provide bulk copy
services, the County Recorder’s designee, in order to receive bulk form copies.
The contract must be in writing and must require that the bulk user agree not
to do any of the following:
            1.   Except as provided in division (F) below, provide, transfer,
or allow the transfer of any copy of a recorded document obtained by the bulk
user under this section to a third party;
            2.   Engage in unauthorized access to recorded documents; and/or
            3.   Engage in unauthorized alteration of recorded documents.
         (b)   A contract required under this division (E) may not include any
restrictions on a bulk form user’s use of the bulk form copies other than those
contained in this division (E).
      (2)   If a bulk user does not comply with a contract, the County Recorder
may terminate the contract, immediately stop providing bulk form copies to the
bulk user, and refuse to provide the bulk form copies required by the bulk user
if all termination provisions and procedures in the contract have been met by
the County Recorder. The County Recorder may refuse subsequent requests from a
bulk user for bulk form copies in the following circumstances:
         (a)   The bulk user is a person that has had a previous bulk form copy
contract terminated by the County Recorder because the Recorder determined that
the bulk user failed to comply with the contract; and
         (b)   The bulk user is a corporation, or limited liability company, in
which a person has a majority or controlling interest and:
            1.   The person requested bulk form copies under a previous
contract with the County Recorder; and
            2.   The contract was terminated by the County Recorder because the
County Recorder determined that the person failed to comply with the contract.
   (F)   Resale of bulk form copies by bulk user.
      (1)   (a)   A bulk user that is licensed under I.C. 27-1-15.6-6(d), or
holds a certificate of authority under I.C. 27-7-3-6, may provide bulk form
copies related to the specific order for a title search (as defined in I.C. 27-
7-3-2) when operating as:
            1.   A title plant for the issuance of title insurance (as defined
in I.C. 27-7-3-2); or
            2.   A title company (as defined in I.C. 27-7-3-2).
         (b)   A bulk user that meets the requirements of this division (F) may
charge his or her customers a fee for using the bulk form copies obtained by
the bulk user that may not exceed the costs incurred by the bulk user for
obtaining the bulk form copies.
         (c)   A bulk user that meets the requirements of this division (F) may
not resell, provide, transfer, or allow the transfer of any copy of a recorded
document, whether in bulk form or as individual copies or images, to any other
bulk user or title plant.
      (2)   A bulk user that does not meet the requirements of division (F)(1)
(a) above is prohibited from selling, offering for sale, advertising for sale,
soliciting a purchase of, loaning, giving away, allowing subscription service
to, or otherwise transferring, providing, or allowing the transfer of bulk form
copies for commercial purposes to a third-party, whether the copies are in bulk
form or individual copies or images.
   (G)   Watermark on bulk form copies. The Recorder shall watermark all bulk
form copies with the following: “THIS DOCUMENT IS PROVIDED FOR THE SOLE USE OF
(insert bulk user name) AND EXCEPT AS PROVIDED FOR IN I.C. 36-2-7-10.1(h),
SHALL NOT BE RESOLD PURSUANT TO I.C. 36-2-7-10.1. OFFICIAL COPIES MAY BE
OBTAINED AT THE COUNTY RECORDER’S OFFICE”.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 2019-04, passed 4-15-2019)
§ 34.03 RESERVED.
§ 34.04 REAL ESTATE ENDORSEMENT, DEEDS.
   (A)   The Auditor of the county shall collect a fee in the amount of $10 for
each deed for which the Auditor makes a real property endorsement, which fee
shall be in addition to any other fee provided by law, but shall be in place of
any other endorsement fee heretofor established or authorized by this Board.
   (B)   The revenue received from division (A) above shall be placed in a
dedicated fund for use in maintaining plat books, in traditional or electronic
format.
(Ord. 2019-05, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 34.05 DUPLICATES OF ACCIDENT, INCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The County Sheriff’s Department shall charge a fee in the amount of $5
for each and every accident or incident report copy issued by said Department.
   (B)   Not less frequently than monthly, the County Sheriff’s Department
shall make a report to the County Auditor of all reports furnished during the
proceeding month, and remit all fees collected to the County Auditor.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the fees, the County Auditor shall issue a quietus for
such remittances specifying on such receipt the number of receipts included.
   (D)   Upon receipt of such funds, the County Auditor shall deposit such
funds to the credit of the Sheriff’s accident report account, as provided in
I.C. 9-26-9-3.
(Council Ord. 2002-01, passed 5-21-2002)
§ 34.06 YARD WASTE, TREE TRIMMINGS.
   (A)   This section shall be applicable to all yard waste, and all trees and
bushes, and trimmings therefrom, which shall hereinafter be referred to as
“yard waste”.
   (B)   The county may, from time to time, establish collection sites for the
collection of yard waste deposited by residents of the county not engaged in
business ventures.
   (C)   To be eligible for deposit at established collection sites, yard waste
must be in separate bags or boxes containing no greater than 45 gallons per
container, or cut to size and in the above approximate quantity, which is
manageable by site attendants and county employees.
   (D)   Each authorized bag, box, or quantity of yard waste shall have affixed
thereto one-half of the regular solid waste sticker to be purchased from the
county, or a seller authorized by the county, thereby making the cost of
disposal for yard waste one-half of that established from time to time by the
county for items of solid waste normally deposited at collection sites.
   (E)   Stickers shall not be sold in one-half units but only as a whole
sticker. Income collected from the sale of such stickers shall be deposited in
the County Sanitation Fund.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place items of solid waste in
any container designated to contain yard waste, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to deposit yard wastes at any collection site without payment of an
established fee, or at any time when said collection site is not staffed by a
county employee and open to the public for receipt of items.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any yard waste on
any public real estate or right-of-way, except at a designated collection site.
   (H)   A violator of this section shall also be liable to the county for all
damages and expenses incurred by said county by reason of such violation, which
are established in a civil action for such purpose, and which shall include a
reasonable attorney’s fee in said action.
(Ord. 98-11, passed 12-7-1998) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.07 ELECTRONIC MAP DATA.
   (A)   General. In accordance with I.C. 5-14-3-2, PERSON, as used in this
section, is defined as an individual, a corporation, a limited liability
company, a partnership, an unincorporated association, or a governmental
entity, and ELECTRONIC MAP DATA, as used in this section, is defined as
copyrighted data created and provided by a public agency from an electronic
geographic information system.
   (B)   Fee schedule.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3-8(j), the county may charge a fee, uniform
to all persons, for providing electronic map data that is based upon a
reasonable percentage of the county’s direct cost of maintaining, upgrading,
and enhancing the electronic map, and for the direct cost of supplying the
electronic map in the form requested by the person(s).
      (2)   In the case where disclosable and non-disclosable electronic map
data are combined, I.C. 5-14-3-6 provides that the county may charge a
reasonable fee for the county’s direct cost of computer programming to separate
disclosable from non-disclosable electronic map data.
      (3)   It is hereby established by the County Board of Commissioners and
County Council that the initial fee schedule for the transmission of electronic
map data is as set forth in division (B)(5) below that is incorporated by
reference herein.
      (4)   If the county contracts with a third-party contractor to handle the
transmission of county electronic map data, the third-party contractor shall
receive two-thirds, and the county a third of the fees charged the person for
electronic map data. This fee schedule shall be reviewed on an annual basis and
may be changed on an annual basis to reflect the change in the cost in
providing the electronic map data.
      (5)   The current fee schedule is as follows:
         (a)   Complete map data layers:
            1.   An annual fee of $1,500, paid in advance, for the continuous
transmission of available and disclosable countywide non-photo electronic map
data layers;
            2.   A fee of $750, paid in advance, for a one-time delivery of
available and disclosable countywide non-photo electronic map data layers
delivered on a CD; and
            3.   A fee of $750, paid in advance, for a one-time delivery of a
county’s most recent aerial photo layer delivered on a CD.
         (b)   Subsets of map data layers (for less than countywide areas): A
fee of $150 per hour for the preparation of one-time specifically requested
subsets of county electronic map data; and
         (c)   Separating disclosable and non-disclosable data: A fee of $150
per hour for computer programming required to separate disclosable and non-
disclosable electronic map data if this is required as part of a one-time map
data request.
   (C)   Exceptions to fee schedule.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3-8(k), any public agency, as defined by I.C.
5-14-3-2, located within the county, or within adjacent counties that agrees to
share with the county any electronic map information that a public agency might
have, if any, that is of the same type as is being shared by the county, the
county will agree to automatically approve a data-sharing application with that
public agency and waive that portion of the electronic map fee that would
otherwise be retained by the county.
      (2)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3-8(k), the county’s retained portion of the
electronic map fee shall be waived at the county’s discretion if the use of the
electronic map data will be used for a non-commercial purpose, including the
following:
         (a)   Public agencies that do not agree to share with the county the
same type of electronic map data being provided by the county;
         (b)   Non-profit activities;
         (c)   Journalism; and/or
         (d)   Academic research.
   (D)   Third-party contractor.
      (1)   In accordance with I.C. 5-14-3-3.6, electronic map information may
be provided to person(s) through the county’s own computer gateway, or by
agreement through a computer gateway of a third-party contractor. I.C. 5-14-3-
3.6(e) provides that a contract entered into under this section may require the
payment of a reasonable fee to either the third-party contractor, the county,
or both.
      (2)   In accordance with I.C. 5-14-3-4, neither the county nor the third-
party contractor shall disclose electronic map data that is specifically
excepted from disclosure requirements.
   (E)   Payment.
         (1)   Where the county is using its own computer gateway for the
provision to person(s) of electronic map data, payment shall be made by the
person(s) at the time of delivery.
         (2)   Where the county has entered into an agreement with a third-
party contractor to provide electronic map data through the third-party
contractor’s computer gateway, the third-party contractor shall handle the
billing and invoicing of the fees charged, and shall agree to send by U.S. mail
that portion of the fee due to the county to the county’s Electronic Map
Generation Fund within ten business days of the receipt of payment of fees to
the third-party contractor by the person(s) making the purchase.
   (F)   Compliance with state statutes. Nothing herein shall compel any office
or its contracted third-party contractor to charge a fee for copies if the fee
imposed by this section is contrary to state law. In the event the fees in this
section are contrary to any charges established by state statute, the state
statute shall apply.
   (G)   Use restrictions and notice.
      (1)   Pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 5-14-3-3(e), no person, other
than those authorized in writing by the Board of Commissioners, may use the
electronic map data provided by the county for commercial purposes, including
to sell, advertise, or solicit the purchase of merchandise, goods, or services,
or sell, loan, give away, or otherwise deliver the information obtained by
request to any other person for these purposes.
         (a)   This includes the repackaging or assimilation of electronic map
data for a commercial purpose in paper or electronic media.
         (b)   The electronic map data may be used as a reference for
determining the accuracy of maps developed independently from the county’s
electronic map data.
      (2)   (a)   A person who uses information in a manner contrary to this
section, or a rule or ordinance adopted under I.C. 5-14-3-3, may be prohibited
by the county from obtaining any electronic map data. The following notice
regarding data ownership, restrictions, and qualifications shall be provided to
every person that receives a copy of the county’s electronic map data:
 
   “Dubois County electronic map data is the property of Dubois County, Indiana.
All electronic map data supplied by Dubois County has been derived from public
records that are constantly undergoing change and is not warranted for content
or accuracy. The County does not guarantee the positional or thematic accuracy
of the data. The cartographic digital file server is not a legal representation
of any of the features depicted, and the County disclaims any assumption of the
legal status they represent. Any implied warranties, including warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose, shall be and/or expressly
excluded. The data represents an actual reproduction of data contained in the
County’s computer files. This data may be incomplete or inaccurate, and is
subject to modifications and changes. Therefore, the County cannot be held
liable for errors or omissions in the data. The recipient’s uses and reliance
upon such data is at the recipient’s risk. By using this data, the recipient
agrees to protect, hold harmless and indemnify Dubois County and its employees
and officers. This indemnity covers reasonable attorney’s fees and all court
costs associated with the defense of Dubois County arising out of this
disclaimer. The recipient may copy this data into computer memory or onto
computer storage devices and prepare derivative works from it for the
recipient’s own use.
 
   Pursuant to the provisions of Indiana Code 5-14-3-3(e), no person, other than
those authorized in writing by the Board of Commissioners may use the electronic
map data provided by the County for commercial purposes, including to sell,
advertise, or solicit the purchase of merchandise, goods, or services, or sell,
loan, give away, or otherwise deliver the information obtained by request to any
other person for these purposes. A person who uses information in a manner
contrary to a rule or ordinance adopted under Indiana Code 5-14-3-3(e) may be
prohibited by the Board of Commissioners from obtaining any electronic map data.
 
   Please refer to Dubois County Ordinance 2013-01 for any other restrictions on
the use of electronic map data or penalties for the misuse electronic map data”.
 
         (b)   A copy of the language contained in this division (G) shall be
conspicuously posted in all offices where electronic map data is sold in the
county, and shall be provided to any person(s), as defined by I.C. 5-14-3-2,
who desires to purchase electronic map data from the county.
   (H)   Electronic Map Generation Fund.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3-8.5, the County Council hereby establishes
the County Electronic Map Generation Fund. The Electronic Map Generation Fund
shall consist of fees charged for providing electronic map data to person(s) in
accordance with I.C. 5-14-3-8(j) and be subject to the appropriation by the
County Council.
      (2)   In accordance with I.C. 5-14-3-8.5(b), all funds collected in the
Electronic Map Generation Fund shall be specifically dedicated to the following
purposes:
         (a)   The maintenance, upgrading, and enhancement of the electronic
map; and
         (b)   The reimbursement of expenses incurred by a public agency in
supplying an electronic map in the form requested by the person(s).
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 5-6-2013)
§ 34.08 SEX, VIOLENT CRIME OFFENDERS CHANGE OF ADDRESS.
   (A)   The County Sheriff’s Department is hereby authorized to charge the sum
of $50 per year for the registration of sex or violent offenders, and $5 for
each time a sex or violent offender registers an address change with the County
Sheriff’s Department.
   (B)   The county now establishes a county Sex and Violent Offender
Administration Fund, and the County Sheriff’s Department shall deposit all
funds collected for sex or violent offender registration fees, and address
change fees for sex or violent offenders, into this account.
   (C)   The County Auditor shall, monthly, transfer 10% of any fees collected
to the treasurer of the state for deposit in the state’s Sex and Violent
Offender Administration Fund under I.C. 11-8-8-21.
   (D)   The County Council may appropriate money from the county’s Sex and
Violent Offender Administration Fund to defray the expense of administering or
ensuring compliance with the laws concerning the state’s Sex and Violent
Offender Registry.
(Council Ord. 2007-12, passed 9-17-2007)
§ 34.09 EMERGENCY SYSTEM TELEPHONE FEE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ENHANCED EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM. A telephone system that utilizes the
three-digit number 911 to send automatic number identification and automatic
location identification for reporting police, fire, medical, or other emergency
situations.
      EXCHANGE ACCESS FACILITY. The access from a particular service user’s
premises to a telephone system.
         (a)   The term includes:
            1.   An access line;
            2.   A private branch exchange (PBX) trunk; and
            3.   A centrex line trunk equivalent that is provided by the
service supplier.
         (b)   The term also includes a mobile telephone system access trunk,
whether the trunk is provided by a telephone company or a radio common carrier.
         (c)   The term does not include:
            1.   A service supplier owned and operated telephone pay station
line;
            2.   A wide area telecommunications service (WATS) lines;
            3.   A foreign exchange (FX) line; or
            4.   An incoming-only line.
      SERVICE SUPPLIER. A person who provides exchange telephone service to a
service user.
      SERVICE USER. A person to whom exchange telephone service is provided.
   (B)   Monthly fee.
      (1)   Beginning October 1, 2003, and each month thereafter, each service
supplier shall commence to collect a monthly enhanced emergency telephone
system fee of $2.10 per telephone access line, or other exchange access
facility.
      (2)   Prior to such date, each service supplier shall continue to collect
the monthly fee of $1.89.
   (C)   Administrative fee. The service supplier(s) shall be entitled to
retain an administrative fee of 3% of the monthly fees collected as
compensation for collecting the fees.
   (D)   Remit to Auditor. All monthly fees collected, except for the 3%
administrative fee, shall be remitted to the County Auditor within ten days
after the last day of the calendar year quarter. With the fee remittal, the
service supplier shall provide a fee collection report on a form provided by
the County Auditor.
   (E)   County Emergency Telephone System Fund. The County Auditor shall
deposit the remitted fees in a separate fund named the County Emergency
Telephone System Fund. The County Auditor may invest monies in the fund in the
same manner that other monies of the county are invested with the interest
earned from such investment to be deposited in that fund.
   (F)   Delinquent fee report.
      (1)   During January of each year, each service supplier that collects
the enhanced emergency telephone system fee for the county shall provide a
delinquent fee report to the County Auditor.
      (2)   The report shall list the name, address, and amount due for each
service user who is two or more months delinquent in paying the fee.
(Council Ord. 1989-8, passed 7-10-1989; Council Ord. 2003-03, passed 8-11-2003)
FUNDS
§ 34.25 RAINY DAY FUND.
   The County Council hereby establishes a Rainy Day Fund, pursuant to I.C. 36-
1-8-5.1, and that such fund shall be entitled to hereafter receive a transfer
of such funds and from such sources as may be, from time to time, determined by
resolution of this Council, but any annual transfer to be in an amount not to
exceed 10% of the county’s annual budget for that fiscal year, and that any
expenditure from said fund, after the required appropriation, has been for such
purpose and in such amounts as the Council, by resolution may, from time to
time, determine.
(Council Ord. 2004-01, passed 1-26-2004)
§ 34.26 LOSS, SHORTAGE OF FUNDS; SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT BOARD.
   (A)   General. The Solid Waste Management District Board of the county
recognizes that losses, shortages, and theft of District funds, and other
assets, may occur from time to time. State law requires the District to report
to the State Board of Accounts all erroneous or irregular material losses,
shortages, or theft of District funds or property. The State Board of Accounts
mandates government entities to determine their own material threshold for the
purposes of reporting the loss, shortage, or theft to the State Board of
Accounts as required by state law.
   (B)   Threshold of loss. The threshold for material losses, shortages, or
theft for the Solid Waste Management District, which must be reported to the
State Board of Accounts by the Controller of the District, is as follows:
      (1)   Cash losses, shortage, or theft. A loss, shortage, or theft of cash
from any District fund is an amount over $500; and
      (2)   Other assets loss, shortage, or theft. A loss, shortage, or theft
of a District asset other than cash exceeding a value of $500.
   (C)   Investigation. Whenever a loss, shortage, or theft of District funds
or property occurs, no matter the amount or value, or the requirement to report
such to the State Board of Accounts, the District Board, or their designee,
should investigate any and all losses, shortages, or thefts of District funds
or assets. The investigation and the resolution of the investigation must be
documented by the District Board, or its designee who conducts the
investigation. Such documentation should be maintained in the office of the
District. State law requires public employees who have actual knowledge of, or
reasonable cause to believe, a misappropriation of funds, or other assets, has
occurred to report such misappropriation to the State Board of Accounts and the
County Prosecuting Attorney.
(Res. 2017-01, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 34.27 POLICE PENSION FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners have previously indicated that funds
received by the County Sheriff’s Department for out-of-state and in-state civil
process fees may be deposited monthly into the County Police Pension Fund.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners have also previously indicated that funds
received by the County Sheriff’s Department for civil process and Sheriff’s
fees related to the Sheriff’s sales of foreclosed property may be deposited
monthly into the County Police Pension Fund.
   (C)   Civil Process fees and fees related to the Sheriff’s sale of
foreclosed property, all as collected by the County Sheriff’s Department, shall
hereafter continue to be paid and distributed to the County Police Pension
Fund.
(Ord. 2019-10, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 34.28 SUPPLEMENTAL JURORS.
   The County Auditor is authorized, and directed, to pay the various fees
related to court jurors from the county’s Jury Pay Fund; and that for purpose
of such payments, the work fees shall be interpreted, for supplemental
purposes, to include reasonable meals and parking charges incurred by jurors.
(Council Ord. 2004-02, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 34.29 COUNTY MISDEMEANANT FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a County Misdemeanant Fund, to be
administered by the County Council. The Fund shall consist of deposits received
from the Department of Corrections in accordance with I.C. 11-12-11.
   (B)   Deposits received from the Department of Corrections for daily per-
diem on state prisoners (felony) held at the County Security Center, and state
counties for daily per-diem on boarding prisoners from their respective
jurisdictions at the County Security Center, to be deposited in the same County
Misdemeanant Fund.
   (C)   The County Misdemeanant Fund may be used only for funding the
operation of the county jail, jail programs, or other correctional facilities.
Any monies remaining in the County Misdemeanant Fund at the end of the year
does not revert to any corrections fund.
(Ord. 1998-1, passed 2-2-1998)
§ 34.30 COMMUNITY CORRECTIONS COMMISSARY FUND.
   (A)   There exists an established Community Corrections Commissary Fund for
the county, hereinafter referred to as the “Fund”.
   (B)   Said Fund shall be separate from the county’s General Fund; funds
therein shall not revert to the General Fund; and disbursements from said Fund
shall not be the subject of required appropriations.
   (C)   The primary purpose of the Fund shall be for the purpose of purchase
of merchandise for resale to individuals committed to the County Community
Corrections Center (hereinafter referred to as “Community Corrections”).
   (D)   The Fund shall be under the supervision of the Director of the County
Community Corrections Center (hereinafter “Director”), who shall cause all
receipts for the sale of such merchandise to be deposited into said Fund, which
the Director, or the Director’s designee, shall keep in a depository designated
under I.C. 5-13-8.
   (E)   The Director, or the Director’s designee, at the Director’s, or the
Director’s designee’s, discretion and without appropriation by the County
Fiscal Body, may disburse money from the fund for:
      (1)   Merchandise for resale to inmates through the commissary;
      (2)   Expenses of operating the commissary, including, but not limited
to, facilities and personnel;
      (3)   Special training in law enforcement for employees of the Community
Corrections;
      (4)   Equipment installed at the Community Corrections;
      (5)   Equipment, including vehicles and computers, computer software,
communication devices, office machinery and furnishings, cameras and
photographic equipment, animals, animal training, holding and feeding equipment
and supplies, or attire used by an employee of the County Corrections in the
course of the employee’s official duties;
      (6)   An activity provided to maintain order and discipline among the
individuals committed to the Community Corrections;
      (7)   An activity or program of the Community Corrections intended to
reduce or prevent occurrences of criminal activity, including the following:
         (a)   Substance abuse;
         (b)   Child abuse;
         (c)   Domestic violence;
         (d)   Drinking and driving; and
         (e)   Juvenile delinquency.
      (8)   Any other purpose that benefits the County Community Corrections
that is mutually agreed upon by the County Fiscal Body and the Director.
   (F)   Money disbursed from the fund under this section must be supplemental,
or in addition to, rather than a replacement for, regular appropriations made
to carry out the purposes listed in division (E)(1) through (E)(7) above.
   (G)   It is understood, and agreed, that a prudent reserve of $5,000 in the
Commissary Fund is encouraged.
   (H)   The Director, or the Director’s designee, shall maintain a record of
receipts and disbursements from the Fund on such forms as prescribed by the
State Board of Accounts. The Director, or the Director’s designee, shall submit
a copy of said record on a semi-annual basis to the Community Correction’s
Advisory Board and to the County Council.
(Ord. 2019-06, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 34.31 PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM FUND.
   The following guidelines are adopted pursuant to I.C. 33-39-8-5(c).
   (A)   The decision to divert cases from the criminal justice system is the
responsibility of the prosecuting attorney. The prosecutor should, within the
exercise of his or her discretion, determine whether diversion or deferral best
serves the interests of justice.
   (B)   Diversion and deferral programs shall only be operated with the
consent, oversight, and scrutiny of the elected prosecuting attorney.
   (C)   A prosecutor should attempt to obtain all relevant investigative
information, personal data, case records, criminal history, and/or driving
record information necessary to render sound and reasonable decisions on
diversion or deferral of individuals.
   (D)   In exercising discretion to divert or defer individuals, factors which
may be considered include:
      (1)   The nature and severity of the offense;
      (2)   Any special characteristics or difficulties of the offender;
      (3)   Whether the defendant is a first-time offender;
      (4)   Whether there is a probability that the defendant will cooperate
and benefit from a diversion or deferral program;
      (5)   Whether an evidence based practice and/or other program is
available and appropriate for the defendant;
      (6)   The impact of the diversion or the deferral upon the community;
      (7)   Whether the defendant is likely to recidivate;
      (8)   Provisions for restitution; and
      (9)   Any mitigating or aggravating circumstances.
   (E)   As required by I.C. 33-39-1-8, the following cases may not be included
in a pre-trial diversion program:
      (1)   Murder, Level 1, Level 2, Level 3 or Level 4 felony cases;
      (2)   Cases in which a person:
         (a)   Holds a commercial driver’s license at the time of the request
for diversion; and
         (b)   Has been charged with an offense involving the operation of a
motor vehicle in accordance with the federal Motor Carrier Safety Improvement
Act of 1999 (MCSIA) (Public Law 106-159.113 Stat. 1748).
      (3)   Cases in which a person is arrested for or charged with:
         (a)   An offense under I.C. 9-30-5-1 through I.C. 9-30-5-5; or
         (b)   If a person was arrested or charged with an offense under I.C.
9-30-5-1 through I.C. 9-30-5-5, an offense involving:
            1.   Intoxication; or
            2.   Operation of a motor vehicle if the offense involving
intoxication or the operation of a motor vehicle was part of the same episode
of criminal conduct as the offense under I.C. 9-30-5-1 through I.C. 9-30-5-5.
   (F)   As required by I.C. 34-28-5-1, an infraction may not be deferred to an
offense or violation under I.C. 9-24-6 involving the operation of a commercial
motor vehicle.
   (G)   A prosecutor shall not negotiate a diversion agreement with an
unrepresented defendant prior to a waiver of the right to counsel at an initial
hearing before a judicial officer.
   (H)   Diversion and deferral agreements shall be in writing, executed by the
parties, and filed with the court as a public document.
   (I)   The elected prosecuting attorney shall not receive any salary
appropriation from diversion or deferral funds.
   (J)   Prosecutors’ offices which receive diversion or deferral funds should
make any budget requests to their local county fiscal body based upon an
appropriating ordinance (I.C. 33-37-8-6) without regard for anticipated or
projected diversion or deferral revenues.
   (K)   Diversion or deferral funds shall be maintained as local user fees by
the appropriate county official as required by law (I.C. 35-37-8(5), (6), and
(7)) in a separate account subject to appropriate accounting controls and
financial audits of all deposits and expenditures.
   (L)   The prosecutor’s office shall not handle diversion or deferral fees.
All payments made to the program are to be made through the Clerk’s office
(I.C. 33-37-5-17).
   (M)   Only those fees which are consistent with the appropriate statutory
authority shall be required and collected.
   (N)   All expenditures of diversion or deferral funds shall be approved by
the county fiscal body or the county executive.
   (O)   No claim for expenditures from the county diversion or deferral user
funds shall be appropriated by the county fiscal body or approved by the county
executive without the consent and approval of the prosecuting attorney.
   (P)   Pursuant to I.C. 33-39-l-8(c)(4) and I.C. 34-28-5-1(h)(6), as a
requirement of maintaining a diversion or deferral program the prosecuting
attorney must electronically transmit information required by the Prosecuting
Attorneys Council. This information is considered confidential and is designed
for the use of prosecuting attorneys in making diversion or deferral decisions
under divisions (C) and (D) above.
   (Q)   Filing fees by case type collected by the Clerk:
  PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM
   Felony Misdemeanor
  PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM
                                           Felony  Misdemeanor
 Under I.C. 33-37-5:  
 Total               (driving offense)     $479.50 $454.50
                    (non-driving offense) $479.50 $454.50
 DEFERRAL PROGRAM     
 Under I.C. 33-37-5   
 Total               (driving offense)     $192.50
                    (non-driving offense) $192
*   Statute states these fees are not to exceed these amounts. The
prosecutor may have lower rates than the maximum allowed.
(1) If the infraction or violation is not a moving traffic offense, then
this will not be collected.
(2) $50 goes to the deferral program and $2 goes to the jury pay fund.
(3) Monthly fee is $20 for each month that the person remains in the
program.
(4) Monthly fee is $10 for each month that the person remains in the
program.
(These scenarios would illustrate a 6-month program. The county may have
different time ranges for the program which will cause the total to be
different.)
(Updated 7-1-2018)
 
(Approved by the Indiana Prosecuting Attorneys Council on 6-18-2014)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 9-24-6 was repealed by P.L. 198-2016, Sec. 451
§ 34.32 COUNTY RECORDER’S ENHANCED ACCESS FUND.
   (A)   The County Council does hereby establish the County Recorder Enhanced
Access Fund No. 163 (the “Fund”) to receive those fees collected by said
Recorder for enhanced public access to public records under said Recorder’s
charge.
   (B)   The Fund shall be a dedicated fund, and the monies deposited therein
shall be used for the replacement, improvement, and expansion of capital
expenditures in the County Recorder’s office, and/or for the reimbursement of
operating expenses incurred in providing enhanced access to public information
by the County Recorder’s office.
(Council Ord. 2006-01, passed 12-27-2006)
§ 34.33 ARP CORONAVIRUS LOCAL FISCAL RECOVERY FUND.
   (A)   There is created a new local grant fund within the Dubois County
Auditor's office that shall be titled "ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery
Fund," and that the Auditor has issued a fund number of 075-8950 with respect
to these monies and that such monies shall be non-reverting.
   (B)   The uses of the Fund are specified in § 603(c) of the ARPA and shall
be used in accordance with U.S. Treasury Guidance, as amended:
      (1)   To respond to the public health emergency with respect to the
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) or its negative economic impacts, including
assistance to households, small businesses, and nonprofits, or to aid the
impacted industries such as tourism, travel and hospitality;
      (2)   To respond to workers performing essential work during the COVID-19
public health emergency by providing premium pay to eligible works of the
metropolitan city, non-entitlement unit of local government or county that are
performing such essential work, or by providing grants to eligible employers
that have eligible workers who perform essential work;
      (3)   For the provision of government services to the extent of the
reduction in revenue of such metropolitan city, non-entitlement unit of local
government, or county due to the COVID-19 public health emergency relative to
revenues collected in the most recent full fiscal year of the metropolitan
city, non-entitlement unit of local government or county prior to the
emergency; or
      (4)   To make necessary investments in water, sewer or broadband
infrastructure as approved by the U.S. Treasury.
   (C)   The monies of the Fund shall be appropriated by the County Council
before expenditure and all expenditures shall be approved by the Board of
Commissioners (the "Commissioners") with any and all claims to be paid from the
Fund.
   (D)   The Commissioners will encourage public input in order to create the
plan, conditions, and rules (together, the "plan"), upon which the monies are
to be requested and used.
   (E)   The plan is attached to Ord. 2021-19 as "Exhibit A" and may be
amended.
   (F)   The Auditor shall keep accurate and complete financial records of the
receipt and expenditure of any and all monies deposited into and paid from the
Fund.
   (G)   Any unused monies of the fund shall be paid back to the U.S. Treasury,
as required.
   (H)   Monies of the Fund shall not be deposited into any pension fund.
(Ord. 2021-19, passed 5-17-2021)
FINANCES
§ 34.45 CO-PAYMENT BY INMATES; MEDICAL SERVICES.
   The Board of Commissioners does now authorize the implementation of a policy
requiring co-payment of medical, dental, or other health care-related services
by inmates of the County Security Center, pursuant to I.C. 11-12-5-5.
(Res. 94-5, passed 7-5-1994)
§ 34.46 DUES OF COUNTY OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners is authorized to budget, and the County
Council is authorized to appropriate, funds from the General Fund, or from
other funds, to provide membership for the county and for the elected and
appointed officials and members of the county’s boards, council, departments,
or agencies in local, regional, state, and national associations of a civic,
educational, or governmental nature, which have, as their purpose, the
betterment and improvement of county government operations.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners is further authorized to budget, and the
County Council is further authorized to appropriate, funds to pay the expenses
of duly-authorized representatives to attend the meetings and functions of
organizations to which the county belongs.
(Ord. 1982-1, passed - -)
§ 34.47 FIXED ASSET CAPITALIZATION POLICY.
   (A)   Definitions and provisions. For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      CAPITAL ASSET. An asset having a useful life of more than one year and an
actual or historical cost of $5,000 or more. CAPITAL ASSETS include: land,
easements, right-of-ways, land improvements, building, building improvements,
construction in progress, machinery and equipment, vehicles, infrastructure,
works of art and monuments, and all other tangible assets used in operations
with useful lives extending beyond one year.
      CAPITAL OUTLAYS. Expenditures that benefit both current and future fiscal
periods. This includes costs of acquiring land or structures, construction or
improvement of buildings, structures, or other fixed assets, and equipment
purchases having an appreciable and calculable period of usefulness. These are
expenditures resulting in the acquisition of or addition to the government's
general fixed assets.
      FIXED ASSET. Tangible assets of a durable nature employed in the
operating activities of the unit and that are relatively permanent and are
needed for the production or sale of goods or services that are termed
property, plant and equipment, or fixed assets. These assets are not held for
sale in the ordinary course of business. This broad group is usually separated
into classes according to the physical characteristics of the items (such as
land, buildings, improvements other than buildings, machinery and equipment).
      VALUATION OF CAPITAL ASSETS. Capital assets should be recorded at actual
cost. Normally, the cost recorded is the purchase price or construction costs
of the asset, but also included are any reasonable and necessary costs incurred
to place the asset in its intended location and intended use that can be
directly related to the asset. Such costs could include the following: legal
and title fees; appraisal and negotiation fees; surveying fees; damage
payments; land preparation costs; demolition costs; architect and accounting
fees; insurance premiums during construction; transportation charges; and
interest costs during construction. Donated or contributed assets should be
recorded at their fair market value on the date donated or acquired.
   (B)   Asset definitions by major category. It is important to the
maintenance of accurate records that each asset category be precisely defined
and that all persons responsible for records maintenance be fully aware of the
categorization system. This division further clarifies the asset definition by
major category.
      (1)   Land.
         (a)   The county will capitalize all land purchases or land donations.
All land purchases shall be capitalized with the actual cost of purchase or if
unavailable, the estimated historical cost. This includes all specified land,
easements, right-of-ways, lots, and parcels owned by the governmental unit or
its various departments, boards or authorities, regardless of the method of
acquisition. This includes land purchased outright as an easement or right-of-
way to infrastructures. All costs of legal services incidental to the
acquisition of land, costs relating to the razing for the structure, and other
charges incurred in preparing the land for use are capitalized and carried in
the land account. Donated land will be capitalized at the fair market value at
the time of the donation.
         (b)   All properties obtained through tax sale including but not
limited to land, buildings, land improvements, and building improvements shall
be considered to have no dollar value and will be excluded from reporting as
they are considered property that is being held for resale.
      (2)   Buildings.
         (a)   The county will capitalize all buildings at the purchase price
or construction cost. Buildings are all structures designed and erected to
house equipment, services or functions. This includes systems, services, and
fixtures within the buildings, and attachments such as porches, stairs, fire
escapes, canopies, areaways, lighting fixtures, flagpoles, and all such units
that serve the building. Plumbing systems; lighting systems; heating, cooling,
ventilating and air handling systems; alarm systems; sound systems;
surveillance systems; passenger and freight elevators; escalators; built-in
casework; walk-in coolers and freezers; fixed shelving; and other fixed
equipment are included with the building. Communication antennas and/or towers
are not included as buildings. These are parts of the equipment units they
serve.
         (b)   Additions, improvements, and leasehold improvements to the
building as well as the cost of the heating and ventilating system or other
permanently attached fixtures should be capitalized when these costs are
considered betterments. These improvements or renovations to the buildings will
be capitalized in the county if the total cost is $5,000 or greater.
Replacement of a building roof or heating and cooling system will be
capitalized when the cost of the item is $5,000 or greater.
         (c)   Donated buildings will be capitalized using the market value of
the building at the time of the donation. Building purchases made using the
federal or state funding shall follow the appropriate funding source guidelines
and the county capital asset policy.
      (3)   Improvements other than buildings. The county will capitalize
improvements other than buildings in the following manner:
         (a)   Improvements such as excavation, non-infrastructure utility
installation, driveways, parking lots, flagpoles, sidewalks, retaining walls,
and fencing shall be capitalized when the cost of the item is $5,000 or
greater.
         (b)   Milling and paving of an existing parking lot shall be
considered maintenance rather than a capital asset.
         (c)   Improvements other than buildings will be capitalized at the
actual cost of the improvement. If the actual cost is unavailable, the
improvement will be capitalized using its current replacement cost, estimated
date of purchase, and the Indiana Board of Accounts factoring table to
determine the estimated historical cost.
         (d)   The county department heads shall report to the County Auditor
any improvements other than buildings which their respective departments
authorized that cost $5,000 or greater.
         (e)   Donated improvements other than buildings will be capitalized at
the fair market value at the time of the donation.
      (4)   Construction work in progress. The county will capitalize actual
amounts expended on an uncompleted building or other capital construction
project. Once the project is completed, the cumulative costs are transferred to
the appropriate permanent fixed asset account.
      (5)   Machinery and equipment.
         (a)   The county will capitalize all machinery and equipment at the
purchase price or actual cost. The cost of the asset acquired when payment
includes both cash and a trade-in is the sum of the cash paid plus the fair
market value of the asset traded in. If the fair market value of the asset
being traded in is not readily determinable, cost may be recorded as the cash
paid plus the book value (asset cost minus accumulated depreciation) of the
asset traded in.
         (b)   Equipment includes all types of physical property within the
scope of the capital asset policy for the county not previously classified.
Included in this category are office mechanical equipment, office furniture,
appliances, furnishings, machinery items, maintenance equipment, communication
equipment, police, fire, sanitation, Park Department equipment, laboratory
equipment, vehicles, road and highway equipment, aircraft, EMS and emergency
equipment, earth moving equipment, text equipment, civil defense and emergency
equipment, and data processing equipment. All supplies are excluded.
         (c)   The county shall capitalize all machinery and equipment items
with an actual cost or estimated cost of $5,000 or greater. Attachments to
machinery and equipment will be capitalized if purchased at the same time as
the equipment item. Attachments that are purchased separately from a given
equipment item will be capitalized separately from the item if they are
purchased at a time other than when the original item was purchased and have a
cost of $5,000 or greater.
         (d)   Items which extend the useful life of the equipment shall be
capitalized. Department heads should report to the County Auditor the
description, year completed, funding source and dollar amount. An example would
be the purchase of a motor for a vehicle. This does not include the normal
maintenance costs or supplies.
         (e)   Donated machinery and equipment will be capitalized at the fair
market value at the time of donation.
      (6)   Infrastructure.
         (a)   The county will capitalize all county-owned roads and bridges.
All county roads and bridges will be capitalized at original cost or historical
estimated cost. Infrastructure assets are long-lived capital assets that
normally can be preserved for a significantly greater number of years than most
capital assets and that are normally stationary in nature. Infrastructure
assets include roads, bridges, streetlights, traffic signals, drainage systems
and water systems. Maintenance and repairs will be considered as necessary to
maintain the existing asset and therefore are not capitalized. Examples such as
patching, resurfacing, milling, chip sealing, and snow removal shall be
considered maintenance activities and will be expensed. Additionally, normal
department operating activities, such as feasibility studies, and primary
engineering and design will be expensed and not capitalized as an element of
the infrastructure asset.
         (b)   Gravel roads that are paved shall be considered a capital asset.
County roads that are redesigned or re-engineered beyond maintenance activities
such as paving, milling, or chip sealing shall be considered a capital asset.
Roads that are accepted by the Board of Commissioners and the Highway
Department from developers or owners shall be capitalized at the market value
at the time of the donation.
   (C)   Recording and accounting.
      (1)   The County Auditor shall ensure that accounting for capital assets
is being exercised by establishing a capital asset inventory, both initially
and periodically in subsequent years. The County Auditor will further ensure
that the capital asset report shall be updated annually to reflect additions,
retirements, and transfers and to reflect the new, annual capital asset balance
for financial reporting purposes and the annual and accumulated depreciation
calculation. The County Auditor shall be responsible for maintaining the
records and accounts of all capital assets that have an actual cost or
estimated historical costs of $5,000 or greater.
      (2)   The County Auditor will depreciate the capital assets of the county
by using the straight-line method or the composite/group method of
depreciation. Land is not depreciated according to general accepted accounting
principles. Depreciable property must meet the following qualifications: the
asset must have a useful life of more than one year and the asset must wear out
or lose value over time.
      (3)   Useful life is defined for each asset class as follows:
         (a)   Land: not depreciated.
         (b)   Buildings: 50 years.
         (c)   Improvements other than buildings: 15 years.
         (d)   Construction work in progress: not depreciated.
         (e)   Machinery and equipment: ten years, unless otherwise specified
below.
            1.   Distributer trucks and motor graders: 25 years.
            2.   Wheel loaders, dirt loaders, asphalt compactor rollers,
snowplows, sanders, and chain saws: 20 years.
            3.   Sanitation trucks: 15 years.
            4.   Dump trucks, pickups, and excavators: ten years.
            5.   Boom mower and tractors: eight years.
            6.   Patrol cars: five years.
         (f)   Infrastructure assets.
            1.   Roads: 50 years.
            2.   Bridges: 75 years.
      (4)   Infrastructure record keeping and reconciliation.
         (a)   The County Highway Engineer shall be responsible for maintaining
accurate records regarding all county infrastructure. If roads or bridges are
permanently closed, or new roads are accepted into the county road system by
the County Board of Commissioners, such changes shall be recorded by the County
Auditor in the year that such changes occur. If a gravel road is paved, or if a
road is totally redone beyond milling and paving, or chip sealing, such
improvement shall be considered a capital asset if the cost is $5,000 or
greater.
         (b)   Normal department operating activities regarding infrastructure,
such as feasibility studies, preliminary engineering, and design, will be
expensed rather than capitalized greater.
   (D)   Maintenance of assets. For the maintenance of the capital asset
accounting report, the department heads have the responsibility to report
additions, retirements, and transfers in detail to the County Auditor. Detail
includes such data elements as asset description, location, make, model, serial
number, date of acquisition, cost, life and other information deemed relevant.
Reports shall be made in a timely manner, as the capital asset record must be
updated annually. Property should not be transferred, turned in for auction or
disposed of without the approval of the Board of Commissioners. Department
heads shall report all disposed items to the County Auditor, who shall remove
the item from the county capital asset inventory. All lost or stolen items
shall be reported to the County Auditor by the department heads.
   (E)   Periodic inventories. A physical inventory of capital assets will be
conducted by each department as near as practical to year-end. The County
Auditor will provide a list of the inventory on file which will be sent to each
department head before each year-end. The department heads will then compare
physical observations of assets to the listing noting whether the assets exist,
the location if not apparent otherwise, and relevant factors. If the condition
of an asset has deteriorated to the point its useful life has been impaired,
the fact should be noted, and the reasons for such omissions should be
documented to the extent possible. Department heads shall be accountable for
the capital asset inventory charged to their department. The physical capital
asset inventory sheet and related documentation shall be forwarded to both the
County Auditor and the Board of Commissioners. The County Auditor will compare
the results of the physical inventory to the capital asset records and make
necessary adjustments to the capital assets.
(Ord. 2021-33, passed 10-4-2021)
§ 34.48 COUNTY CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CONTRACT.
         (a)   A contract for the purchase of:
            1.   Real property;
            2.   Tangible or intangible personal property; or
            3.   Services, as defined by I.C. 5-22-2-30, meaning the furnishing
of labor, time, or effort by a person, not involving the delivery of specific
supplies other than printed documents or other items that are merely incidental
to the required performance.
         (b)   The term CONTRACT does not include a contract concerning the
issuance of:
            1.   A bond to finance the construction of a public facility; or
            2.   A bond or other type of security for the payment of a lease
obligation.
   (B)   Pursuant to this section, a contract entered into by the county,
including a contract executed by a county officer or an authorized county
employee, must meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The contract must be executed in the name of the county.
      (2)   Any property purchases for public use shall be:
         (a)   Title to; or
         (b)   Documented as owned by the county.
   (C)   A contract entered into by the county, including a contract executed
by a county officer or an authorized county employee, where applicable, must
include standard contractual language set forth in Exhibit A attached to Ord.
2024-12, as may be amended.
   (D)   In accordance with I.C. 36-2-2.9-15, the following county employee
positions are authorized to take action on a county contract, on behalf of the
county, provided such action is approved by the Board of Commissioners of the
county:
      (1)   The County Engineer;
      (2)   The Administrative Director of Community Corrections;
      (3)   The Director of the Health Department;
      (4)   The Human Resources Generalist; and
      (5)   The Director and Deputy Director of the Emergency Management
Agency.
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 7-1-2024; Ord. 2024-17, passed 12-2-2024; Ord. 2025-07,
passed 8-4-2025; Ord. 2025-09, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person found in violation of any provisions of §
34.06 shall be fined an amount not to exceed $2,500 for each violation. The
county shall also be entitled to seek an injunction to prevent further
violation of §
34.06.
   (C)   Any person(s) who violates the terms and conditions of §
34.08 by failing to pay for purchased electronic map data shall be liable for
the total fee charged for the electronic map data, plus attorney’s fees and the
cost of collection. Any person(s) who violates the restrictions on the use of
electronic map data, as set forth in §
34.08(G) shall be guilty of an infraction, and may be fined by the county up to
$2,500, and each violation shall be deemed a separate offence. Also, in the
event that there is an improper use of electronic map data as set forth in §
34.08(G), or in violation of state or federal law, the county may prohibit the
person(s) (as defined by I.C. 5-14-3-2) from obtaining any electronic map data,
and seek injunctive relief from any misuse of electronic map data by the person
(s) who originally purchased the electronic map data, or any other person(s)
who has received a copy of the electronic map data.
(Ord. 98-11, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 2013-01, passed 5-6-2013)
CHAPTER 35: TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Local income tax rates
   
35.02   Disbursement of tax warrant collections
   
35.03   Alternative minimum bid; tax sales
   
35.04   Innkeeper’s tax
   
35.05   Procedure of notification; delinquent property taxes
Tax Abatement Procedure
   
35.20   Property tax abatement available
   
35.21   Application; procedure; requirements
   
35.22   Filing fee
   
35.23   Ineligible projects; scoring system; other requirements; schedules
   
35.24   Expiration; reapplication
   
35.25   Review, determination of compliance
   
35.26   Abatement limited by state law
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 LOCAL INCOME TAX RATES.
   (A)   Modified income tax rates.
 
Allocation Rate Category                   Existing LIT Rate Proposed LIT Rate
Certified shares (I.C. 6-3.6-6)            0.6000%           0.6000%   
Public safety (I.C. 6-3.6-6)               0.0000%           0.0000%
Economic development (I.C. 6-3.6-6)        0.4000%           0.4000%
Property tax relief rate (I.C. 6-3.6-5)    0.0000%           0.0000%
Correctional or rehabilitation facilities  0.0000%           0.2000%
(I.C. 6-3.6-6-2.7)
Total expenditure rate                     1.0000%           1.2000%
 
   (B)   Correctional and rehabilitation facilities.
      (1)   The revenues generated by the tax rate for correctional and
rehabilitation facilities identified in division (A) above shall be directed to
the Correctional Facilities and Rehabilitation Facilities Fund, which is hereby
created pursuant to I.C. 6-3.6-6-2.7.
      (2)   The tax rate for correctional and rehabilitation facilities
proposed in division (A) above will become effective on October 1, 2019, and
will remain in effect until modified by ordinance of the Council.
      (3)   The rate imposed under I.C. 6-3.6-6-2.7, as amended from time to
time, may not be in effect for more than any statutorily-limited time period,
or until a date upon which all debt obligations and/or costs, or expenses
associated with such debt obligations that are payable from revenues generated
by the tax rate for correctional and rehabilitation facilities identified in
division (A) above, have been paid and satisfied in full, whichever is sooner.
(Council Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-24-2019)
§ 35.02 DISBURSEMENT OF TAX WARRANT COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 6-8.1-8-3, the County Sheriff shall attempt to levy
on, and collect, a judgment arising from a state tax warrant in the county.
   (B)   I.C. 6-8.1-8-2(b) provides that when the State Department of Revenue
issues a tax warrant, a collection fee of 10% of the unpaid tax is added to the
total amount due.
   (C)   If the Sheriff has entered a salary contract under I.C. 36-2-13-2.5,
the Sheriff shall deposit, in the County General Fund, the part of the
collections that represents the 10% collection fee added under I.C. 6-8.1-8-2
(b), in accordance with I.C. 6-8.1-8-3.
   (D)   If the Sheriff has not entered into a salary contract under I.C. 36-2-
13-2.5, the Sheriff shall keep the part of the tax warrant collections that
represents the 10% collection fee added under I.C. 6-8.1-8-2(b), provided that
said sum, when added to his or her compensation, does not exceed the amount
allowed by I.C. 36-2-13-17.
(Council Ord. 2019-11, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 35.03 ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM BID; TAX SALES.
   For tax sales conducted by the county after September 1, 2012, the County
Treasurer may accept a bid on a tract or item of real property that is greater
than, or equal to, the lesser of:
   (A)   The amount determined under I.C. 6-1.1-24-5(f) for the tract or item
of real property; or
   (B)   Seventy-five percent of the gross assessed value of the tract, or
item, of real property, as determined on the most recent assessment date.
(Council Ord. 2012-02, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 35.04 INNKEEPER’S TAX.
   (A)   (A)   An innkeeper’s tax is hereby levied on every person, as defined
by I.C. 6-2.5-1-3, engaged in the business of renting or furnishing, for
periods of less than 30 days, any room or rooms, lodgings, or accommodations in
any of the following located in the county:
      (1)   Hotel;
      (2)   Motel;
      (3)   Boat motel;
      (4)   Inn;
      (5)   College or university memorial union;
      (6)   College or university residence hall or dormitory; or
      (7)   Tourist cabin.
   (B)   The innkeeper’s tax does not apply to gross income received in a
transaction in which:
      (1)   A student rents lodging in a college or university residence hall
while that student participates in a course of study for which the student
receives college credit from a college or university located in the county; or
      (2)   A person rents a room, lodging, or accommodation for a period of 30
days or more.
   (C)   The innkeeper’s tax shall be levied at the rate of 5% on the gross
retail income derived from lodging income only and is in addition to the state
gross retail tax imposed under I.C. 6-2.5.
   (D)   The innkeeper’s tax shall be imposed, paid to, and collected by the
State Department of Revenue in accordance with I.C. 6-9-18-3.
   (E)   All of the provisions of I.C. 6-2.5 relating to rights, duties,
liabilities, procedures, penalties, definitions, exemptions, and administration
are applicable to the imposition and administration of the innkeeper’s tax,
except to the extent those provisions are in conflict or inconsistent with the
specific provisions of I.C. 6-9-18 or the requirements of the County Treasurer.
   (F)   There is hereby established a Convention, Recreation, and Visitor
Promotion Fund, and all funds collected under this section shall, upon receipt
by the County Treasurer, be deposited into said Fund.
   (G)   Money in the county Convention, Recreation, and Visitor Promotion Fund
shall be used to promote and encourage conventions, visitors, and tourism
within the county. Such expenditures include, but are not limited to,
expenditures for advertising, promotional activities, trade shows, special
events, and recreation.
(Council Ord. 91-12A, passed - -; Council Ord. 95-1, passed 4-3-1995; Council
Ord. 2005-01, passed - -; Ord. 2023-02, passed 4-24-2023)
§ 35.05 PROCEDURE OF NOTIFICATION; DELINQUENT PROPERTY TAXES.
   It is hereby enacted by the Board of Commissioners that the County Treasurer
is hereby directed to give written notification by regular mail, and
notification by publication in the local newspapers, to those persons or
entities that are delinquent pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-23-9.
(Ord. 94-11, passed 9-6-1994)
TAX ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
§ 35.20 PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT AVAILABLE.
   (A)   There shall be available, within the jurisdictional limits of the
county, a program of property tax abatements in accordance with I.C. 6-1.1-
12.1, as amended from time to time, for the redevelopment and/or rehabilitation
of commercial and industrial property, and for the acquisition and installation
of new manufacturing equipment in areas within the jurisdiction of the county
authority, which is hereafter designated by the County Council as “Economic
Revitalization Areas”.
   (B)   The terms “Economic Revitalization Areas”, “new manufacturing
equipment”, “property”, “redevelopment”, and “rehabilitation”, as used in §§
35.20 through
35.26, shall have the same meaning as said terms are defined by I.C. 6-1.1-
12.1-1, and as provided for in I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-2. The term “new” manufacturing
equipment, in some cases, may include certain used equipment.
(Council Ord. 2017-02, passed 10-22-2018)
§ 35.21 APPLICATION; PROCEDURE; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The county shall prepare printed forms, and require all applicants
applying for designation/abatement to complete and submit such forms.
Applicants shall submit separate forms for real property abatement and personal
property abatement.
   (B)   The applications shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information: description of the real estate; proposed use of the real estate;
proposed type and costs of redevelopment, rehabilitation, and/or new
manufacturing equipment, and/or research and development equipment; and
description of the proposed operation and number of jobs to be created, wages
for jobs to be created, and the projected date of completion for the proposed
improvements.
   (C)   The original completed application, fee, and other forms required by
the county, shall be submitted to the County Auditor. Said information shall be
forwarded to a committee composed of the County Auditor, or a representative,
two representatives of the County Council, and a representative of the County
Board of Commissioners, and the County Assessor, or a representative, for
review and to make written recommendations to the County Council regarding the
desirability of designating the area described in the application as an
Economic Revitalization Area, and may recommend the period of time during which
the area shall be so designated and the type of abatement/incentives that
should be allowed, in accordance with I.C. 6-1.1-12.1 and any other state law,
and after following the procedures set forth in divisions (E) and (F) below.
The committee designated above may consult with such other individuals or
entities as members of the committee determine advisable in review of the
application to provide information necessary, in the sole opinion of the
committee, to form a recommendation regarding the effect of granting the
application. The County Council shall consider the application and
recommendation, and make the determination as to whether or not to grant the
Economic Revitalization Area status in accordance with I.C. 6-1.1-12.1 and
amounts of tax abatement in accordance with §
35.23(C).
   (D)   Pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-17, the County Council hereby adopts, as a
guideline, the alternative abatement schedule set forth in §
35.23(G) and (H), which considers the total amount of the applicant’s
investment in real and personal property, the number of new full-time
equivalent jobs created, the average wage of the new employees compared to the
state minimum wage, and the infrastructure requirements for the applicant’s
investment.
   (E)   The applicant must provide reasons why the project site qualifies as
an Economic Revitalization Area as defined under state law; for example, lack
of development, cessation of growth, deterioration of improvements or character
of occupancy, age, obsolescence, substandard buildings, or other factors that
have impaired values or prevent a normal development of property or use of
property.
   (F)   The application shall include information as to the total amount of
investment to be made in real and personal property, the number of new full-
time equivalent jobs being created, the average wage of the new employees
compared to the state minimum wage, and the infrastructure requirements for the
taxpayer’s investment.
(Council Ord. 2017-02, passed 10-22-2018)
§ 35.22 FILING FEE.
   Upon filing his or her application and any other forms required by the
county for real property tax abatement, the applicant shall pay a non-
refundable filing fee in the sum of $250, made payable to the county. Upon
filing his or her application, and any other forms required by the county for
personal property tax abatement, the applicant shall pay a non-refundable
filing fee in the sum of $250, made payable to the county. If the applicant
files for both real property and personal property abatement, the applicant
shall pay a total non-refundable fee of $500.
(Council Ord. 2017-02, passed 10-22-2018)
§ 35.23 INELIGIBLE PROJECTS; SCORING SYSTEM; OTHER REQUIREMENTS; SCHEDULES.
   (A)   Ineligible projects. 
      (1)   Any applicant who completes an assessor assessment registration or
building permit if within an incorporated area’s jurisdiction for a proposed
project or acquires new manufacturing equipment prior to filing the appropriate
tax phase-in (abatement) applications may not be eligible for tax phase-in
(abatement). This is because the decision of the Council to designate the
Economic Revitalization Area must be passed on the finding that the area is
undesirable for normal development.
      (2)   Pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-3(e), tax abatement for the
redevelopment or rehabilitation of real property may not be approved for the
following facilities:
         (a)   Private or commercial golf course;
         (b)   Country club;
         (c)   Massage parlor;
         (d)   Tennis club;
         (e)   Skating facility (including roller skating, skateboarding, or
ice skating);
         (f)   Racquet sport facility (including any handball or racquetball
court);
         (g)   Hot tub facility;
         (h)   Suntan facility;
         (i)   Racetrack;
         (j)   Any facility the primary purpose of which is (unless the
facility is located in an economic development target area established under
state law):
            1.   Retail food and beverage service;
            2.   Automobile sales or service; or
            3.   Other retail.
         (k)   Residential, unless:
            1.   Multifamily facility with no less than 20% of units available
for low and moderate income individuals;
            2.   Located in an economic development target area; or
            3.   Located in an area designated as a residential distressed
area.
         (l)   A package liquor store that holds a liquor dealer’s permit under
I.C. 7.1-3-10, or any other entity that is required to operate under a license
issued under I.C. 7.1. This division (A)(2)(l) does not apply to an applicant
that:
            1.   Was eligible for tax abatement before July 1, 1995;
            2.   Is described in I.C. 7.1-5-7-11; or
            3.   Operates a facility under:
               a.   A beer wholesaler’s permit under I.C. 7.1-3-3;
               b.   A liquor wholesaler’s permit under I.C. 7.1-3-8; or
               c.   A wine wholesaler’s permit under I.C. 7.1-3-13 for which
the applicant claims a deduction under this chapter.
      (3)   The County Council will not generally consider granting Economic
Revitalization Area designation for “speculative developments” for which no
major tenant has been identified. The County Council may consider granting an
ERA designation if exceptional circumstances, in the discretion of the County
Council, exist.
   (B)   Applications.
      (1)   The applicant must provide reasons why the project site qualifies
as an Economic Revitalization Area as defined under state law, i.e., lack of
development, cessation of growth, deterioration of improvements, or character
of occupancy, age, obsolescence, substandard buildings, or other factors that
have impaired values or prevent a normal development of property or use of
property.
      (2)   The application shall include information as to the total amount of
investment to be made in real and personal property, the number of new full-
time equivalent jobs being created, the average wage of the new employees
compared to the state minimum wage and the infrastructure requirements for the
taxpayer’s investment.
   (C)   Scoring system. The County Council utilizes a scoring system as a
guide for determining the appropriate length of time (one of ten time periods
for real estate and one of five time periods for personal property are set
forth in the guidelines) of the property tax abatement(s) being sought for a
proposed project. The County Council may deviate from these guidelines and
grant more or less tax abatement for longer or shorter periods of time (but not
to exceed ten years) on a case-by-case basis as long as all requirements of
Indiana law are met. The County Council may, in its sole discretion, determine
that certain projects should not receive any tax abatement, no matter what the
outcome using the schedules divisions (G) and (H) below.
   (D)   Real property.
      (1)   A property’s assessed value is the basis for property taxes.
Annually, local assessing officials assess the value of real property on
January 1 based on market value. Property owners can estimate the property
taxes for new construction by adding the cost of the land and improvements
together and multiplying by the tax rate. For real property tax abatement
calculation purposes, the cost of the improvements (the land itself cannot be
abated) would be utilized as the real property assessed value.
      (2)   This real property assessment value could then be phased-in.
   (E)   Personal property.
      (1)   Personal property values are assessed January 1 of every year and
are self-reported by property owners to the assessor using prescribed state
forms. Generally speaking, personal property taxes are levied against all
tangible property other than real property. Numerous deductions can be applied
to personal property. Of course, the value of personal property over time will
be subject to depreciation, therefore, applicants are advised to seek the
counsel of a financial advisor.
      (2)   To determine the eligibility of your specific type of personal
property and for additional information on the state’s property tax assessment
system, check the State Department of Local Government Finance website at
www.in.gov/dlgf.
   (F)   Other requirements.
      (1)   The applicant for tax abatement, or an authorized representative,
must attend all meetings of the County Council that deal with the application
for tax abatement.
      (2)   (a)   Property owners receiving tax abatement are required to file
forms pursuant to state law on an annual basis by the dates required by state
law with the County Auditor and/or County Assessor for each year during which
tax abatement is received.
         (b)   The County Committee, as established in §
35.21(C), will verify the information prior to presenting the annual report to
the County Council.
   (G)   Real and personal property tax abatement guideline scoring criteria;
project evaluation criteria for new and existing businesses in the county.
Category Points
Category                                                                 Points
New investment in property and equipment                                  
   $25,000 to $99,999                                                 5
   $100,000 to $249,999                                               10
   $250,000 to $499,999                                               15
   $500,000 to $749,999                                               20
   $750,000 to $999,999                                               23
   $1,000,000 to $1,999,999                                           26
   $2,000,000 to $3,999,999                                           28
   Over $4,000,000                                                    30
New employment: number of new full-time equivalent (FTE) jobs
   3 to 5 new FTE                                                     5
   6 to 10 new FTE                                                    10
   11 to 15 new FTE                                                   15
   16 to 25 new FTE                                                   20
   26 to 50 new FTE                                                   23
   51 to 74 new FTE                                                   26
   75 to 99 new FTE                                                   28
   100 or more FTE                                                    30
New employment wage level: % above state minimum wage ($7.25 in 2011)*
   180% of state minimum wage ($13.05)                                10
   200% of state minimum wage ($14.50)                                15
   225% of state minimum wage ($16.31)                                20
   250% of state minimum wage ($18.25)                                25
   300% of state minimum wage ($21.75)                                30
   *Wage calculation based on average of all new positions.
Points possible based on specific evaluation criteria                    90
Targeted business bonus points*                                          0—5
Use of existing vacant structure (points will be awarded based on actual 0—10
vacant structure to be used)
Use of county suppliers and contractors in construction/operation of     0—10
project
Offers tuition reimbursement or continuing education, "Clean/Safe"       0—5
workplace, or incentives to move to Dubois County programs
*   Targeted businesses include those in measuring, testing and navigational
instrument manufacturing, specialty food manufacturing, durable goods/
wholesaling/distribution, specialty manufacturers such as medical, athletic,
and game, toy and children’s vehicle manufacturing, and Crane Naval Surface
Warfare Center Vendors (as identified in the County Area Development
Corporation’s most recent Business Target Recommendations for the county)
(Existing county business)                                                
Years the applicant has operated in the county                            
   1 to 4 years                                                       1
   5 to 9 years                                                       3
   10 or more years                                                   5
Total points possible with bonus points                                  125
 
   (H)   Guideline for real property tax incentives schedule of abatement.
Total No. of Points Year Real Property Tax Phase-In
Total No. of Points Year Real Property Tax Phase-In
10—19             1    100%
20—29             1    100%
                    2    60%
30—39             1    100%
                    2    70%
                    3    30%
40—49             1    100%
                    2    75%
                    3    50%
                    4    25%
50—59             1    100%
                    2    80%
                    3    60%
                    4    40%
                    5    20%
60—69             1    100%
                    2    90%
                    3    70%
                    4    50%
                    5    40%
                    6    20%
70—79             1    100%
                    2    90%
                    3    75%
                    4    60%
                    5    50%
                    6    30%
                    7    15%
80—89             1    100%
                    2    90%
                    3    80%
                    4    65%
 
   (I)
Total No. of Points Year Personal Property Tax Phase-In
Total No. of Points Year Personal Property Tax Phase-In
   10—19       1    100%
   20—39       1    100%
                   2    60%
   40—59       1    100%
                   2    70%
                   3    35%
   60-79         1    100%
                   2    75%
                   3    50%
                   4    25%
   80+           1    100%
                   2    80%
                   3    60%
                   4    40%
                   5    20%
 
   (J)   Revocation of tax abatement by County Council. The County Council
believes that the granting of a request for real and/or personal property tax
abatement under the terms and conditions established results in a contractual
arrangement between the county and owners granted abatement.
      (1)   An applicant who fails to file its annual report with the County
Council as required may have the tax abatement revoked by the County Council.
      (2)   An applicant who complies with the annual report requirement but
does not substantially comply with the estimates set forth in the documents
used by the Council when granting the abatement, unless the failure to do so
was due to factors beyond the applicant’s control, may have the tax abatement
revoked by the County Council.
(Council Ord. 2017-02, passed 10-22-2018; Council Ord. 2021-10, passed 329-
2021)
§ 35.24 EXPIRATION; REAPPLICATION.
   If the improvements proposed in the application for economic revitalization
area status are not commenced (defined as obtaining a building permit and
actual start of construction) within one year of the date of designation, the
economic revitalization area designation for the real estate may be voided at
the discretion of the County Council.
(Council Ord. 2017-02, passed 10-22-2018)
§ 35.25 REVIEW, DETERMINATION OF COMPLIANCE.
   Property owners receiving tax abatement must annually file all documents as
required by state law, including the Compliance with Statement of Benefits Form
(CF-1). Said forms shall be reviewed by the county to determine compliance, and
if the property owner is not in compliance, the County Council may act to
rescind the remaining term of abatement and enforce penalties for paying back
previously granted tax abatement as allowed by state law, or by any agreement
between the county and property owner.
(Council Ord. 2017-02, passed 10-22-2018)
§ 35.26 ABATEMENT LIMITED BY STATE LAW.
   This subchapter shall not give any applicant any rights to tax abatement for
a longer period of time, or greater amount, than as provided by the laws of the
state.
(Council Ord. 2017-02, passed 10-22-2018)
CHAPTER 36: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   Purchasing rules
   
36.02   Accountability and transparency; control standards
   
36.03   Surplus equipment
   
36.04   Inventory of personal property acquired by the county
   
36.05   Abortion provider; patient safety
Restricted Address Policy
   
36.20   Purpose and scope
   
36.21   Definitions
   
36.22   Duty to comply
   
36.23   Result of changes to applications and databases
   
36.24   Fee structure
   
36.25   Immunity and litigation proceedings
   
36.26   Reversal of privacy settings
   
36.27   Confidentiality
   
36.28   Excluded properties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01 PURCHASING RULES.
   (A)   Protection of officers; status of documents as public records.
      (1)   Protection of offers prior to opening. The purchasing agent shall
retain all offers received in a secure location prior to the date and time at
which offers will be opened in order to prevent disclosure of the contents
prior to the opening of the offers.
      (2)   Unobstructed evaluation of offers. After offers have been opened,
the purchasing agent shall be responsible for maintaining the offers in such a
manner as to permit evaluation of the offers by the persons responsible for
evaluating the offers.
      (3)   Public records status of bids. Bids submitted in response to an
invitation for bids must be available for public inspection and copying after
the time of the bid opening.
      (4)   Register of proposals. The purchasing agent shall prepare a
register of proposals for each request for proposals issued, which shall
contain information concerning the proposals available for public inspection
and copying. Proposals may not be disclosed.
   (B)   Discussions with offerors; responding to a request for proposals. The
purchasing agent may conduct discussions with offerors, and the best and final
offers may be obtained from responsible offerors who submit proposals
determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for a contract award.
   (C)   Delay of opening of offers. When the Board of Commissioners makes a
written determination that its in the county’s best interest, offers may be
opened after the time stated in the solicitation. The date, time, and place of
the rescheduled opening must be announced at the time and place of the
originally scheduled opening.
   (D)   Evidence of financial responsibility.
      (1)   Purchase less than $25,000. The purchasing agent may not require
evidence of financial responsibility when the estimated cost of a purchase is
less than $25,000.
      (2)   Purchase between $25,000 and $100,000. The solicitation may include
a requirement that an offeror provide evidence of financial responsibility. If
evidence of financial responsibility is required, the solicitation must
indicate the kind of evidence that will be acceptable. If a bond or certified
check is required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated cost of the purchase.
      (3)   Purchase over $100,000. The solicitation shall include a
requirement that an offeror provide evidence of financial responsibility, and
must indicate the kind of evidence that will be acceptable. If a bond or
certified check is required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated cost of the
purchase.
      (4)   Small business set-asides. The purchasing agent may determine that
no evidence of financial responsibility shall be required for a small business
set-aside purchase.
   (E)   Use of RFP for purchases of designated types of supplies. The Board of
Commissioners reserves the right, from time to time, to determine that it is
not practicable, or not advantageous, to purchase certain types of supplies by
sealed competitive bidding, in which event said Board may authorize the receipt
of proposals as the preferred method for purchasing.
   (F)   Modification and termination of contracts.
      (1)   Price adjustments. The purchasing agent may include provisions to
permit price adjustments in a purchase contract. The following provisions for
price adjustments may be included:
         (a)   Price adjustments must be computed by agreement on a fixed price
adjustment before the beginning of the pertinent performance, or as soon after
the beginning of performance as possible;
         (b)   Price adjustments must be computed by unit prices specified in
the contract or subsequently agreed upon;
         (c)   Price adjustments must be computed by costs attributable to the
events or situations under such clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all
as specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;
         (d)   Price adjustments must be computed in such other manner as the
contracting parties may mutually agree upon; or
         (e)   In the absence of agreement by the parties, price adjustments
must be computed by a unilateral determination by the governmental body of the
costs attributable to the events or situations under such clauses with
adjustment of profit or fee, all as computed by the governmental body in
accordance with applicable rules adopted by the governmental body.
      (2)   Adjustments in time of performance. The purchasing agent may
include provisions in a purchase contract concerning adjustments for the time
of performance under the contract.
      (3)   Unilateral rights of the county. The purchasing agent may include
in a purchase contract provisions dealing with the unilateral rights of the
county to order changes in the work within the scope of the contract, or to
order temporary work stoppage or delays in time of performance.
      (4)   Quantity variations. The purchasing agent may include in a purchase
contract provisions dealing with variations between the estimated quantities of
work in a contract and the actual quantity delivered.
   (G)   Publication of notices.
      (1)   Invitation for bids. All notices of invitation for bids shall be
published in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in The Herald, and in a second
publication designated annually by the Board of Commissioners. The purchasing
agent shall schedule the publication of notice to provide a reasonable amount
of time for preparation and submission of bids. The notice will be published
two times, at least one week apart. The second publication must occur at least
ten days prior to the date the bids will be opened.
      (2)   Request for proposals. All notices of request for proposals shall
be published in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in The Herald, and in a second
publication designated annually by the Board of Commissioners. The purchasing
agent shall schedule the publication of notice to provide a reasonable amount
of time for preparation and submission of proposals. The notice will be
published two times, at least one week apart. The second publication must occur
at least seven days prior to the date the proposals will be opened.
      (3)   Request for specifications. All notices of request for
specifications shall be published in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in The Herald,
and in a second publication designated annually by the Board of Commissioners.
The purchasing agent shall schedule the publication of notice to provide a
reasonable amount of time for preparation and submission of proposals. The
notice will be published two times, at least one week apart. The second
publication must occur at least seven days prior to the date the proposals will
be opened.
      (4)   Electronic notices. Whenever a notice or other material, including
specifications, an invitation for bids, request for proposals, or request for
specifications, is sent by mail, the purchasing agent may alternatively send
the notice, or other material, by electronic means, provided that the
transmission of the information is at least as efficient as mailing the
information.
   (H)   Receiving offers.
      (1)   Opening of offers. Bids received in response to an invitation for
bids must be opened publicly at the time and place designated in the invitation
for bids.
         (a)   Proposals received in response to a request for proposals must
be opened so as to avoid disclosure of the contents to competing offerors
during the process of negotiation.
         (b)   Proposals received in response to a request for specifications
may be opened as specified in the request for specifications.
      (2)   Electronic receipt of offers. The purchasing agency may receive
electronic offers in response to an invitation to bid, request for proposals,
or request for specifications. An electronic offer may only receive an
electronic offer if:
         (a)   The solicitation includes the procedure for the electronic
transmission of the offer; and
         (b)   The purchasing agency receives the offer on a fax machine or
other system with a security feature that protects the contents of an
electronic offer with the same degree of protection as provided to an offer not
transmitted electronically.
      (3)   Correction and withdrawal of bids. An offeror may correct
inadvertent errors in a bid up to the time at which bids will be opened by
supplementing the erroneous bid and submitting a revised bid. A bidder may not
supplement an inadvertently erroneous bid after the time at which the bids were
opened. A bidder may withdraw a bid containing inadvertent errors up to the
time at which bids will be opened and for a period of not more than 24 hours
after the time at which the bids were opened.
      (4)   Cancellation of solicitation. When the purchasing agent makes a
written determination that is in the county’s best interests, the purchasing
agent may cancel a solicitation or reject all offers, provided that the
solicitation included information concerning the procedure for cancellation.
   (I)   Small purchases. The purchasing agent may purchase supplies with an
estimated cost of less than $25,000 on the open market without inviting or
receiving quotes, provided, however, that any single purchase which exceeds
$25,000 must have the expressed authority of the Board of Commissioners.
   (J)   Purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States. Supplies
manufactured in the United States shall be specified for all county purchases,
and shall be purchased unless the Board of Commissioners determines that:
      (1)   Not manufactured in the United States. The supplies are not
manufactured in the United States in reasonably available quantities;
      (2)   Prices. The prices of the supplies manufactured in the United
States exceeds by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable
supplies manufactured elsewhere;
      (3)   Quality. The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United
States is substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available
supplies manufactured elsewhere; or
      (4)   Public interest. The purchase of supplies manufactured in the
United States is not in the public interest.
   (K)   Purchase of services. The county determines that each county agency,
department, and office, and elected county official, may purchase services in
whatever manner the purchaser determines to be reasonable, subject to limits
imposed by §
31.05.
(Ord. 98-6, passed 6-16-1998)
§ 36.02 ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY; CONTROL STANDARDS.
   (A)   All employees, officials, consultants, vendors, contractors, and other
parties maintaining a business relationship with the county shall act with due
diligence in duties involving the county’s fiscal resources.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-11-1-27, the County Board of Commissioners adopts
the Uniform Internal Control Standards for the State Political Subdivisions in
order to aid in the prevention and detection of fraud, financial impropriety,
or irregularity.
   (C)   Any public official, department head, or employee with actual
knowledge or reasonable cause to believe that there has been a misappropriation
of public funds is to immediately send written notice of the misappropriation
to the State Board of Accounts and the County Auditor.
   (D)   The materiality threshold at which point the county shall report
incidents of material variances, losses, or shortages to the State Board of
Accounts shall be a one-time cash loss of at least $500, or a value of $500 for
a one-time loss of assets.
   (E)   The County Auditor shall be responsible to implement the internal
control standards designed to prevent and detect fraud, financial impropriety,
or fiscal irregularities within the county government unit, and to recommend to
the Board of Commissioners any policies or procedures required to carry out the
standards.
   (F)   Training shall be provided on the internal control standards and
procedures to all county employees, and newly-hired employees, whose duties
include receiving, processing, depositing, disbursing, or having access to
county funds. Such training should be given periodically to these employees
whenever the standards have been changed or updated, including new county
employee policies and procedures relating to the internal control standards,
and training to refresh the employees on the standards requirements.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 5-16-2016)
§ 36.03 SURPLUS EQUIPMENT.
   The Board of Commissioners shall be authorized to assign use of surplus
items of furniture, including file cabinets, to county officials for county
business purposes. Items so assigned shall remain the sole property of the
county, and the official having possession to any such item shall submit to the
County Auditor a receipt for such assigned item(s), which shall be returned to
the county when no longer used for county business, or when said assignee no
longer serves as a county official, whichever occurs first.
(Res. passed 10-15-2001)
§ 36.04 INVENTORY OF PERSONAL PROPERTY ACQUIRED BY THE COUNTY.
   The various offices and departments of government of the county shall
maintain a written inventory of all items of tangible personal property
acquired by said office or department having an individual purchase price, or
value, of $1,000 or more, and having a useful life of more than two years.
Machinery, equipment, or parts, which are combined together to form one working
unit, shall be considered as one item. The valuation of personal property shall
be based upon historical cost, but if undeterminable shall be estimated.
(Res. 99-6, passed 9-7-1999)
§ 36.05 ABORTION PROVIDER; PATIENT SAFETY.
   (A)   A physician may not perform an abortion in the county unless the
physician has admitting privileges at a hospital located:
      (1)   In the county; or
      (2)   In a county adjacent to the current county.
   (B)   A physician who performs an abortion in the county shall notify the
patient of the location of the hospital at which the physician has admitting
privileges, and where the patient may receive follow-up care by the physician
if complications arise.
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 8-18-2008)
RESTRICTED ADDRESSES POLICY
§ 36.20 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. To establish a policy for county departments containing a
process to comply with the requirements of I.C. 36-1-8.5 specifically related
to “covered persons” and publically accessible property websites.
   (B)   Scope. This policy applies to all county-provided public property
websites.
(Res. passed 12-21-2015; Res. 2020-05, passed - -2020; Res. 2021-21, passed 6-
7-2021; Res. 2023-11, passed 7-3-2023)
§ 36.21 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADDRESS CONFIDENTIALITY PROGRAM PARTICIPANT. An individual who is
certified as a program participant in the address confidentiality program
established by the attorney general under I.C. 5-26.5-2-3.
      COOPERATIVE AGENCY. An agency such as a police department, prosecutor’s
office, etc. that will agree to compile and keep lists of covered individuals
up to date and accurate.
      COVERED PERSON.
         (a)   A judge;
         (b)   A law enforcement officer;
         (c)   A victim of domestic violence;
         (d)   A public official;
         (e)   The surviving spouse of a person described herein, if the person
was killed in the line of duty;
         (f)   An employee of the department of child services;
         (g)   A current or former probation officer;
         (h)   A current or former community corrections officer;
         (i)   A regular, paid firefighter or a volunteer firefighter; or
         (j)   Any person who resides in the same household as a person
described in divisions (a) through (i) above.
(I.C. 36-8-12-2)
      EMPLOYEE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF CHILD SERVICES. An individual who is or was
employed as any of the following by the department of child services
established by I.C. 31-25-1-1:
         (a)   A family case manager trainee;
         (b)   A family case manager;
         (c)   A family case manager supervisor;
         (d)   A local office director;
         (e)   A regional manager;
         (f)   A child services assistant; or
         (g)   A child services attorney.
(I.C. 36-1-8.5-2.5)
      JUDGE. An individual who holds or formerly held office as:
         (a)   A judge of the supreme court, court of appeals, tax court,
circuit court, superior court, municipal court, county court, federal court,
probate court, or small claims court; or
         (b)   A magistrate, commissioner, or juvenile referee of a court.
(I.C. 36-1-8.5-3)
      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An individual who is employed or was formerly
employed as:
         (a)   A police officer (including a tribal police officer, a
correctional police officer, and a hospital police officer employed by a
hospital police department established under I.C. 16-18-4), sheriff, constable,
marshal, prosecuting attorney, special prosecuting attorney, special deputy
prosecuting attorney, the securities commissioner, or the inspector general;
         (b)   A deputy of any of the persons specified in division (a) of this
definition above;
         (c)   An investigator for a prosecuting attorney or for the inspector
general;
         (d)   A conservation officer;
         (e)   An enforcement officer of the alcohol and tobacco commission; or
         (f)   An enforcement officer of the securities division of the office
of the secretary of state.
(I.C. 36-1-8.5-4)
      PUBLIC OFFICIAL. An individual who holds or formerly held office at any
time during the preceding four years in the executive or legislative branch of
the state or federal government or a political subdivision of the state or
federal government.
(I.C. 36-1-8.5-4.5)
      PUBLIC PROPERTY DATABASE WEBSITE. I.C. 36-1-8.5-5 defines a database
website as an internet web site that:
         (a)   Is available to the general public over the internet;
         (b)   Does not require registration, subscription, or the creation of
a user name and password to search the web site; and
         (c)   Connects a covered person’s home address to the covered person’s
name, so that a search of the web site for the covered person’s name discloses
the covered person’s home address.
   (B)   Additional definitions and clarifications can be found by visiting the
website for the Indiana General Assembly and searching for I.C. 36-1-8.5.
(Res. passed 12-21-2015; Res. 2020-05, passed - -2020; Res. 2021-21, passed 6-
7-2021; Res. 2023-11, passed 7-3-2023)
§ 36.22 DUTY TO COMPLY.
   (A)   General. The duty to prevent disclosure of an address as it falls
under I.C. 36-1-8.5 rests upon the County Auditor’s office. The process to
comply with the code is outlined below.
   (B)   Bulk requests from a cooperative agency. (See the definition for
cooperative agency in §
36.21.)
      (1)   An annual request summary shall be sent by the agency’s designated
administrator via the county provided electronic form. This list shall include
all current covered persons.
      (2)   The list shall also include those individuals that have moved from
their primary residence and are therefore no longer covered by statute.
      (3)   Individuals that have moved and are still covered according to
statute must submit a new request and fee.
   (C)   Requests from individuals for redaction of information.
      (1)   The process to verify the validity of a request is completed. The
Auditor’s office will verify the submission is valid and the requestor is
covered according to I.C. 36-1-8.5. Any necessary agency shall be contacted to
verify applicability of a request. Victims of domestic violence must submit
proof of program participation of Attorney General address confidentiality
program.
      (2)   Process of appeal. If an application for redaction is denied by the
Auditor’s office, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Board of
Commissioners.
(Res. passed 12-21-2015; Res. 2020-05, passed - -2020; Res. 2021-21, passed 6-
7-2021; Res. 2023-11, passed 7-3-2023)
§ 36.23 RESULT OF CHANGES TO APPLICATIONS, DATABASES.
   As a result of the requests, the following change will be made to the
appropriate county information systems or to third-party systems from time-to-
time managed by the county.
   (A)   GIS. The search results for GIS will reflect the changes made to the
WTH Think GIS Database or subsequent database(s) and/or website(s) for those
records marked as “confidential”. These records will display “Information
withheld in accordance with I.C. 36-1-8.5” in place of the name information. It
is the intention of the county to comply with the intent of the code to not
make the property accessible by means of removing the link between name and
parcel information.
   (B)   WTH think GIS Website or subsequent database(s) and/or website(s).
Once the option to suppress has been enabled for a specific parcel, it will not
be returned in search results or display in the map.
(Res. passed 12-22-2015; Res. 2020-05, passed - -2020; Res. 2021-21, passed 6-
7-2021; Res. 2023-11, passed 7-3-2023)
§ 36.24 FEE STRUCTURE.
   (A)   Exclusion. Victims of domestic violence per the definition in §
36.21 will be excluded from fees.
   (B)   Initial request. A fee of $25 per parcel will be assessed for both
bulk and individual requests.
   (C)   Additional requests. A $25 per parcel fee will be assessed for any
changes to the title of the parcel or relocation of the covered person.
   (D)   Deposits. All fees collected will be deposited to the County General
Fund.
(Res. passed 12-22-2015; Res. 2020-05, passed - -2020; Res. 2021-21, passed 6-
7-2021; Res. 2023-11, passed 7-3-2023)
§ 36.25 IMMUNITY AND LITIGATION PROCEEDINGS.
   A unit may not be held liable for failure to timely restrict disclosure of
an address under this subchapter unless the unit’s act or omission constitutes
gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct.
(I.C. 36-1-8.5-12) (Res. passed 12-22-2015; Res. 2020-05, passed - -2020; Res.
2021-21, passed 6-7-2021; Res. 2023-11, passed 7-3-2023)
§ 36.26 REVERSAL OF PRIVACY SETTINGS.
   (A)   Public access, removed information. The public access of removed
information can only be done at the request of the original covered person. An
individual may request reinstatement of his or her excluded information.
   (B)   Title change. Should any changes to the title of a covered parcel be
made, the existing residence will be removed from the list of confidential
properties. A new request will need to be made in order to have the parcel
covered again.
(Res. passed 12-21-2015; Res. 2020-05, passed - -2020; Res. 2021-21, passed 6-
7-2021; Res. 2023-11, passed 7-3-2023)
§ 36.27 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   A written request, notification of name change, or any other information
submitted to the unit by a covered person under this subchapter is confidential
under I.C. 5-14-3-4(a).
(I.C. 36-1-8.5-11) (Res. passed 12-21-2015; Res. 2020-05, passed - -2020; Res.
2021-21, passed 6-7-2021; Res. 2023-11, passed 7-3-2023)
§ 36.28 EXCLUDED PROPERTIES.
   This policy is in effect for requestor’s primary residence only, per I.C.
36-1-8.5-7. If the requestor owns or is involved in additional properties that
utilize the primary home address as the mailing address, they will be
displayed. If the requestor wishes to have those addresses removed as well, the
$25 fee will apply to each submission.
(Res. passed 12-21-2015; Res. 2020-05, passed - -2020; Res. 2021-21, passed 6-
7-2021; Res. 2023-11, passed 7-3-2023)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER
      
51.   WASTE, SANITATION
CHAPTER 50: WATER
Section
   
50.01   Private sewage disposal systems
   
50.02   Pipe, inlet requirements
   
50.03   Connection to sanitary sewer system
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Authority. The County Health Department is hereby authorized to issue
residential and commercial on-site sewage system permits, collect permit fees
and penalties, perform inspections, hold hearings, order or otherwise compel
correction of violations of this section, and is otherwise authorized to
perform all actions necessary for the administration and enforcement of this
section.
   (B)   Definitions. All definitions included in Indiana Department of Health
Rules 410 IAC 6-8.3 et seq. and 410 IAC 6-10.1 et seq. are hereby incorporated
into this section. Supplementary to those definitions, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CONSTRUCTION, NEW.
         (a)   1.   Construction of a new home or residential outbuilding where
there previously was no home or outbuilding;
            2.   Rebuilding or remodeling an existing home or residential
outbuilding where the footprint of the new home or outbuilding extends beyond
the footprint of the previous structure; or
            3.   When the design daily flow of the new structure(s) exceeds
what was previously at the site.
         (b)   Best judgment shall not be used for new construction.
      CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR/REPLACEMENT. Repair or replacement of a residential
on-site sewage system for an existing home or residential outbuilding or the
rebuilding or remodeling of an existing home or residential outbuilding on the
same foundation as a previous home or outbuilding without an increase in the
design daily flow of the project. In accordance with Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3, the
best judgment of the Dubois County Health Department may be used, when
necessary and appropriate, for the repair or replacement of a failing
residential on-site sewage system.
      HEALTH BOARD. The Health Board appointed as specified in I.C. 16-20-2 and
having jurisdiction in Dubois County, State of Indiana.
      HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The local health department in Dubois County having
jurisdiction over the installation, construction, maintenance, reconnection,
replacement, alteration, and repair of a residential on-site sewage system as
specified in I.C. 16-20-1.
      HEALTH OFFICER. The person appointed as specified in I.C. 16-20-2-16, or
the Health Officer’s duly authorized representative, as specified in I.C. 16-
20-1-14. The HEALTH OFFICER may conduct inspections and make a decision on an
enforcement action in Dubois County, State of Indiana.
      HOLDING TANK. A septic tank(s) or a combination of septic and dosing
tanks, for which the outlet of the last tank in series has been sealed off in
order to prevent sewage or effluent discharge from any tank.
      INSTALLER. Any individual who performs any work in furtherance of
construction, installation, replacement, alteration, or repair of any
residential or commercial on-site sewage system in Dubois County, State of
Indiana.
      INVOLUNTARY. A need to modify or improve a dwelling or residential
outbuilding due to factors outside of the owner’s control, such as destruction
by wind, fire, flood, or other natural disaster, or due to condemnation of a
dwelling.
      NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A written notification of an ordinance, rule, or
statute violation.
      ORDER. (Derived from I.C. 4-21.5-1-9.) A Dubois County Health Department
action of particular applicability that determines the legal rights, duties,
privileges, immunities, or other legal interests of one or more specific
persons. The term includes a permit.
      REGISTERED INDIVIDUAL. An individual who registers with the Dubois County
Health Department.
      VOLUNTARY. An owner’s intentional or deliberate action to construct
modify or improve a dwelling or residential outbuilding.
   (C)   Construction permits for on-site sewage systems.
      (1)   All persons owning, leasing, or otherwise occupying property not
connected to sanitary sewer shall comply with the requirements of Rules 410 IAC
6-8.3 et seq., 410 IAC 6-10.1 et seq., and/or Bulletin S.E. 11 as applicable,
and the provisions of this section for an on-site sewage system.
      (2)   An on-site sewage system construction permit shall be obtained by a
property owner, or agent of the owner, prior to the start of construction of a
home, a residential outbuilding with plumbing or any structure with plumbing,
or a commercial facility.
      (3)   The application for a construction permit issued by the Dubois
County Health Department shall include:
         (a)   An on-site soil evaluation report submitted by a state approved
soil scientist;
         (b)   Written plans of sufficient clarity that it can be verified that
the design of the on-site sewage system complies with the applicable rule and
this section;
         (c)   A site review will be conducted to verify written plan complies
with the applicable rule and this section;
         (d)   A completed application form as provided by the Dubois County
Health Department;
         (e)   A fee established by the Dubois County Board of Health shall be
paid with each application for permits filed with the Dubois County Health
Department;
         (f)   A copy of any necessary recorded easements; and
         (g)   Anything else deemed necessary by the Dubois County Health
Officer.
      (4)   If the on-site sewage system has not been constructed, installed,
or altered after one year and the rules governing it changes, the permit shall
automatically expire.
      (5)   The issuance of a permit does not constitute assumption by the
Dubois County Health Department or its employees of liability for the failure
of any on-site sewage system.
   (D)   Professional standards.
      (1)   All on-site sewage system installers providing services in Dubois
County shall abide by all associated requirements in state statutes, rules, and
this section regarding onsite sewage systems.
      (2)   An installer must register with Dubois County Health Department if
they provide on-site sewage system installation, including new installation,
repair, replacement, alteration or abandonment in Dubois County, Indiana.
Registration requires:
         (a)   Applying to Dubois County Health Department for registration by:
            1.   Completing the Dubois County Health Department registration
form;
            2.   Paying the appropriate registration fee as required in the
Dubois County Health Department Fee Schedule.
            3.   Registration is valid from January 1 to December 31 of the
same year and must be renewed annually.
            4.   A lapse of certification and/or registration or repeated
violation of any state statute, rules, or this section pertaining to on-site
sewage systems may result in revocation or denial of renewal of a registration.
An appeal of registration revocation or denial of registration renewal may be
appealed to the Dubois County Board of Health.
               A.   The period of revocation shall be no less than 90 days, or
a time period deemed appropriate by the Dubois County Health Officer; and
               B.   The registered individual shall be advised in writing for
the basis of the revocation, the right and procedure for appeal and the
opportunity for a hearing.
   (E)   Sewage holding tanks.
      (1)   A sewage holding tank is an alternative method of sewage disposal
pursuant to I.C. 16-41-25-9 only when all other means of sewages disposal
methods in Rules 410 IAC 6-8.3 and 410 IAC 6-10.1 have been exhausted.
      (2)   An application must be filed by the property owner or property
owner’s agent including:
         (a)   An application form provided by the Dubois County Health
Department;
         (b)   A fee established by the Dubois County Board of Health shall be
paid with each application for permits filed with the Dubois County Health
Department.
         (c)   A construction plan of sufficient clarity to show compliance
with this section;
         (d)   A copy of a written contract with an operator of a septage
management vehicle providing for the removal of septage at regular intervals;
and
         (e)   A written statement, signed by the property owner, indicating
that copies of all receipts and other records as requested be submitted to the
local Health Department within ten days of service.
         (f)   For commercial sites where IDOH has completed plan review and
approval for a commercial holding tank, a copy of the written approval from
IDOH.
      (3)   All sewage holding tanks shall have a capacity of no more than
10,000 gallons.
      (4)   A sewage holding tank shall meet all construction requirements of
septic tanks in Rules 410 IAC 6-8.3 and 410 IAC 6-10.1.
      (5)   All sewage holding tanks shall have at least one riser to the
surface for ease in pumping the tank. A secondary childproof plug shall be
installed under any riser to the surface.
      (6)   A construction permit issued by the Dubois County Health Department
is required prior to the installation of the holding tank or gravity sewer.
      (7)   A gravity sewer, meeting the requirements for a residential sewer
in Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3 or the requirements for a building sewer in Rule 410 IAC
6-10.1 shall be used to make a direct connection between the plumbing of the
structure with plumbing and the holding tank.
      (8)   All sewage holding tanks installed in Dubois County shall have:
         (a)   An installation inspection to confirm proper installation and to
confirm the outlet of the last tank has been appropriately sealed prior to
backfilling; and
         (b)   An audible and visible alarm that will activate when the level
in the tank reaches two-thirds of the tank’s capacity;
         (c)   The alarm wired in by an electrician and verified operational.
      (9)   Use of a sewage holding tank must be discontinued if:
         (a)   Connection to an approved on-site sewage system becomes
available to the owner; or
         (b)   Connection to sanitary sewer becomes available within 300 feet
of the property line on which the sewage holding tank is being used.
      (10)   Upon connection to an on-site sewage system or sanitary sewer, the
sewage holding tank shall be abandoned unless it will be converted for use as a
septic tank or a dosing tank in an on-site sewage system.
   (F)   Construction and final inspections.
      (1)   A permit for the installation, construction, reconnection,
replacement, alteration, or repair of an on-site sewage system shall not
constitute final approval of such system until the same is completed to the
satisfaction of the Dubois County Health Officer or the Health Officer’s duly
appointed representative.
      (2)   The property owner, or agent of the property owner, shall notify
the Dubois County Health Officer before the start of construction or
installation of any component of the on-site sewage system.
      (3)   The Dubois County Health Officer may inspect the work at any stage
of the construction.
      (4)   The property owner, or agent of the property owner, shall notify
the Dubois County Health Officer for a final inspection of the on-site sewage
system prior to covering any component of the on-site sewage system not
previously inspected and approved.
      (5)   The issuance of a construction permit shall serve as due notice to
the property owner that the Dubois County Health Officer, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon the property
on which the on-site sewage system is being installed at reasonable times for
the purposes of inspections, observations, measurements, sampling, and testing
necessary to complete construction and final inspections.
   (G)   Connection or reconnection to an existing on-site sewage system.
      (1)   An existing residential or commercial on-site sewage system may be
considered for reconnection to a new or replacement dwelling, residential
outbuilding, or commercial facility if:
         (a)   The original system installation was permitted through the
Dubois County Health Department; and
         (b)   The existing system is appropriately sized for the structure to
be served.
            1.   If the connection or reconnection is due to involuntary
events, the Dubois County Health Department may utilize their best judgment for
system sizing when approving a connection or reconnection to an existing
system.
            2.   If the connection or reconnection is due to voluntary events,
the system being connected to must meet the requirements of the appropriate
rule, unless the site meets the requirements of the definition of repair or
replacement construction in this section.
         (c)   All commercial facilities wanting to connect or reconnect to an
existing system must be approved by IDOH.
   (H)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of this regulation
may be served by the Health Officer or his or her designee with a written order
stating the nature of the violation and providing a time limit for satisfactory
correction thereof.
      (2)   After receiving an order in writing from the Health Officer or his
or her designee, the owner, agent of the owner, the occupant or agent of the
occupant of the property shall comply with the provisions of this section as
set forth in the order and within the time limit included therein. The order
shall be served on the owner or agent of the owner or the occupant or the agent
of the occupant, but may be served on any person who, by contact with the
owner, has assumed the duty of complying with the provisions of an order.
   (I)   Procedure for appeal.
      (1)   If an applicant is refused a permit, the Health Officer shall, upon
request, afford the applicant a fair hearing in accordance with provisions of
I.C. 4-21.5-3.
      (2)   The Health Officer may, after reasonable notice and opportunity for
a fair hearing, in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 4-21.5-3, revoke a
permit if it finds that the holder of the permit has failed to comply with any
provisions of this section.
   (J)   Validity. If any division, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word
of this section, or any part thereof be declared invalid for any reason, the
remainder of this section shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in
full force and effect.
   (K)   Fee schedule. All applicable fees as set forth in the Dubois County
Health Department Fee Ordinance and any amendments or revisions hereafter,
shall be made payable to the Dubois County Health Department.
   (L)   Date of effect. This section shall be in full force and effect from
and after its passage by the Board of Commissioners of Dubois County, Indiana,
and completion of any other legal requirements, all in the manner as provided
by law.
(Ord. 2023-17, passed 11-6-2023)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.02 PIPE, INLET REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Persons desiring to bury drainage pipe in the road ditch along their
property must first contact the County Highway Superintendent or County
Engineer for a site review.
   (B)   The County Highway Superintendent or County Engineer will make a site
review of the proposed location to determine the size and slope of the pipe
required.
   (C)   Installation of the pipe is to be uniform in alignment and slope, with
36 inches by 36 inches masonry inlet boxes installed at intervals no greater
than 50 feet measured along the pipe. These inlet structures are to be of
masonry construction with a concrete bottom, solid masonry walls, and a slotted
steel grate top.
   (D)   The top grate is to be a minimum of eight inches below the level of
the adjacent roadway. (See image below for pipe and inlet requirements.)
   (E)   A swale is to be constructed directly over the pipe at a minimum depth
of eight inches below the level of the adjacent roadway, and at a slope
parallel to the slope of the pipe. The purpose of this swale is to collect the
surface runoff water from the roadway and adjacent property, and direct it into
the inlet grate. (See image below for pipe and inlet requirements.)
   (F)   Any downspout tiles, basement drains, or other surface or groundwater
tiles are to enter the pipe at an inlet box. (See image below for pipe and
inlet requirements.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd1f3761419c433896a084ab37adc984560e0fea/
IMAGES/0-0-0-681.jpg]
 
   (G)   The minimum pipe diameter is 12 inches, and existing conditions must
allow a minimum of one foot of backfill on top of the pipe.
   (H)   The landowner is responsible for the proper installation, and
maintenance, of the pipe and inlet structures, keeping them free of silt,
debris, and functioning properly for the lifetime of the structures.
(Ord. 1986.7, passed 11-3-1986)
§ 50.03 CONNECTION TO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The owner of any real estate within the county upon which is located
any structure or improvement producing sanitary sewage or waste, and which
improvement, or any portion thereof, is located within 300 feet of any
collection line maintained as part of a public sanitary sewer system, shall
disconnect from, and discontinue use of, any septic tank or similar disposal
system, and shall connect said improvement(s) to said sanitary sewer system,
and shall comply with such service and other regulations as may be, from time
to time, established by the operator of said public sewer system.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, any structure or
improvement producing sanitary sewage or waste which is served by a septic
tank, or similar system, which system has been installed pursuant to a permit
issued by the County Health Department prior to installation of a public
sanitary system described in division (A) above, shall be entitled to continue
use of said septic tank, or similar system, until the earlier of either of the
following events:
      (1)   The passage of seven years from the date of installation of said
septic tank, or similar disposal system; or
      (2)   The determination by the County Health Department that said septic
tank, or similar disposal system, has ceased to properly function.
   (C)   Connection to a public sewer system, and disconnection from a septic
tank, or a similar disposal system, when required under division (A) above,
shall be completed within 45 days following written notice mailed to a real
estate owner from the operator of such public sanitary sewer system, or from
the County Health Department, or from any governmental agency that said public
sanitary sewer system is available for use by said owner’s real estate
improvements.
   (D)   In the event that an owner has delayed connection under division (B)
above, said owner shall connect to the public sewer system and disconnect from
the exempted septic tank, or a similar system, on, or prior to, the end of the
exemption period.
   (E)   In the event of a non-functioning septic tank, or similar a system,
within the period specified in a written notice from the County Health
Department, which specified date shall be not less than 15 days, nor more than
45 days, from the date of said notice.
(Ord. 2000-5, passed 11-20-2000)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or entity found to be in violation of any
provision of § 
50.01 and/or rule shall be fined for the first offense by a fine of not more
than $500 dollars; for the second offense by the fine of not more than $1,000
dollars; and for the third and each subsequent offense by a fine of not more
than $1,000 dollars to which may be added imprisonment for any determined
period not exceeding 90 days, and each day after the expiration of the time
limit for abating insanitary conditions and conditions as ordered by the Health
Officer or his or her designee, shall constitute a distinct and separate
offense.
      (2)   The Dubois County Health Department shall also be entitled to seek
any other legal remedy available against any person who shall violate any
provision of § 
50.01 and/or rule.
      (3)   The Dubois County Health Department shall be entitled to seek all
legal fees incurred during enforcement of § 
50.01 section and/or rule.
      (4)   The penalties provided in this division (B) shall be cumulative,
and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by
law.
   (C)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of §
50.03 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. On conviction, the violator shall be
punished for the first offense by a fine of not more than $500; for the second
offense, by the fine of not more than $1,000; and for the third, and each
subsequent, offense by a fine of not more than $1,000, to which may be added
imprisonment for any determined period not exceeding 90 days, and each day
after the expiration of the time limit for abating insanitary conditions, and
conditions as ordered by the Health Officer, or his or her designee, shall
constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. 2000-5, passed 11-20-2000 ; Ord. 2023-17, passed 11-6-2023 )
CHAPTER 51: WASTE, SANITATION
Section
   
51.01   Fees; residential rubbish placement
   
51.02   Cleanup, maintain county
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 FEES; RESIDENTIAL RUBBISH PLACEMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners, in order to regulate the public disposal
of household rubbish, the gathering of such rubbish, and to provide funding for
the collection, removal, and disposal thereof, does hereby establish, and
declare, that fees shall be paid by all persons placing residential solid waste
in the county’s solid waste collection system, whether such collection be by
deposit in county solid waste containers or by any other type of delivery to,
or collection by, any agency of the county.
   (B)   The term RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE shall be defined to include household
rubbish or trash, but shall exclude bulky items including, but not limited to,
refrigerators, washing machines, tables, chairs, sofas, mattresses, or other
household items, brush and tree trimmings, lumber, table scraps, food, oil, oil
products, dead animals and fowl, human, animal, or bird offal, fence wire,
fence posts, bricks, building material, dirt, ashes, and car and truck tires or
parts.
   (C)   The county’s solid waste collection system shall be operated solely
for the benefit of, and shall be used solely by, residents of the county, and
shall exclude persons or firms collecting rubbish for a fee, schools, retail,
wholesale, manufacturing, or other business.
   (D)   Residential solid waste shall enter the county’s solid waste
collection system only in those methods, from time to time established, by the
Board of Commissioners. All such residential solid waste entering said system
shall be placed in a trash bag or container having a capacity not in excess of
45 gallons.
   (E)   All bags and containers shall be closed and sufficiently tightened to
prevent the leakage of contents.
   (F)   Each bag, or container, placed in the county’s solid waste collection
system shall have affixed to said bag, or container, a tag or label issued by
the county signifying that the proper fee, as then determined by the Board of
Commissioners, has been paid to the county for that bag, or container.
   (G)   The fee to be paid to the county for each tag or label described in
division (E) above shall be $1.50 for each tag or label purchased.
   (H)   The designated employee will provide $50 at the start of the shift and
receive $50 reimbursement at the conclusion of the shift. All funds collected
by the county from the sale of said tags or labels shall be deposited with the
County Treasurer, and shall be credited to the County Solid Waste Collection
System Fund (which Fund is hereby established) for use in the operation of said
system, including the payment of expenses and fees for the disposition of
residential solid waste collection within said system.
   (I)   No solid waste, including residential solid waste, and including those
items excluded from the definition of residential solid waste set forth in
division (B) above, shall be abandoned in the county except to a person, or
firm, holding a permit to collect rubbish for a fee, or at a lawful landfill
or, if applicable, in compliance with this section.
(Ord. 1991-4, passed 3-18-1991) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.02 CLEANUP, MAINTAIN COUNTY.
   (A)   Every effort will be made to promote and implement the recycling, or
reuse, of every possible product used in the county.
   (B)   Every effort will be made to identify, inform, and educate the public
of their options for the reuse of materials, rather than final disposal.
   (C)   Every effort will be made to keep the costs of waste disposal to a
very minimum, and yet do so in an environmentally sound, and approved, manner.
   (D)   Every effort will be made to identify, prosecute, and remove any
illegal waste disposal site, and those persons owning or using said site.
   (E)   Roadside waste disposal will not be tolerated in any form.
(Res. 1991-3, passed 2-14-1991) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   Any persons, firm, or corporation found violating any of the provisions of §
51.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon being found guilty, the
violator shall be punished for the first offense by a fine of not more than
$500; for the second offense, by a fine not more than $1,000; and for a third,
and each subsequent, offense, by a fine of $1,000, and a sentence of not more
than 90 days.
(Ord. 1991-4, passed 3-18-1991)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
72.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
73.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Weight restrictions
   
70.02   Erection of identification, directional signs
   
70.03   Procedures for vehicle inspection; Sheriff’s Department
   
70.04   Oversized/overweight vehicle permit
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   All persons, companies, corporations, partnerships, and other legal
entities shall be required to obtain a truck hauling permit prior to operating
any motor vehicle upon any road within the jurisdiction of the county highway
system if the total gross vehicle weight is in excess of the posted weight
limit for said road, as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   This section shall apply to all highways in the county highway system
under the jurisdiction of the Board of Commissioners, except highways in the
state highway system, and the state maintained routes thereof, through cities
and towns.
   (C)   The exemptions set forth in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) below, as
contained in I.C. 9-19-1-2 and 9-19-1-3, shall apply to this section.
      (1)   The provisions of this division (C) shall not apply to vehicles
while engaged in the construction of public highways when the movement of such
vehicles is confined wholly to such highway or roads, or sections thereof,
actually under construction and not yet open to unlimited public use, provided
that the owner, or operator, of such vehicle first obtains, from the proper
authority having jurisdiction, a permit, in writing, allowing such operation.
      (2)   The provisions of this division (C) shall not apply to machinery or
equipment used in highway construction or maintenance by the State Highway
Commission, counties, or municipalities; nor to farm-drainage machinery; nor to
implements of husbandry, when so constructed that they can be moved without
material damage to the highways; nor as limiting the width or height of farm
vehicles when loaded with farm products; and the vehicles enumerated in this
section may be moved, or operated, as to avoid any material damage to the
highway, or unreasonable interference with other highway traffic. For the
purpose of this section, any truck hauling unprocessed leaf tobacco is a farm
vehicle loaded with a farm product.
   (D)   The Board of Commissioners shall determine, in its sole discretion,
the county highways and roads, and portions thereof, which shall be closed or
which shall be limited to vehicles not exceeding a total gross vehicle weight
as determined by the Board of Commissioners for each of said county highways
and roads, and as designated by the posting of appropriate signs as hereinafter
provided in division (F) below.
   (E)   The determination of road closings and limitations may be altered, or
amended from time to time, by the addition or deletion of roads, or portions
thereof, or by the increase or decrease of weight limits for any of said roads,
as shall be determined to be necessary in the sole discretion of the Board of
Commissioners.
   (F)   The County Highway Department is now authorized, and directed, to
erect and maintain signs designating the provisions of this section at each end
of the portion of any county highway or road affected thereby, and at
intersecting highways or roads.
   (G)   The provisions of divisions (D) and (E) above shall not be effective
until signs designating the closing, or weight limits, are erected and
maintained at each end of the portion of county highway or road affected
thereby, and at all intersecting county highways or roads.
   (H)   Truck hauling permits shall be issued by the Auditor’s office, county
courthouse, in Jasper, Indiana. Prior to issuing any truck hauling permit for
any vehicle which shall be using a specific county highway or road for a
continuous, or extended, period of time, as determined by the Board of
Commissioners in its sole discretion, the County Auditor shall follow the
procedures adopted thereto by the Board of Commissioners, including the
requirement that the owner of said vehicle shall post with the County Auditor a
cash and surety bond, at least 20% of which shall be a cash bond in a form
approved by the Board of Commissioners, said bond equaling not more than
$60,000 per mile for each mile of surfaced blacktop road to be used, not more
than $40,000 per mile for each mile of chip and seal road to be used, and not
more than $20,000 per mile for each mile of gravel road to be used by said
owner. Said cash and surety bond shall ensure, and save harmless, the county
from maintenance of damage to, and repairs to, said road while said bond is in
effect.
      (1)   The cash portion of the bond shall be invested by the county in a
savings account in a local depository of the public funds in the name of the
county, with interest earned thereon to be credited of the individual,
partnership, or company filing the bond. The county shall withdraw from each
cash bond for the purpose of maintaining and repairing roads for which the bond
was filed under the following procedure in division (H)(2) below.
      (2)   When the County Highway Supervisor finds that a bonded county
highway is in need of repair or maintenance, he or she shall give three days
notice by receipted mail, return receipt requested, or delivered in person to
the users of said highway to repair or maintain the same to his or her
satisfaction. If the needed maintenance or repair is not done within three days
of delivery of the notice, the County Highway Supervisor will make the
necessary repairs, or provide the needed maintenance. After the maintenance or
repair work is done, those persons, partnership, or companies bonded to keep
the road maintained and in repair are to be notified of the amount expended for
such maintenance and repair, and their proportionate part of such cost, which
shall be paid to the County Auditor within seven days. If said sums are not
paid, the county shall withdraw the sum required from the cash bond to pay for
the repair and maintenance, and notify the person, partnership, or company of
the withdrawal. Within ten days thereafter, cash equal to the amount of the
expenditure must be deposited by the holders of the permits with the County
Auditor to maintain the 20% cash bond. If said bond is not maintained at 20%,
the County Board of Commissioners may order that the permit be revoked until
such time as the proper bond is filed.
      (3)   The owners of vehicles having surety bonds with the county in
existence as of the effective date of this section, which allow for use of
specific county highways and roads having weight limits thereon, shall not be
required to place additional bonds on said specific county highways and roads.
The owners of vehicles who have continuously, under the duly issued permits,
used, operated over, and satisfactorily maintained, in the sole discretion of
the Board of Commissioners, the designated county highways and roads for five
immediately preceding years, and who have not been in default on, sued upon, or
forfeited bonds on said highways and roads, may provide bond of an approved
surety in the amounts provided in division (H) above in lieu of a cash bond.
      (4)   In the event that a truck hauling permit requiring the posting of a
bond is requested for a county highway or road, or portion thereof, for which
such a truck hauling permit already exists, the County Auditor shall
immediately notify the holder of such existing permit, and his or her surety of
the request. Each permittee shall be held jointly, and severally, liable for
damage to any county highway or road, or portion thereof, which may be used by
more than one permittee.
   (I)   (1)   To prevent damage caused by excess weight on county roads during
periods of freeze and thaw, the Commissioners hereby establish a ten-ton gross
load (weight) limit on all motor vehicles operated on county roads within
Dubois County, Indiana during the period from January 15, 2025 through April
15, 2025. Jasper 3rd Avenue from Jasper city limits south to S.R. 162 is exempt
from this division.
      (2)   Operation of a motor vehicle on any county road in violation of
this division shall be a Class C infraction, as defined by I.C. 34-6-2-85 and
I.C. 34-28-5-4.
(Ord. 1980-1, passed 8-11-1980; Res. passed 1-16-1989; Ord. 2021-41, passed 12-
20-2021; Ord. 2023-19, passed 12-18-2023; Ord. 2024-19, passed 12-16-2024)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 34-6-2-85 was repealed by P.L. 186-2025, Secs. 175 and 273
§ 70.02 ERECTION OF IDENTIFICATION, DIRECTIONAL SIGNS.
   (A)   In order to give guidance to the motoring public and emergency
vehicles in response to 911 emergency calls, all county highways have been
designated a name or number, and signs have been erected to designate the name
or number of each highway in the county.
   (B)   The removal of, obliteration, or damage to a highway sign by any
person shall be considered a Class C misdemeanor, as provided in I.C. 35-50-3-
4.
(Ord. 1991-7, passed 8-5-1991) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 PROCEDURES FOR VEHICLE INSPECTION; SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Sheriff’s Department is hereby authorized to make inspections of
all motor vehicles, semi-trailers, recreational, and other vehicles to
accompany applications for certificates of titles for such motor vehicles,
semi-trailers, recreational, and other vehicles for registration in the state
as required by the State Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
   (B)   The Sheriff’s Department, after the necessary inspection has been
made, shall sign the required inspection certificate issued to the owner of
such vehicle if found not to be possessed illegally, for which a reasonable fee
of $5 shall be charged to the owner. Upon receipt of such fee, the Sheriff
shall issue Sheriff’s Receipt No. 133.
   (C)   Not less frequently than monthly, the Sheriff’s Department shall make
a report to the County Auditor of all inspections made during the proceeding
month, and remit all fees collected to the County Auditor.
   (D)   Upon receipt of the fees, the County Auditor shall issue a quietus for
such remittances, specifying on such receipt the number of receipts included.
   (E)   Upon receipt of such funds, the County Auditor shall deposit such
funds to the credit of the Sheriff’s Equipment Fund. The fiscal body of the
unit must appropriate the money collected from the inspection only for law
enforcement purposes.
(Ord. 1988-6, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 70.04 OVERSIZED/OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE PERMIT.
   (A)   An oversized/overweight vehicle is a vehicle that exceeds the legal
limits set forth in I.C. 9-20.
   (B)   The Dubois County Highway Department must be notified at least 24
hours in advance of any transport of an oversized/overweight unit to confirm
travel routes.
   (C)   Permits are automatically invalidated by the violation of any of the
conditions specified by the terms of the permit or by false information given
on the application. Failure to comply with the conditions of this permit shall
be just cause for the immediate suspension or revocation of any or all permits
and the operator and/or owner of the vehicle shall be subject to appropriate
legal action.
   (D)   Oversized/overweight moving permits are issued for daylight hours
only, Monday through Friday. Permits are not valid from 1:00 p.m. on the day
preceding and continuing until daylight of the first day after the holidays
here listed: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas. The only exception to this division is with
approval from the Dubois County Highway Department or a law enforcement
officer, when emergency movements are necessary and in the best interest of
public safety and welfare. Permits are only valid if favorable driving and
traffic conditions exist.
   (E)   The movement shall not impede other traffic in an unreasonable manner
and at no time shall traffic be blocked from use of the highway. Vehicles and
loads shall not be parked on the highway at any time.
   (F)   Vehicles shall be registered as required by the Indiana vehicle code
and will not violate any statute, valid ordinance, rule or regulation by any
state agency or sub-division of the state. Vehicles are to comply with all
statutory provisions as to other permits, licensing, motor vehicle equipment
and operation.
   (G)   The driver of the vehicle shall carry an approved copy of the permit
in the vehicle to which it applies and shall have it available for inspection
by any law enforcement officer, motor carrier officer, or Dubois County highway
employee.
   (H)   Applicant shall be responsible for any damage caused to wires,
mailboxes, trees, buildings, or the road, including structures and
appurtenances, and shall reimburse the appropriate parties for any damage
caused by the moving of said vehicle and load. Applicant shall save harmless,
indemnify, defend, and represent the Dubois County Board of Commissioners, the
Dubois County Highway Department, and their officers, agents, and employees
against any and all claims for bodily injury or property damage, or any other
claim arising out of or related to the moving of said vehicle, load, or its
presence on or use of the highway by said vehicle and load.
   (I)   Permits are not valid if insurance expires or has expired. Each
applicant shall present evidence that at least the following insurance coverage
is in full force and effect on each vehicle while operating on the public
highways under special permit:
 
Type of Coverage                          Amount
Bodily injury liability - each person     $500,000
Bodily injury liability - each accident   $1,000,000
Property damage liability - each accident $1,000,000
Single limit policy                       $1,000,000
Worker's compensation                     Statutory coverage
 
   (J)   The permitee or contractor shall name the Dubois County Commissioners
as additional insured and certificate holders, by name, on any general
comprehensive liability insurance or commercial general liability insurance
carried by the permitee or contractor, worded as follows:
"The Dubois County Board of Commissioners, the Dubois County Highway
Department, and their officers, agents, and employees, are named as additional
insured parties."
   (K)   Permits will be issued only for vehicles owned by the applicant or
operated under a lease or rental agreement. The applicant may be required to
deposit a reasonable inspection fee and to furnish a cash bond to cover any
damage that might occur to roads, bridges, or highway structures by the
movement of vehicles and objects under the proposed permit.
   (L)   Permits will be issued for oversize or overweight vehicles or loads
which can be readily dismantled, reduced, or otherwise rearranged to come
within the legal limits. Permits will in no way supersede posted axle loading
limits on any bridge or highway. The applicant agrees to reimburse the Dubois
County Highway Department for any damage resulting from applicant's disregard
of such postings.
   (M)   The equipment shall be loaded on the vehicle in such a manner to
reduce to a minimum the excess over statutory size or weight limitations and
the least width or length dimensions of the load becomes the width of the load
on the trailer. Striking or damage to any structure or facility will be
perceived to be noncompliance with this section and will result in termination
of a permit.
   (N)   The Dubois County Highway Department may temporarily suspend or revoke
an oversized/overweight moving permit, either in its entirety or in respect to
certain of its provisions, due to seasonal conditions, other special
conditions, or if it is in the interest of the public's safety.
   (O)   The vehicle shall not be loaded or unloaded within the outer shoulder
limits of any county road unless permitted by a law enforcement officer or the
Dubois County Highway Department.
   (P)   The movement requires the display of clean, plain, red or orange flags
of at least 18 inches square. One flag shall be displayed at each of the four
corners of the vehicle or load; and if any portion of the load extends beyond
the width of the corner flag, one additional flag shall be displayed at the
widest point on each side of the vehicle or load. Flags should be securely
fastened by at least one corner or securely mounted on a staff.
   (Q)   When the width of the loads exceed 12 feet, the vehicle(s) shall be
accompanied by an escort vehicle (passenger car or pickup truck) in front a
distance of no more than 1,500 feet and no less than 500 feet of the movement,
with at least one flashing or rotating amber light on top of cab, when
traveling on less than four lanes and an escort vehicle (passenger car or
pickup truck) in the rear a distance of no more than 1,000 feet and no less
than 200 feet with at least one flashing or rotating amber light on the top of
the cab, when traveling on four or more lanes. Amber lights are to be visible
for 360 degrees for 500 feet.
   (R)   Permits are not valid on highways which are posted for lighter than
normal loadings and vehicle exceeds axle loadings as posted, or when restricted
loadings are in effect.
   (S)   The vehicle covered by a permit shall not exceed 35 mph at any time.
(Ord. 2021-15, passed 4-19-2021)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Upon conviction of violation of §
70.01, any such person shall, for the first conviction thereof, be punished by
a fine of not more than $100; for a second such conviction within one year
thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200; upon
a third, or subsequent, conviction within one year after the first conviction,
such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500. Law enforcement
personnel, owners, and operators of vehicles shall have the same rights upon
violation of §
70.01, as set forth in I.C. 9-20-13, 9-20-14, 9-20-15, 9-20-17, 9-20-18, and 9-
20-13-22.
   (C)   Any person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
unincorporated association, or other entity violating any provision of §
70.04 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not to exceed $1,000.
Each separate violation thereof and each day's violation thereof shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1980-1, passed 8-11-1980; Ord. 2021-15, passed 4-19-2021)
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Off-Road Vehicles
   
71.01   Off-road vehicles
   
71.02   Definition
   
71.03   Registered vehicle
   
71.04   Use on county roads
   
71.05   Operator of off-road vehicle
   
71.06   Law enforcement
   
71.07   Violation
Off-Road, and Three, Four Wheeler, Vehicles for Agricultural Purposes
   
71.20   General
   
71.21   Liability
   
71.22   Driver’s license
   
71.23   County roads, highways
 
   
71.99   Penalty
OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
§ 71.01 OFF-ROAD VEHICLES.
   Off-road vehicles, if appropriately registered, as required under I.C. 14-
16-1, and if operated by an individual who has a valid motor vehicle driver’s
license, as required under I.C. 14-16-1-20(c), may be operated on approved
public county highways which are not highways in the state highway system, and
which are not within the corporate boundaries of any city or town.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 71.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OFF-ROAD VEHICLE. A motor driven vehicle of at least four wheels capable of
cross-country travel without the benefit of a road, and on, or immediately
over, land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. The
term OFF-ROAD VEHICLE shall not include any farm vehicle being used for
farming, a snowmobile, any other vehicle properly registered by the Bureau of
Motor Vehicles, any watercraft that is registered under state statutes, or a
golf cart vehicle.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 71.03 REGISTERED VEHICLE.
   A registered vehicle shall be one issued and displaying two current
registration decals issued for that vehicle by the State Department of Natural
Resources, unless otherwise exempted under state law.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 71.04 USE ON COUNTY ROADS.
   (A)   Any off-road vehicle operated on the county road system may not be
operated between sunset and sunrise, unless the vehicle has at least one
functioning headlight and one functioning taillight; may not be operated at any
time, unless the vehicle has adequate brakes capable of producing deceleration
at 14 feet a second on level ground at a speed of 20 mph; and must be equipped
with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation so as to prevent
excessive or unusual noise, or annoying smoke.
   (B)   An off-road vehicle must not be operated while having a number of
passengers in excess of that for which said vehicle is certified by the
manufacturer.
   (C)   No off-road vehicle may be operated at a rate of speed greater than
the posted speed limit or, as provided by I.C. 14-16-1-23, at such lesser rate
of speed as is reasonable and proper having due regard for existing conditions,
and will not unnecessarily endanger the person or property of another.
   (D)   No operator of an off-road vehicle shall be under the influence of
alcoholic beverages, or unlawfully under the influence of a narcotic, or other
habit forming or dangerous depressant or stimulant drug, and shall comply with
all other restrictions set forth in I.C. 14-16-1-23.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 10-18-2010) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.05 OPERATOR OF OFF-ROAD VEHICLE.
   (A)   The operator of any off-road vehicle involved in an accident resulting
in serious bodily injury or in death, or in property damage in an estimated
amount of at least $750, shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer and
complete the report forms prescribed.
   (B)   Any person operating an off-road vehicle on a county highway shall
have liability insurance specifically for such off-road vehicle in accordance
with the minimum insurance required for the operation of other motor vehicles
on public highways.
   (C)   Any operator of an off-road vehicle shall carry, in his or her
possession, any operator’s license and registration required under I.C. 14-16-
1, and the certificate of insurance required under this subchapter for the off-
road vehicle being operated.
   (D)   No person shall operate an off-road vehicle on county highways in such
a manner which causes damage to the highway, or disturbs the surface of the
highway.
   (E)   Any violator of division (D) above, in addition to such penalties
imposed under the statute set forth in §
71.99, shall be responsible for all costs of repair of such damage or
disturbance.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 10-18-2010) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 LAW ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any law enforcement officer, the County Highway Supervisor, or the
County Board of Commissioners may prohibit operation of an off-road vehicle on
a county highway during emergencies.
   (B)   All law enforcement officers in the state shall have the power, and it
shall be their duty, to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, unless
otherwise prevented by state statutes regarding the enforcement of state laws.
   (C)   All expenses related to the improvement and transportation of any off-
road vehicle used in violation of this subchapter, and impounded by a law
enforcement officer, shall be paid by the owner of such vehicle prior to the
release thereof.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 10-18-2010)
§ 71.07 VIOLATION.
   A person who operates an off-road vehicle in violation of §§
71.01 through
71.06 shall be subject to the imposition of the same judgement prescribed for a
Class C infraction, as set out in I.C. 34-28-5-4, unless such violation is
otherwise designated by a state statute, or a rule or regulation, promulgated
by a state agency.
(Ord. 2010-05, passed 10-18-2010) Penalty, see §
71.99
OFF-ROAD, AND THREE, FOUR WHEELER, VEHICLES
FOR AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES
§ 71.20 GENERAL.
   The County Board of Commissioners hereby ratify and confirm the provisions
of state law for the use of three and four wheelers in the county and, pursuant
to the authority for local control of local highways, hereby authorize the use
of three and four wheeler vehicles (excluding snowmobiles) on county roads and
highways outside the corporate limits of incorporated cities and towns, and
alleys of an unincorporated town or village, subject to limitations herein.
(Ord. 1988-25, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 71.21 LIABILITY.
   Off-road vehicles shall be covered for liability the same as regular highway
vehicles.
(Ord. 1988-25, passed 11-7-1988) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.22 DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   No person shall operate an off-road vehicle without a valid motor vehicle
driver’s license.
(Ord. 1988-25, passed 11-7-1988) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.23 COUNTY ROADS, HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   An off-road vehicle operated on county roads shall be used only as a
means of transportation by farmers in connection with their farm operation, or
non-farmers engaged in agricultural activities pertaining to farming
operations.
   (B)   Off-road vehicles traveling on county roads and highways must have
lights burning at all times, travel in single file on the right-hand side of
the road, and maintain a minimum of 100 feet between vehicles, and observe the
restrictions of state law.
(Ord. 1988-25, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 1988-25-A, passed 12-5-1988) Penalty, see
§
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Violations of §§
71.20 through
71.23 may be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 1988-25, passed 1-7-1988)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Through traffic; truck, semi-tractor, semi-trailer
      
II.   Speed limits
      
III.   Stop signs
      
IV.   Yield signs
SCHEDULE I. THROUGH TRAFFIC; TRUCK, SEMI-TRACTOR, SEMI-TRAILER.
   (A)   The provisions of this schedule relate to the exclusion of semi-truck
traffic on certain highways and streets in the county.
Point of Operation Location Restrictions
Point of Operation Location                       Restrictions
                   From the Jasper city limits to No through trucks, semi-
36th Street        Co. Rd. 300 N                  tractors, or semi-trailers of
                                                  10,000 pounds or more
                                                  No through trucks, semi-
47th Street        From U.S. 231 to Co. Rd. 400 N tractors, or semi-trailers of
                                                  10,000 pounds or more
Chestnut Street    From 3rd Street to Co. Rd. 450 No semi-truck traffic
                   E
                   From 36th Street W to Co. Rd.  No through trucks, semi-
Co. Rd. 300 N      500 W                          tractors, or semi-trailers of
                                                  10,000 pounds or more
                   From 47th Street W to Co. Rd.  No through trucks, semi-
Co. Rd. 400 N      500 W                          tractors, or semi-trailers of
                                                  10,000 pounds or more
Co. Rd. 450 E      From St. Anthony Road S to     No semi-truck traffic
                   S.R. 64
                   From Co. Rd. 50 E to Deer      No through trucks, semi-
Co. Rd. 450 S      Trail                          tractors, or semi-trailers of
                                                  10,000 pounds or more
                   Between Co. Rd. 400 N and S.R. No through trucks, semi-
Co. Rd. 500 W      56                             tractors, or semi-trailers of
                                                  10,000 pounds or more
Grant Street       From Center Street to S.R. 56  No semi-truck traffic
 
   (B)   Vehicles issued farm plates, or transporting agricultural hazardous
chemicals, and/or live poultry or livestock, and/or dry or liquid animal
wastes, shall be exempt from this schedule when operating on County Road 400
northwest of U.S. 231, or on County Road 500 west between County Road 400 north
and State Road 56.
   (C)   Local service traffic, operating farm wagons, farm tractors, and farm
machinery shall be exempt from this schedule.
(Ord. 02-3, passed 5-6-2002; Ord. 2002-06, passed 7-15-2002; Ord. 2006-9,
passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 2007-1, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 2007-04, passed 5-11-
2007; Ord. 2007-07, passed 6-11-2007)
SCHEDULE II. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Current speed limits.
      (1)   There are hereby established the following speed limits. It shall
be unlawful to exceed the speed limits in the following areas at any time.
Point of Operation Location Speed Limit
Point of Operation            Location                           Speed Limit
                              From the dead end south of Jackson
2nd Street                    Street to Vine Street, being a     25 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.29
                              mile
                              From Waterworks Street to Vine
3rd Street                    Street, being a distance of        25 mph
                              approximately 0.40 mile
                              From Westlin Drive to Sunshine
3rd Street                    Drive, being a distance of         25 mph
                              approximately 0.13 mile
                              From Church Street to Vine Street,
4th Street                    being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.36 mile
                              From S.R. 545 to Church Street,
4th Street                    being a distance of approximately  30 mph
                              0.33 mile
                              From Skyview Drive to Kluemper
5th Street                    Road, being a distance of          30 mph
                              approximately 0.53 mile
                              From the Huntingburg city limits
12th Street                   to Co. Rd. 400 W, being a distance 30 mph
                              of approximately 0.25 mile
                              From the Jasper city limits to
15th Street                   Meridian Road, being a distance of 35 mph
                              approximately 0.45 mile
                              From Ferdinand Road NW to the
23rd Street                   Ferdinand city limits, being a     35 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.23
                              mile
                              From S.R. 162 to Hillbrook Road,
A Street                      being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.30 mile
                              From Whoderville Road to the dead
Abell Road                    end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.24 mile
                              From Main Street to Walnut Street,
Agnes Street                  being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.05 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 900 S to U.S. 231,
Airport Road                  being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.08 mile
                              From Oak Ridge Drive to the dead
Alder Creek Drive             end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.40 mile
                              From Kluemper Road to Truman Road,
Andrew Lane                   being a distance of approximately  30 mph
                              0.47 mile
                              From Hill Road to Hillbrook Road,
B Street                      being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.13 mile
                              From Wright Road to the dead end,
Backbone Lane                 being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.11 mile
                              From S.R. 164 to 0.25 miles north
Beaver Lake Road              of S.R. 164, being a distance of   35 mph
                              approximately 0.25 mile
                              From the dead end to Maria Court,
Bertwood Court                being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.13 mile
                              From S.R. 145 to the Crawford
Borden Hill Road              county line, being a distance of   45 mph
                              approximately 0.84 mile
                              From the dead end to Shiloh Lane,
Bret Court                    being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.11 mile
                              From Whoderville Road to the dead
Burger Road                   end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.27 mile
                              From Raymond Street to Hillbrook
C Street                      Road, being a distance of          25 mph
                              approximately 0.13 mile
                              From Timberlin Lane to the dead
Cedar Drive                   end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.12 mile
                              From Skyview Drive to the dead
Charlene Drive                end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.13 mile
                              From Gramwood Drive to Glennwood
Charmwood Drive               Terrace Lane, being a distance of  25 mph
                              approximately 0.13 mile
                              From the Huntingburg city limits
Cherry Street                 to Sunset Drive, being a distance  30 mph
                              of approximately 0.55 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 400 S to the
Chestnut Street               Huntingburg city limits, being a   30 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.27
                              mile
                              From 3rd Street to 4th Street,
Church Street                 being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.07 mile
                              From Wheatland Drive to the dead
Clover Court                  end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.06 mile
                              From S.R. 64 to Co. Rd. 400 S,
Co. Rd. 50 E                  being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.54 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 750 W to Co. Rd. 800
Co. Rd. 50 N                  W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.96 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 400 S to Co. Rd. 350
Co. Rd. 75 E                  S, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.75 mile
                              From S.R. 545 to Co. Rd. 820 E,
Co. Rd. 75 N                  being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              0.46 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 350 S to Co. Rd. 375
Co. Rd. 75 W                  S, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.31 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 420 N to Co. Rd. 520
Co. Rd. 100 E                 N, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.06 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 400 W to Co. Rd. 350
Co. Rd. 100 S                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.52 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 450 W to Co. Rd. 400
Co. Rd. 100 S                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.46 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 650 W to Co. Rd. 600
Co. Rd. 100 S                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.51 mile
                              From Old Huntingburg road to the
Co. Rd. 100 S                 Jasper city limits, being a        35 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.26
                              mile
                              From Co. Rd. 1100 S to 0.60 mile
Co. Rd. 100 W                 north of Co. Rd. 925 S, being a    45 mph
                              distance of approximately 2.39
                              miles
                              From Ferdinand Road NW to 0.60
Co. Rd. 100 W                 mile north of Co. Rd. 925 S, being 45 mph
                              a distance of approximately 1.43
                              miles
                              From Kellerville Road to Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 125 E                 300 N, being a distance of         45 mph
                              approximately 1.48 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 400 S to Co. Rd. 225
Co. Rd. 130 W                 S, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.81 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 500 W to Co. Rd. 600
Co. Rd. 150 N                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.04 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 500 W to Shiloh Road,
Co. Rd. 150 N                 being a distance of approximately  35 mph
                              0.76 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 600 W to Co. Rd. 750
Co. Rd. 150 N                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.53 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 875 W to Co. Rd. 750
Co. Rd. 150 N                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.18 miles
                              From S.R. 56 to Co. Rd. 400 W,
Co. Rd. 150 N                 being a distance of approximately  35 mph
                              0.64 mile
                              From Old Huntingburg Road to 0.50
Co. Rd. 150 S                 mile west of Old Huntingburg Road, 45 mph
                              being a distance of approximately
                              0.50 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 420 S to Co. Rd. 430
Co. Rd. 170 E                 S, being a distance of             25 mph
                              approximately 0.18 mile
                              From 0.75 mile north of Jasper-
Co. Rd. 175 E                 Dubois Road to Co. Rd. 300 N,      45 mph
                              being a distance of approximately
                              1.03 miles
                              From Jasper-Dubois Road to 0.75
Co. Rd. 175 E                 mile north of Jasper-Dubois Road,  45 mph
                              being a distance of approximately
                              0.75 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 820 E to 0.50 mile
Co. Rd. 175 S                 east of Co. Rd. 820 E, being a     45 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.50
                              mile
                              From S.R. 56 to Shiloh Road, being
Co. Rd. 180 N                 a distance of approximately 0.53   35 mph
                              mile
                              From Jasper-Dubois Road to
Co. Rd. 190 N                 Meridian Road, being a distance of 35 mph
                              approximately 1.95 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 600 W to Co. Rd. 800
Co. Rd. 200 N                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 2.06 miles
                              From Old Huntingburg Road to 0.25
Co. Rd. 200 S                 mile west of Co. Rd. 250 S, being  35 mph
                              a distance of approximately 0.77
                              mile
                              From Co. Rd. 700 N to Co. Rd. 600
Co. Rd. 200 W                 N, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.03 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 950 S to Ferdinand
Co. Rd. 200 W                 Road NW, being a distance of       45 mph
                              approximately 2.57 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 1100 S to 950 S,
Co. Rd. 200 W                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.54 miles
                              From Haysville Road to Co. Rd. 700
Co. Rd. 200 W                 N, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.61 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 130 W to WITZ Road,
Co. Rd. 225 S                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              0.79 mile
                              From S.R. 162 to Patoka Road,
Co. Rd. 230 S                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.20 miles
                              Between Jasper-Dubois Road N to
Co. Rd. 250                   State Highway 264 S; no            35 mph
                              approximate distance given
                              From the west city limits of
Co. Rd. 250 N                 Ireland to Co. Rd. 600 W, being a  45 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.70
                              mile
                              From Old Huntingburg Road to Co.
Co. Rd. 250 S                 Rd. 200 S, being a distance of     35 mph
                              approximately 1.01 miles
                              From Ferdinand Road E to the
Co. Rd. 285 E                 Spencer county line, being a       45 mph
                              distance of approximately 1.16
                              miles
                              From Co. Rd. 125 E to Co. Rd. 325
Co. Rd. 300 N                 E, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 2.15 miles
                              From Jasper-Dubois Road to Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 300 N                 325 E, being a distance of         45 mph
                              approximately 1.68 miles
                              From Kellerville Road to Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 300 N                 125 E, being a distance of         45 mph
                              approximately 1.02 miles
                              From Portersville Road to Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 300 N                 500 W, being a distance of         40 mph
                              approximately 2.73 miles
                              From S.R. 56 to Co. Rd. 800 W,
Co. Rd. 300 N                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.65 miles
                              From the Pike county line to Co.
Co. Rd. 300 N                 Rd. 800 W, being a distance of     45 mph
                              approximately 1.03 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 300 N to Co. Rd. 300
Co. Rd. 325 E                 N, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.25 mile
                              From S.R. 56 to Dubois Road NW,
Co. Rd. 325 E                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              0.41 mile
                              From Greener Road to Schnellville
Co. Rd. 330 E                 Road, being a distance of          45 mph
                              approximately 0.29 mile
                              From Kellerville Road to the dead
Co. Rd. 330 N                 end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.31 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 75 E to St. Anthony
Co. Rd. 350 S                 Road W, being a distance of        45 mph
                              approximately 2.13 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 600 W to Co. Rd. 650
Co. Rd. 350 S                 W, being a distance of             30 mph
                              approximately 0.50 mile
                              From Patoka Road to Co. Rd. 75 W,
Co. Rd. 350 S                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              0.73 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 100 S to Co. Rd. 150
Co. Rd. 350 W                 S, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.51 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 300 N to S.R. 56,
Co. Rd. 350 W                 being a distance of approximately  35 mph
                              1.39 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 130 W to Co. Rd. 75
Co. Rd. 375 S                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.73 mile
                              From Schnellville Road to S.R.
Co. Rd. 400 E                 164, being a distance of           45 mph
                              approximately 1.15 miles
                              From S.R. 56 to one mile north of
Co. Rd. 400 E                 S.R. 56, being a distance of       45 mph
                              approximately one mile
                              From U.S. 231 to Co. Rd. 500 W,
Co. Rd. 400 N                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              2.56 miles
                              From U.S. 231 to Co. Rd. 130 W,
Co. Rd. 400 S                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              0.88 mile
                              From U.S. 231 to Co. Rd. 400 W,
Co. Rd. 400 S                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.53 miles
                              From Patoka Road to Co. Rd. 75 E,
Co. Rd. 400 S                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              0.59 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 100 South to Lakeview
Co. Rd. 400 W                 Drive, being a distance of         45 mph
                              approximately 0.56 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 150 W to Division
Co. Rd. 400 W                 Road, being a distance of          35 mph
                              approximately 1.51 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 750 S to Old Road 64,
Co. Rd. 400 W                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              0.81 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 1200 S to Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 400 W                 1150 S, being a distance of        40 mph
                              approximately 0.5 mile
                              From Division Road to Lakeview
Co. Rd. 400 W                 Drive, being a distance of         35 mph
                              approximately 0.43 mile
                              From S.R. 64 to the Huntingburg
Co. Rd. 400 W                 city limits, being a distance of   30 mph
                              approximately 0.85 mile
                              From the Huntingburg city limits
Co. Rd. 400 W                 to Co. Rd. 400 S, being a distance 30 mph
                              of approximately 0.51 mile
                              From Kellerville Road to Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 420 N                 100 E, being a distance of         45 mph
                              approximately 0.40 mile
                              From S.R. 162 to the dead end,
Co. Rd. 420 S                 being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.18 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 400 N to Co. Rd. 500
Co. Rd. 425 W                 N, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.11 miles
                              From S.R. 162 to Co. Rd. 170 E,
Co. Rd. 430 S                 being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.09 mile
                              From S.R. 56 to Co. Rd. 600 N,
Co. Rd. 445 E                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.05 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 750 W to Co. Rd. 800
Co. Rd. 450 N                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.51 mile
                              From S.R. 545 to 0.6 mile west of
Co. Rd. 450 N                 S.R. 545, being a distance of      35 mph
                              approximately 0.6 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 600 W to Co. Rd. 750
Co. Rd. 450 N                 W, being a distance of             40 mph
                              approximately 1.05 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 50 E to the dead end,
Co. Rd. 450 S                 being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.28 mile
                              From Division Road to Co. Rd. 100
Co. Rd. 450 W                 S, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately one mile
                              From Division Road to Co. Rd. 490
Co. Rd. 450 W                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.67 mile
                              From S.R. 264 to Convent Road,
Co. Rd. 475 E                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.05 miles
                              From Stewart Road to Co. Rd. 150
Co. Rd. 490 W                 N, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.04 miles
                              From Front Street to Co. Rd 650 S,
Co. Rd. 500 E                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.54 miles
                              From 1.40 miles east of U.S. 231
Co. Rd. 500 N                 to Kellerville Road, being a       45 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.75
                              mile
                              From Co. Rd. 550 W to Portersville
Co. Rd. 500 N                 Road, being a distance of          45 mph
                              approximately 2.64 miles
                              From U.S. 231 to 1.40 miles east
Co. Rd. 500 N                 of U.S. 231, being a distance of   45 mph
                              approximately 1.40 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 400 W to Co. Rd. 525
Co. Rd. 500 S                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.34 miles
                              From 0.25 miles south of S.R. 56
Co. Rd. 500 W                 to S.R. 56, being a distance of    25 mph
                              approximately 0.25 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 150 N to 0.75 mile
Co. Rd. 500 W                 south of S.R. 56, being a distance 35 mph
                              of approximately 0.75 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 300 N to Co. Rd. 400
Co. Rd. 500 W                 N being a distance of              45 mph
                              approximately 1.28 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 600 N to Portersville
Co. Rd. 500 W                 Road W, being a distance of        45 mph
                              approximately 1.77 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 700 S to S.R. 64,
Co. Rd. 500 W                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.53 miles
                              From Holland Road E to Co. Rd. 900
Co. Rd. 500 W                 S, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.01 miles
                              From S.R. 56 to Co. Rd. 300 N,
Co. Rd. 500 W                 being a distance of approximately  30 mph
                              0.60 mile
                              From Kellerville Road to Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 520 N                 100 E, being a distance of         45 mph
                              approximately 0.30 mile
                              From Duff Road SE to S.R. 64,
Co. Rd. 525 W                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              0.51 mile
                              From S.R. 162 to 0.50 mile west of
Co. Rd. 550 S                 S.R. 162, being a distance of      35 mph
                              approximately 0.50 mile
                              From S.R. 162 to Club Road, being
Co. Rd. 550 S                 a distance of approximately 2.27   45 mph
                              miles
                              From Co. Rd. 550 W to Co. Rd. 700
Co. Rd. 550 W                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.36 miles
                              From S.R. 56 to Portersville Road
Co. Rd. 550 W                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 5.04 miles
                              From S.R. 56 to Co. Rd. 900 N,
Co. Rd. 575 E                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              two miles
                              From Co. Rd. 800 W to Co. Rd. 700
Co. Rd. 580 N                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.02 miles
                              From S.R. 64 to Old Road 64, being
Co. Rd. 585 W                 a distance of approximately 2.02   45 mph
                              miles
                              From S.R. 64 to S.R. 264, being a
Co. Rd. 600 E                 distance of approximately 2.94     45 mph
                              miles
                              From Co. Rd. 200 W to Old Road 45,
Co. Rd. 600 N                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.09 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 500 W to Co. Rd. 550
Co. Rd. 600 N                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.51 mile
                              From U.S. 231 to Kellerville Road,
Co. Rd. 600 N                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.48 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 150 N to three-
Co. Rd. 600 W                 quarters of a mile N of S.R. 56,   45 mph
                              being a distance of approximately
                              2.12 miles
                              From 0.75 miles north of S.R. 56
Co. Rd. 600 W                 to Co. Rd. 450 N, being a distance 45 mph
                              of approximately 1.35 miles
                              From Duff Road SE to Division
Co. Rd. 600 W                 Road, being a distance of          45 mph
                              approximately 4.43 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 150 N to Division
Co. Rd. 620 W                 Road, being a distance of          45 mph
                              approximately 1.29 miles
                              From Old Road 64 to Co. Rd. 500 W,
Co. Rd. 630 S                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.57 miles
                              From Club Road to Co. Rd. 500 E,
Co. Rd. 650 S                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              0.84 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 100 S to 0.25 mile
Co. Rd. 650 W                 north of Co. Rd. 350 S, being a    45 mph
                              distance of approximately 2.29
                              miles
                              From Co. Rd. 350 S to 0.25 mile
Co. Rd. 650 W                 north of Co. Rd. 350 S, being a    30 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.25
                              mile
                              From S.R. 64 to Duff Road SE,
Co. Rd. 650 W                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.36 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 500 W to Portersville
Co. Rd. 675 N                 Road, being a distance of          45 mph
                              approximately 1.52 miles
                              From Schnellville Road to Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 700 E                 400 S, being a distance of         45 mph
                              approximately 1.36 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 200 W to Portersville
Co. Rd. 700 N                 Road, being a distance of          45 mph
                              approximately 1.66 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 500 W to Old Road 64,
Co. Rd. 700 S                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              0.27 mile
                              From S.R. 162 to Co. Rd. 75 E,
Co. Rd. 700 S                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.08 miles
                              From the Huntingburg city limits
Co. Rd. 700 S                 to Co. Rd. 400 W; no approximate   30 mph
                              distance given
                              From S.R. 545 to Dubois Road SE,
Co. Rd. 720 E                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              0.33 mile
                              From the Holland town limits to
Co. Rd. 720 W                 Co. Rd. 1075 S, being a distance   45 mph
                              of approximately 1.27 miles
                              From Dubois Cuzco Road to Dubois
Co. Rd. 735 E                 Road NE, being a distance of       45 mph
                              approximately 1.77 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 400 E to 0.65 mile
Co. Rd. 750 N                 west of Co. Rd. 400 E, being a     45 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.65
                              mile
                              U.S. 231 to Old Road 64, being a
Co. Rd. 750 S                 distance of approximately 2.21     45 mph
                              miles
                              From Co. Rd. 50 N to Co. Rd. 150
Co. Rd. 750 W                 N, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.01 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 300 N to Co. Rd. 150
Co. Rd. 750 W                 N, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.53 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 900 S to Co. Rd. 800
Co. Rd. 750 W                 S, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.03 miles
                              From S.R. 56 to Co. Rd. 450 N,
Co. Rd. 750 W                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              0.83 mile
                              From S.R. 161 to Co. Rd. 750 W,
Co. Rd. 800 S                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              0.51 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 50 N to 2.50 miles
Co. Rd. 800 W                 south of Co. Rd. 50 N, being a     45 mph
                              distance of approximately 2.50
                              miles
                              From Co. Rd. 300 N to Co. Rd. 200
Co. Rd. 800 W                 N, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately one mile
                              From Co. Rd. 300 N to S.R. 56,
Co. Rd. 800 W                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.01 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 580 N to Portersville
Co. Rd. 800 W                 Road W, being a distance of        45 mph
                              approximately 1.80 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 580 N to S.R. 56,
Co. Rd. 800 W                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.78 miles
                              From S.R. 162 to Holiday Lake
Co. Rd. 815 S                 Road, being a distance of          45 mph
                              approximately 0.90 mile
                              From Schnellville Road to Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 820 E                 175 S, being a distance of         45 mph
                              approximately 0.78 mile
                              From S.R. 164 to Ellsworth Road,
Co. Rd. 820 E                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.45 miles
                              From S.R. 162 to Club Road, being
Co. Rd. 825 S                 a distance of approximately 1.42   35 mph
                              miles
                              From Co. Rd. 75 E to 0.60 mile
Co. Rd. 850 S                 west of Co. Rd. 75 E, being a      45 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.60
                              mile
                              From Ferdinand Road NW to 0.60
Co. Rd. 850 S                 mile west of Co. Rd. 75 E, being a 45 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.55
                              mile
                              From Co. Rd. 825 W to S.R. 64,
Co. Rd. 850 W                 being a distance of approximately  35 mph
                              0.96 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 750 W to the Pike
Co. Rd. 900 S                 county line, being a distance of   45 mph
                              approximately 1.54 miles
                              From U.S. 231 to Co. Rd. 200 W,
Co. Rd. 900 S                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.19 miles
                              From U.S. 231 to Co. Rd. 500 W,
Co. Rd. 900 S                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.86 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 150 N to the Pike
Co. Rd. 900 W                 county line, being a distance of   45 mph
                              approximately 0.86 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 100 W to Ferdinand
Co. Rd. 925 S                 Road NW, being a distance of       45 mph
                              approximately 0.90 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 100 W to Co. Rd. 200
Co. Rd. 950 S                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.02 miles
                              From Gramwood Drive to 0.10 mile
Co. Rd. 1000 E                west of Gramwood Drive, being a    25 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.10
                              mile
                              From S.R. 164 to Gramwood Drive,
Co. Rd. 1000 E                being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.55 miles
                              From U.S. 231 to Ferdinand Road
Co. Rd. 1000 S                NW, being a distance of            45 mph
                              approximately 4.46 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 720 W to the Warrick
Co. Rd. 1075 S                county line, being a distance of   45 mph
                              approximately 1.88 miles
                              From S.R. 56 to the Martin county
Co. Rd. 1100 E                line, being a distance of          45 mph
                              approximately 0.90 mile
                              From 0.2 mile west of West Street
Co. Rd. 1100 S                to U.S. 231, being a distance of   45 mph
                              approximately 2.10 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 100 W to 0.2 mile
Co. Rd. 1100 S                west of West Street, being a       30 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.46
                              mile
                              From the Ferdinand city limits to
Co. Rd. 1100 S                Co. Rd. 100 W, being a distance of 45 mph
                              approximately 2.77 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 400 W to the dead
Co. Rd. 1175 S                end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.13 mile
                              From U.S. 231 to Co. Rd. 500 W,
Co. Rd. 1200 S                being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.25 miles
                              From 47th Street to the dead end,
Commissioner Drive            being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.11 mile
                              From the Ferdinand town limits to
Convent Road                  Co. Rd. 475 E, being a distance of 45 mph
                              approximately 2.03 miles
                              From County Highway 350 W (Federal
County Highway 300 N (Federal Road CR 127) to its intersection
Road CR 34)                   with County Highway 500 W (Federal 40 mph
                              Road CR 21); no approximate
                              distance given
                              From U.S. 231 W to S.R. 161 and
County Highway 750 S          Old Road 64 from 1st Street in     40 mph
                              Huntinburg to Co. Rd. 750 S; no
                              approximate distance given
                              From Oak Ridge Drive to the dead
Countryside Lane              end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.07 mile
                              From S.R. 162 to the dead end,
Countrywood Estates Road      being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.50 mile
                              From S.R. 56 to 0.70 mile north of
Crystal Road N                S.R. 56, being a distance of       45 mph
                              approximately 0.70 mile
                              From Cuzco Road S to S.R. 56,
Cuzco Road N                  being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              3.09 miles
                              From Cuzco Road S northeast, being
Cuzco Road N                  a distance of approximately 0.11   35 mph
                              mile
                              From Cuzo Road S to Co. Rd. 450 N,
Cuzco Road S                  being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              2.09 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 450 N to S.R. 545,
Cuzco Road S                  being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              2.14 miles
                              From Cuzco Road N south, being a
Cuzco Road S                  distance of approximately 0.11     35 mph
                              mile
                              From Co. Rd. 400 W to Co. Rd. 600
Division Road                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 2.12 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 600 W to Co. Rd. 620
Division Road                 W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.50 mile
                              From the Jasper city limits to Co.
Division Road                 Rd. 400 W, being a distance of     30 mph
                              approximately 1.62 miles
                              From Robert Drive to the dead end,
Dogwood Court                 being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.05 mile
                              From Dubois Road NE to Cuzco Road
Dubois Cuzco Road             S, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 5.07 miles
                              From 0.50 mile north of Dubois
                              Cuzco Road to 0.75 mile north of
Dubois Road NE                Dubois Cuzco Road, being a         45 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.25
                              mile
                              From 0.75 mile north of Dubois
                              Cuzco Road to 1.25 miles north of
Dubois Road NE                Dubois Cuzco Road, being a         45 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.50
                              mile
                              From 1.25 miles north of Dubois
Dubois Road NE                Cuzco Road to Co. Rd. 735 E, being 35 mph
                              a distance of approximately 0.85
                              mile
                              From Co. Rd. 735 E to 0.64 mile
Dubois Road NE                south of S.R. 56, being a distance 45 mph
                              of approximately 0.94 mile
                              From Dubois Cuzco Road to 0.50
Dubois Road NE                mile north of Dubois Cuzco Road,   25 mph
                              being a distance of approximately
                              0.50 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 325 to 0.40 miles
Dubois Road NW                west of Co. Rd. 600 N, being a     45 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.49
                              mile
                              From S.R. 545 to 0.40 mile west of
Dubois Road NW                Co. Rd. 600 N, being a distance of 45 mph
                              approximately 1.97 miles
                              From Ellsworth Road to Co. Rd. 720
Dubois Road SE                E, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.56 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 525 W to Co. Rd. 600
Duff Road SE                  W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.33 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 600 W to Co. Rd. 650
Duff Road SE                  W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.39 mile
                              From Hill Road to the dead end,
E Street                      being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.07 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 775 E to S.R. 545,
Ellsworth Road                being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              two miles
                              From Celestine Road N to Co. Rd.
Ellsworth Road                775 E, being a distance of         30 mph
                              approximately 1.29 miles
                              From S.R. 162 to 0.10 mile west of
Fairgrounds Drive             S.R. 162, being a distance of      25 mph
                              approximately 0.10 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 285 E to the Perry
Ferdinand Road E              county line, being a distance of   45 mph
                              approximately 3.27 miles
                              From the Ferdinand city limits to
Ferdinand Road E              Co. Rd. 285 E, being a distance of 30 mph
                              approximately 0.17 mile
                              From the Ferdinand town limits
Ferdinand Road E              east, being a distance of          35 mph
                              approximately 0.25 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 200 W to the
Ferdinand Road NW             Ferdinand city limits, being a     45 mph
                              distance of approximately 5.71
                              miles
                              From Kluemper Road to Omega Drive,
Fifth Avenue                  being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.74 mile
                              From Truman Road to Kluemper Road,
Fifth Avenue                  being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.29 mile
                              From the dead end to Lakeview
Glenwood Terrace Lane         Drive, being a distance of         25 mph
                              approximately 0.30 mile
                              From the dead end to Lakeview
Gramwood Drive                Drive, being a distance of         25 mph
                              approximately 0.51 mile
                              From 0.75 mile east of S.R. 164 to
Greener Road                  Co. Rd. 330 E, being a distance of 45 mph
                              approximately 1.25 miles
                              From S.R. 164 to 0.75 mile east of
Greener Road                  S.R. 164, being a distance of      35 mph
                              approximately 0.75 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 400 E to Co. Rd. 500
Hall Creek Road               E, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.24 miles
                              From 47th Street to the dead end,
Harvest Lane                  being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.07 mile
                              From the dead end to Ladino Lane
Hayland Drive                 to the dead end, being a distance  25 mph
                              of approximately 0.25 mile
                              From 0.35 mile west of U.S. 231 to
Haysville Road                S.R. 56, being a distance of       30 mph
                              approximately 0.66 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 200 W to 0.35 mile
Haysville Road                west of U.S. 231, being a distance 45 mph
                              of approximately 1.24 miles
                              From Jackson Street to Sycamore
Hemmerlein Street             Street, being a distance of        25 mph
                              approximately 0.05 mile
                              From 1.21 miles north of S.R. 56
Hickory Grove Road            to Thales Road N, being a distance 45 mph
                              of approximately 1.58 miles
                              From S.R. 56 to 1.21 miles north
Hickory Grove Road            of S.R. 56, being a distance of    45 mph
                              approximately 1.21 miles
                              From Thales Road N to the Martin
Hickory Grove Road            county line, being a distance of   45 mph
                              approximately 0.85 mile
                              From Walnut Drive to Maple Drive,
Hickory Lane                  being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.14 mile
                              From the Jasper city limits to
Highland Street               Hill Road, being a distance of     25 mph
                              approximately 0.17 mile
                              From E Street to A Street, being a
Hill Road                     distance of approximately 0.28     25 mph
                              mile
                              From C Street to A Street, being a
Hillbrook Road                distance of approximately 0.12     25 mph
                              mile
                              From S.R. 56, north a distance of
Hillham Road NW               approximately 1.15 miles to the    35 mph
                              Martin county line
                              From S.R. 56 to 0.25 mile south of
Hillham Road S                S.R. 56, being a distance of       25 mph
                              approximately 0.25 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 500 W to S.R. 161,
Holland Road E                being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              2.22 miles
                              From U.S. 231 to Co. Rd. 500 W,
Holland Road E                being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.61 miles
                              From S.R. 161 to the Holland town
Holland Road E                limits, being a distance of        30 mph
                              approximately 0.25 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 720 W to Co. Rd. 1000
Holland Road SW               S, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.29 miles
                              From the Ferdinand town limits to
Industrial Park Road          3rd Street (Ferdinand town         45 mph
                              limits), being a distance of 0.58
                              mile
                              From the Ferdinand town limits to
Industrial Park Road          the Ferdinand town limits, being a 35 mph
                              distance of 0.46 mile
                              From S.R. 162 to the Ferdinand
Industrial Park Road          town limits, being a distance of   35 mph
                              0.07 mile
                              From Orchard Street to 4th Street,
Jackson Street                being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.29 mile
                              From S.R. 545 to S.R. 164, being a
Jasper-Dubois Road            distance of approximately 6.77     45 mph
                              miles
                              From S.R. 545 to 0.21 mile east of
Kalb-Zehr Road                S.R. 545, being a distance of      35 mph
                              approximately 0.21 mile
                              From the Jasper city limits to
Kellerville Road              S.R. 56, being a distance of       45 mph
                              approximately 6.13 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 550 W to Ell Creek
Kessner Bridge Road           Road, being a distance of          45 mph
                              approximately 0.28 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 600 W to Co. Rd. 550
Kessner Bridge Road           W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 0.51 mile
Killarney Court               From Co. Rd. 500 W to the dead     25 mph
                              end, being a distance of 0.10 mile
                              From Division Road to Gregory
Kluemper Road                 Lane, being a distance of          30 mph
                              approximately 1.06 miles
                              From Mundy Boulevard to the dead
Kempf Avenue                  end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.07 mile
                              From S.R. 64 to Co. Rd. 625 S,
Kyana Road                    being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.55 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 490 W to the dead
Ladino Lane                   end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.23 mile
                              From the dead end to Gramwood
Lakeview Drive                Drive to the dead end, being a     25 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.35
                              mile
                              From Andrews Lane to the Jasper
Lechner Lane                  city limits, being a distance of   30 mph
                              approximately 0.62 mile
                              From 3rd Street to the dead end,
Liberty Street             being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.03 mile
                              From 4th Street to dead end east
Main Street                   of 4th Street, being a distance of 25 mph
                              approximately 0.14 mile
                              From S.R. 545 to 4th Street, being
Main Street                   a distance of approximately 0.26   30 mph
                              mile
                              From the dead end west of Orchard
Main Street                   Street to S.R. 545, being a        25 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.08
                              mile
                              From S.R. 162 to Oak Lane, being a
Maple Drive                   distance of approximately 0.16     25 mph
                              mile
                              From Gramwood Drive to Pleasant
Maria Court                   View Lane, being a distance of     25 mph
                              approximately 0.22 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 1100 S to the Spencer
Mariah Hill Road              county line, being a distance of   45 mph
                              approximately 1.87 miles
                              From Rolling Ridge Drive to the
Meagan Court                  dead end, being a distance of      25 mph
                              approximately 0.05 mile
                              From Meridian Road to Newton
Mendel Lane                   Street, being a distance of        35 mph
                              approximately 0.32 mile
                              From S.R. 64 to Conservation Club
Mentor Road S                 Road, being a distance of          45 mph
                              approximately 1.77 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 190 N to the Jasper
Meridian Road                 city limits, being a distance of   35 mph
                              approximately one mile
                              From Mendel Lane to Co. Rd. 130 W,
Meridian Road                 being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              2.19 miles
                              From Mendel Lane to the Jasper
Meridian Road                 city limits, being a distance of   35 mph
                              approximately 0.74 mile
                              From Mundy Boulevard to the dead
Messmer Drive                 end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.07 mile
                              From the Jasper city limits to Co.
Mill Street                   Rd. 400 N, being a distance of     40 mph
                              0.87 mile
                              From Division Road to Fifth
Mulberry Street               Avenue, being a distance of        25 mph
                              approximately 0.09 mile
                              From Celestine Road N to Ellsworth
Mundy Boulevard               Road, being a distance of          30 mph
                              approximately 0.25 mile
                              From Vine Street to the dead end,
Neukam Street                 being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.09 mile
                              From Mendel Lane to S.R. 162,
Newton Street                 being a distance of approximately  35 mph
                              0.80 mile
                              From the Jasper city limits to
Newton Street                 S.R. 162, being a distance of      45 mph
                              approximately 1.48 miles
                              From S.R. 64 to 10th Street, being
North Cherry Street           a distance of approximately 0.56   25 mph
                              mile
                              From Walnut Drive to the dead end,
Oak Lane                      being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.27 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 500 W to Alder Creek
Oak Ridge Drive               Drive, being a distance of 0.54    25 mph
                              mile
                              From Jackson Street to Main
Orchard Street                Street, being a distance of        25 mph
                              approximately 0.11 mile
                              From Division Road to Co. Rd. 400
Old Huntingburg Road          S, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 4.72 miles
                              From Division Road to the Jasper
Old Huntingburg Road          city limits, being a distance of   30 mph
                              approximately 0.50 mile
                              From S.R. 56 to Pike county line,
Old Petersburg Road           being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.08 miles
                              From U.S. 231 to Co. Rd. 600 N,
Old Road 45                   being a distance of approximately  35 mph
                              0.58 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 850 W to Pike county
Old Road 64                   line, being a distance of          35 mph
                              approximately 0.77 mile
                              From the Huntingburg city limits
Old Road 64                   to S.R. 161, being a distance of   45 mph
                              approximately 4.29 miles
                              From S.R. 161 to the Pike county
Old Road 64                   line, being a distance of          45 mph
                              approximately 2.27 miles
                              From S.R. 161 W to Co. Rd. 850 W,
Old Road 64                   being a distance of approximately  35 mph
                              1.5 miles
                              From S.R. 162 to the dead end,
Old Road 162                  being a distance of approximately  35 mph
                              0.52 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 1200 S to the dead
Old U.S. 231                  end, in being a distance of        25 mph
                              approximately 0.31 mile
                              From the dead end to the dead end
Old U.S. 231                  in Harbison Township, being a      25 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.25
                              mile
                              From U.S. 231 to Old U.S. 231 in
Old U.S. 231                  Harbison Township, being a         25 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.05
                              mile
                              From Division Road to the dead
Omega Drive                   end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.13 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 230 S to S.R. 64,
Patoka Road                   being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              2.67 miles
                              From the dead end west of 3rd
Payne Street                  Street to the dead end east of 3rd 25 mph
                              Street, being a distance of
                              approximately 0.06 mile
                              From 0.25 mile south of
Pine Ridge Road               Schnellville Road to Schnellville  30 mph
                              Road, being a distance of
                              approximately 0.25 mile
                              From 0.50 mile north of S.R. 64 to
Pine Ridge Road               Co. Rd. 400 S, being a distance of 45 mph
                              approximately 0.61 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 400 S to 0.25 mile
Pine Ridge Road               south of Schnellville Road, being  45 mph
                              a distance of approximately 0.87
                              mile
                              From S.R. 64 to 0.50 mile north of
Pine Ridge Road               S.R. 64, being a distance of       25 mph
                              approximately 0.50 mile
                              From Gramwood Drive to Maria
Pleasant View Lane            Court, being a distance of         25 mph
                              approximately 0.20 mile
                              From Portersville Road E to the
Portersville Bridge Road      Daviess county line, being a       40 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.15
                              mile
                              From 47th Street to 36th Street,
Portersville Road             being a distance of approximately  35 mph
                              1.10 miles
                              From Portersville Road W to 47th
Portersville Road             Street, being a distance of        45 mph
                              approximately 4.49 miles
                              From Portersville Road W to the
Portersville Road             dead end, being a distance of      25 mph
                              approximately 0.14 mile
                              From 0.10 mile east of
Portersville Road E           Portersville Road N to the dead    25 mph
                              end, being a distance of
                              approximately 0.31 mile
                              From Portersville Road E to the
Portersville Road N           Daviess county line, being a       25 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.14
                              mile
                              From Portersville Road to Himsel
Portersville Road W           Road, being a distance of          45 mph
                              approximately 4.72 miles
                              From St. James Avenue to C Street,
Raymond Street                being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.18 mile
                              From Pleasant View Lane to the
Robert Drive                  dead end, being a distance of      25 mph
                              approximately 0.26 mile
                              From Santine Road to Co. Rd. 450
Rolling Ridge Drive           S, being a distance of             25 mph
                              approximately 0.39 mile
                              From Schnellville Road to the dead
Rustic Acres Road             end, being a distance of           35 mph
                              approximately 0.23 mile
                              From the dead end to Skyview
Ryan Road                     Drive, being a distance of         25 mph
                              approximately 0.07 mile
                              From Hall Creek Road to S.R. 164,
Santine Road                  being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              1.69 miles
                              From one mile north of Co. Rd. 400
Santine Road                  S to Schnellville Road, being a    45 mph
                              distance of approximately 1.33
                              miles
                              From Schnellville Road to Hall
Santine Road                  Creek Road, being a distance of    45 mph
                              approximately 1.65 miles
                              From St. Anthony Road to one mile
Santine Road                  north of Co. Rd. 400 S, being a    35 mph
                              distance of approximately 1.48
                              miles
                              From Whoderville Road to the dead
Scherle Lane                  end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.06 mile
                              From Schnellville Road to 0.13
Schnell Road                  mile north of Co. Rd. 400 W, being 45 mph
                              a distance of approximately 1.03
                              miles
                              From 0.50 mile west of Pine Ridge
Schnellville Road             Road to Schnell Road, being a      30 mph
                              distance of approximately 1.53
                              miles
                              From Schnell Road to S.R. 64,
Schnellville Road             being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              2.41 miles
                              From S.R. 162 to 0.50 mile west of
Schnellville Road             Pine Ridge Road, being a distance  45 mph
                              of approximately 7.62 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 350 W to the Jasper
Schuetter Road                city limits, being a distance of   35 mph
                              approximately 0.98 mile
                              From Kluemper Road to Sunshine
Shelyn Drive                  Drive, being a distance of         25 mph
                              approximately 0.24 mile
                              From S.R. 56 to Co. Rd. 400 W,
Shiloh Road                   being a distance of approximately  35 mph
                              one mile
                              From Sycamore Street to Main
Short Street                  Street, being a distance of        25 mph
                              approximately 0.05 mile
                              From 5th Street to the dead end,
Skyview Drive                 being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.32 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 400 W to 5th Street,
Skyview Drive                 being a distance of approximately  30 mph
                              0.62 mile
                              From Division Road to Fifth
Skyview Drive                 Avenue, being a distance of        25 mph
                              approximately 0.08 mile
                              From Jasper-Dubois Road to S.R.
Steinbottom Road              164, being a distance of           45 mph
                              approximately 2.16 miles
                              From Schnellville Road to Santine
St. Anthony Road N            Road, being a distance of          45 mph
                              approximately 3.48 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 250 S to Schnellville
St. Anthony Road W            Road, being a distance of          45 mph
                              approximately 1.79 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 350 S to Co. Rd. 250
St. Anthony Road W            S, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.23 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 450 S to Co. Rd. 350
St. Anthony Road W            S, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.28 miles
                              From Raymond Street to A Street,
St. James Avenue              being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.15 mile
St. Patrick Court             From Co. Rd. 500 W to the dead     25 mph
                              end, being a distance of 0.10 mile
                              From 4th Street to the dead end
St. Raphael Street            east of 4th Street, being a        25 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.09
                              mile
                              From Division Road to Co. Rd. 490
Stewart Road                  W, being a distance of             45 mph
                              approximately 1.20 miles
                              From Co. Rd. 200 W to the
Sunset Drive                  Huntingburg city limits, being a   30 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.85
                              mile
                              From the Huntingburg city limits
Sunset Drive                  to Co. Rd. 400 W, being a distance 30 mph
                              of approximately 0.69 mile
                              From 5th Street to the dead end,
Sunshine Drive                being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.29 mile
                              From Division Road to the dead
Sunshine Drive                end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.24 mile
                              From S.R. 545 to 4th Street, being
Sycamore Street               a distance of approximately 0.26   25 mph
                              mile
                              From the dead end to Skyview
Threasa Court                 Drive, being a distance of         25 mph
                              approximately 0.09 mile
                              From Timberlin Lane to the dead
Timberlin Drive               end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.12 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 230 S to the dead
Timberlin Lane                end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.43 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 490 W to the dead
Timothy Lane                  end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.09 mile
                              From Division Road to the Jasper
Truman Road                   city limits, being a distance of   30 mph
                              approximately 0.67 mile
                              From 2nd Street to Dubois Road NE,
Vine Street                   being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.41 mile
                              From Oak Lane to the dead end,
Walnut Drive                  being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.14 mile
                              From the dead end west of Agnes
Walnut Street                 Street to 4th Street, being a      25 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.30
                              mile
                              From the dead end west of 3rd
Waterworks Street             Street to 4th Street, being a      25 mph
                              distance of approximately 0.10
                              mile
                              From S.R. 164 to the dead end,
Weisheit Drive                being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.19 mile
                              From S.R. 64 to the Huntingburg
West 3rd Street               city limits, being a distance of   30 mph
                              approximately 0.57 mile
                              From 3rd Street to the dead end,
Westlin Drive                 being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.21 mile
                              From the dead end to 5th Street,
Westlin Drive                 being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.05 mile
                              From Co. Rd. 150 N to Ladino Lane,
Wheatland Drive               being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.36 mile
                              From S.R. 164 to the dead end,
Whoderville Road              being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                              0.82 mile
                              From U.S. 231 to the dead end,
WITZ Road                     being a distance of approximately  45 mph
                              0.84 mile
                              From Whoderville Road to the dead
Wright Road                   end, being a distance of           25 mph
                              approximately 0.24 mile
 
      (2)   Each such public highway shall be posted for such maximum speed
limit.
      (3)   Violation of this schedule shall be punishable in a manner
prescribed by state statute and by prior ordinances pertaining to speed limits,
heretofore adopted by the County Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   Unincorporated community of St. Anthony.
Point of Operation Location Speed Limit
Point of Operation Location                                         Speed Limit
                   From 0.08 mile east of Sycamore Street to Cross
Co. Rd. 450 S      Street, being a distance of approximately 0.17   25 mph
                   mile
                   From Cross Street to 0.35 miles west of St.
Co. Rd. 450 S      Johns Street, being a distance of approximately  30 mph
                   0.45 mile
Cross Street       From S.R. 64 to Indiana Street, being a distance 30 mph
                   of approximately 0.41 mile
                   From Ohio Street to 0.06 miles west of Cross
Indiana Street     Street, being a distance of approximately 0.11   25 mph
                   mile
Ohio Street        From Co. Rd. 450 S to Santine Road, being a      25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.31 mile
Santine Road       From Indiana Street to St. Anthony Road N, being 30 mph
                   a distance of approximately 0.26 mile
South Street       From S.R. 64 to Cross Street, being a distance   30 mph
                   of approximately 0.43 mile
St. Anthony Road S From S.R. 64 to South Street, being a distance   25 mph
                   of approximately 0.13 mile
St. Johns Street   From Co. Rd. 450 S to South Street, being a      25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.13 mile
St. Joseph Street  Co. Rd. 450 S to South Street, being a distance  25 mph
                   of approximately 0.13 mile
                   From Co. Rd. 450 S to 0.02 mile west of Co. Rd.
Sycamore Street    450 S, being a distance of approximately 0.02    25 mph
                   mile
 
   (C)   Unincorporated community of St. Marks.
 
Point of Operation Location                                         Speed Limit
2nd Street         From Chestnut Street to Main Street, being a     25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.06 mile
3rd Street         From Chestnut Street to Front Street, being a    25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.13 mile
Chestnut Street    From Co. Rd. 450 E to 2nd Street, being a        25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.25 mile
Co. Rd. 450 E      From Front Street to St. Anthony Road S, being a 25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.18 mile
Front Street       From 3rd Street to Co. Rd. 450 E, being a        25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.12 mile
Main Street        From 2nd Street to 3rd Street, being a distance  25 mph
                   of approximately 0.12 mile
 
   (D)   Unincorporated community of Ireland.
Point of Operation Location Speed Limit
Point of Operation Location                                         Speed Limit
                   From 0.19 mile west of St. James Street to Co.
Center Street      Rd. 500 W, being a distance of approximately     25 mph
                   0.30 mile
Church Avenue      From Co. Rd. 500 W to Darry Street, being a      25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.15 mile
                   From 0.02 mile west of Grant Street to Co. Rd.
Clay Street        500 W, being a distance of approximately 0.07    25 mph
                   mile
                   From Co. Rd. 460 W to 0.08 mile east of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 230 N      460 W, being a distance of approximately 0.08    25 mph
                   mile
Co. Rd. 235 N      From Co. Rd. 450 W to Co. Rd. 440 W, being a     25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.09 mile
Co. Rd. 250 N      From S.R. 56 to the west city limits of Ireland, 30 mph
                   being a distance of approximately 0.28 mile
Co. Rd. 450 W      From S.R. 56 to 0.13 mile north of Co. Rd. 235   25 mph
                   N, being a distance of approximately 0.24 mile
Co. Rd. 460 W      From S.R. 56 to 0.13 mile north of Co. Rd. 235   25 mph
                   N, being a distance of approximately 0.21 mile
Darry Street       From Walnut Street to Church Street, being a     25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.13 mile
Dublin Street      From Walnut Street to Church Street, being a     25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.13 mile
Grant Street       From Clay Street to Walnut Street, being a       25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.25 mile
Leprechaun Lane    From Shiloh Road to Shamrock Lane, being a       25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.12 mile
Main Street        From S.R. 56 to Co. Rd. 500 W, being a distance  25 mph
                   of approximately 0.10 mile
Shamrock Lane      From S.R. 56 to Co. Rd. 180 N, being a distance  25 mph
                   of approximately 0.23 mile
                   From St. James Street to 0.10 mile east of Co.
South Street       Rd. 500 W, being a distance of approximately     25 mph
                   0.21 mile
                   From South Street to 0.04 mile north of Walnut
St. James Street   Street, being a distance of approximately 0.22   25 mph
                   mile
Walnut Street      From S.R. 56 to Darry Street, being a distance   25 mph
                   of approximately 0.35 mile
 
   (E)   Unincorporated community of Celestine.
Point of Operation Location Speed Limit
Point of Operation       Location                                   Speed Limit
                         From Celestine Road N to De La Hailandiere
Bishop Street            Street, being a distance approximately     25 mph
                         0.06 mile
Celestine Road N         From S.R. 164 to Highland Boulevard, being 30 mph
                         a distance of approximately 0.51 mile
                         From S.R. 164 to a quarter mile south of
Celestine Road S         S.R. 164, being a distance of              30 mph
                         approximately 0.25 mile
                         From Main Cross Street to Ellsworth Road,
De La Hailandiere Street being a distance of approximately 0.24     25 mph
                         mile
                         From the dead end west of Celestine Road N
Ellsworth Road           to Celestine Road N, being a distance of   25 mph
                         approximately 0.14 mile
                         From Celestine Road N to Ellsworth Road,
Highland Boulevard       being a distance of approximately 0.34     30 mph
                         mile
                         From Celestine Road S to the dead end east
Main Cross Street        of De La Hailandiere Street, being a       25 mph
                         distance of approximately 0.08 mile
                         From St. Charles Street to St. Marys
New Orleans Street       Street, being a distance of approximately  25 mph
                         0.09 mile
                         From New Orleans Street to the dead end on
St. Charles Street       east De La Hailandiere Street, being a     25 mph
                         distance of approximately 0.19 mile
                         From New Orleans Street to De La
St. Marys Street         Hailandiere Street, being a distance of    25 mph
                         approximately 0.13 mile
                         From Montana Drive N to Highland
Montana Drive E          Boulevard, being a distance of             25 mph
                         approximately 0.11 mile
                         From Montana Drive E to Montana Drive W,
Montana Drive N          being a distance of approximately 0.11     25 mph
                         mile
                         From Montana Drive N to Highland
Montana Drive W          Boulevard, being a distance of             25 mph
                         approximately 0.11 mile
 
   (F)   Unincorporated community of Haysville.
 
Point of Operation Location                                         Speed Limit
Charles Street     From Hartsfield Street to U.S. 231, being a      45 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.18 mile
Church Street      From Haysville Road W to Charles Street, being a 25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.13 mile
Hartsfield Street  From Haysville Road W to Charles Street, being a 25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.07 mile
Haysville Road W   From U.S. 231 to S.R. 56, being a distance of    25 mph
                   approximately 0.29 mile
Park Street        From U.S. 231 to Haysville Road W, being a       25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.36 mile
Seitz Street       From U.S. 231 to Hartsfield Street, being a      25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.18 mile
 
   (G)   Unincorporated community of Saint Henry.
 
Point of Operation Location                                       Speed Limit
Clay Street        From Market Street to West Street, being a     25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.09 mile
Market Street      From Co. Rd. 1100 S to Clay Street, being a    25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.09 mile
                   From 0.09 mile north of Co. Rd. 1100 S to Clay
West Street        Street, being a distance of approximately 0.18 25 mph
                   mile
 
   (H)   Unincorporated community of Schnellville.
 
Point of Operation Location                                         Speed Limit
                   From 0.15 mile north of Market Street to 0.37
Co. Rd. 800 E      mile north of Market Street, being a distance of 30 mph
                   approximately 0.22 mile
                   From Schnellville Road to 0.15 mile north of
Co. Rd. 800 E      Market Street, being a distance of approximately 25 mph
                   0.22 mile
Elm Street         From Schnellville Road to Market Street, being a 25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.06 mile
Market Street      From Schnellville Road to Walnut Street, being a 25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.37 mile
Walnut Street      From Schnellville Road to Market Street, being a 25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.07 mile
 
   (I)   Unincorporated community of Cuzco.
 
Point of Operation Location                                       Speed Limit
2nd Street         From Sycamore Street to Cuzco Road S, being a  25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.06 mile
                   From 0.08 mile west of Sycamore Street to Main
Cuzco Road W       Street, being a distance of approximately 0.14 25 mph
                   mile
Main Street        From 2nd Street to Cuzco Road W, being a       25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.06 mile
Sycamore Street    From 2nd Street to Cuzco Road W, being a       25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.05 mile
 
   (J)   Unincorporated community of Duff.
 
Point of Operation Location                                       Speed Limit
2nd Street         From Co. Rd. 650 W to Nicholas Street, being a 25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.11 mile
Nicholas Street    From Co. Rd. 350 S to 2nd Street, being a      25 mph
                   distance of approximately 0.06 mile
 
(Ord. 14, passed 12-1-1986; Ord. 15, passed 9-8-1987; Ord. 90-8, passed 5-7-
1990; Ord. 92-5, passed 5-18-1992; Ord. 92-8, passed 10-19-1992; Ord. 93-4,
passed 6-7-1993; Ord. 94-1, passed 1-3-1994; Ord. 94-6, passed 2-7-1994; Ord.
94-10, passed 8-1-1994; Ord. 95-2, passed 1-16-1995; Ord. 95-4, passed 3-20-
1995; Ord. 95-6, passed 5-22-1995; Ord. 95-8, passed 6-19-1995; Ord. 95-10,
passed 8-1-1995; Ord. 11-95, passed 11-6-1995; Ord. 1996-5, passed 3-18-1996;
Ord. 96-06, passed 5-20-1996; Ord. 96-8, passed 8-26-1996; Ord. 96-9, passed
10-7-1996; Ord. 96-12, passed 12-16-1996; Ord. 97-4, passed 5-5-1997; Ord. 97-
5, passed 8-1-1997; Ord. 97-6, passed 10-6-1997; Ord. 98-3, passed 5-4-1998;
Ord. 98-5, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 98-9, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 99-4, passed 7-
6-1999; Ord. 99-10, passed 11-1-1999; Ord. 2000-2, passed 6-19-2000; Ord. 2000-
3, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 00-4, passed 11-6-2000; Ord. 2001-2, passed 7-9-2001;
Ord. 2001-10, passed 12-20-2001; Ord. 2002-05, passed 6-17-2002; Ord. 2003-03,
passed 9-8-2003; Ord. 2004-7, passed 7-19-2004; Ord. 2004-18, passed 9-20-2004;
Ord. 2005-07, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 2005-10, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 2006-1,
passed 4-3-2006; Ord. 2006-7, passed 9-25-2006; Ord. 2007-11, passed 8-27-2007;
Ord. 2008-05, passed 12-1-2008; Ord. 2009-6, passed 11-2-2009; Ord. 2010-03,
passed 10-4-2010; Ord. 2015-01, passed 8-3-2015; Ord. 2016-07, passed 12-5-
2016; Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-1-2017; Ord. 2019-8, passed 11-4-2019 ; Ord. 2025-
11, passed 9-15-2025 )
SCHEDULE III. STOP SIGNS.
   (A)   Current stop sign locations.
      (1)   The provisions of this schedule relate to preferential highways and
stop signs on certain highways in the county.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential  Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Highway(s)
              East-,
              north-,
              south-bound
              traffic,
-             intersection Three-way stop intersection
              with Co. Rd.
              300 N and
              Co. Rd. 325
              E
              Ferdinand
              Road NW, Co.
              Rd. 200 W,
-             Sunset       Four-way stop sign; stop signs placed on all intersecting roads
              Drive, and
              Cherry
              Street
              Main Street
-             and Grant    Four-way stop sign; stop signs placed on all intersecting roads
              Street (town
              of Ireland)
              West-,
              north-,
              south-bound
              traffic,
-             intersection Three-way stop intersection
              at Co. Rd.
              800 S and
              Co. Rd. 750
              W
              Co.Rd. 150 N
Co.Rd. 150 N  and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd. 490 W with Co. Rd. 150 N
              490 W
              Co. Rd. 285
Co. Rd. 285 E E and Co.    East approach of Co. Rd. 1160 S with Co. Rd. 285 E
              Rd. 1160 S
Co. Rd. 500 S Co. Rd. 500
and Duff Road S, Duff Road North approach of Co. Rd. 525 W with Co. Rd. 500 S and Duff Road SE
SE            SE, and Co.
              Rd. 525 W
              Co. Rd. 500
Co. Rd. 500 W W and Co.    East and west approaches of Co. Rd. 1150 S with Co. Rd. 500 W
              Rd. 1150 S
              Co. Rd. 820
Co. Rd. 820 E E and Co.    East approach of Co. Rd. 900 E with Co. Rd. 820 E
              Rd. 900 E
              Convent Road
Convent Road  and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd. 350 E with Convent Road
              350 E
              County
County        Highway 400
Highway 400 E E and South  South Street where traffic approaches from the west
              Street (in
              St. Anthony)
              Ferdinand
              Street;
              South Street
              where south-
              bound
              traffic on
              Cross Street
              stops at the
Cross Street  intersection On Cross Street and all intersecting streets mentioned in “Intersection”
in St.        of Cross     column
Anthony       Street and
              South
              Street;
              State
              Highway 64,
              where south-
              bound
              traffic on
              Cross Street
              Division
Division Road Road and     South approach of Stewart Road with Division Road
              Stewart Road
              Duff Road SE
Duff Road SE  and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd. 600 W with Duff Road SE
              600 W
              Ferdinand
Ferdinand     Road E and   East approach of Co. Rd. 540 with Ferdinand Road E
Road E        Co. Rd. 540
              E
Highland      Montana
Boulevard,    Boulevard E
east-bound    in Celestine At intersection mentioned in “Intersection” column
traffic       Highland
              Estates
              Jasper-
Jasper-       Schnellville
Schnellville  Highway and  South approach Co. Rd. 600 E with the Jasper Schnellville Highway
Highway       County
              Highway 600
              E
Jasper        Jasper
Southside     Southside
Connector     Connector    North and south approaches of Meridian Road with Jasper Southside Connector
(future S.R.  and Meridian
162 under     Road
construction)
Jasper        Jasper
Southside     Southside
Connecter     Connecter    North and south approach of Newton Street with Jasper Southside Connector
(future S.R.  and Newton
162 under     Street
construction)
              Kessner Road
Kessner Road  Bridge,      North and south approach of County Highway 550 W with the Kessner Bridge
Bridge        County       Road
              Highway 550
              W
              Newton
Newton Street Street and   East approach of Church Avenue with Newton Street
              Church
              Avenue
              Newton
Newton Street Street and   East approach of Hochgesang Avenue with Newton Street
              Hochgesang
              Avenue
              Shiloh Road
Shiloh Road   and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd. 150 N with Shiloh Road
              150 N
              Steinbottom
Steinbottom   Road and
Road          Jasper-      West side of Jasper-Dubois Road where it intersects with Steinbottom Road
              Dubois
              Highway
              Stewart
Stewart Road  Road, Co.
and Co. Rd.   Rd. 450 W,   South approach of Co. Rd. 490 W with Stewart Road and Co. Rd. 450 W
450 W         and Co. Rd.
              490 W
 
      (2)   Any violation of this schedule shall be punishable by a fine of up
to $2,500, as provided in I.C. 34-4-32.
      (3)   Violation of this schedule shall be punishable in that manner
prescribed by state statute, and by prior ordinances pertaining to preferential
roads heretofore adopted by the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   Bainbridge Township.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection                Location of Stop Sign(s)
                                                    East and west approach of
-                       Hill Road, Raymond Street,  Hill Road, north approach
                        and C Street (BA25)         of Raymond Street, south
                                                    approach of C Street
                                                    East and south approaches
                        Old Huntingburg Road, Co.   of Old Huntingburg Road,
-                       Rd. 350 W, and Co. Rd. 150  north approach of Co. Rd.
                        S (BA29)                    350 W, west approach of Co.
                                                    Rd. 150 S
36th Street and Co. Rd. 36th Street, Co. Rd. 300 N, South approach of Co. Rd.
300 N                   and Co. Rd. 350 W (BA14)    350 W with 36th Street and
                                                    Co. Rd. 300 N
A Street                A Street and Hill Road      West approach of Hill Road
                        (BA27)                      with A Street
A Street                A Street and St. James      West approach of St. James
                        Avenue (BA23)               Avenue with A Street
                        Ackerman Road and Apple     South approach of Apple
Ackerman Road           Blossom Lane (BA5)          Blossom Lane with Ackerman
                                                    Road
Ackerman Road           Ackerman Road and Beth Lane North approach of Beth Lane
                        (BA3)                       with Ackerman Road
                        Ackerman Road and           South approach of
Ackerman Road           Meadowlark Lane (BA4)       Meadowlark Lane with
                                                    Ackerman Road
Ann Lane                Ann Lane and Bart Lane      North approach of Bart Lane
                        (BA39)                      with Ann Lane
                        Apple Blossom Lane and      West approach of Clover
Apple Blossom Lane      Clover Street (BA7)         Street with Apple Blossom
                                                    Lane
                        Apple Blossom Lane and      West approach of Magnolia
Apple Blossom Lane      Magnolia Drive (BA9)        Drive with Apple Blossom
                                                    Lane
                        Apple Blossom Lane and      West approach of Maple
Apple Blossom Lane      Maple Street (BA10)         Street with Apple Blossom
                                                    Lane
Beth Lane               Beth Lane and Todd Lane     East and west approach of
                        (BA2)                       Todd Lane with Beth Lane
Co. Rd. 130 W           Co. Rd. 130 W and Co. Rd.   East approach of Co. Rd.
                        250 S (BA34)                250 S with Co. Rd. 130 W
Co. Rd. 130 W           Co. Rd. 130 W and Meridian  East approach of Meridian
                        Road (BA35)                 Road with Co. Rd. 130 W
Co. Rd. 230 S           Co. Rd. 230 S and Timberlin West approach of Timberlin
                        Lane (BA38)                 Lane with Co. Rd. 230 S
Co. Rd. 300 N           Co. Rd. 300 N and Co. Rd.   South approach of Co. Rd.
                        50 E (BA13)                 50 E with Co. Rd. 300 N
Co. Rd. 350 W           Co. Rd. 350 W and Schuetter East approach of Schuetter
                        Road (BA15)                 Road with Co. Rd. 350 W
Hill Road               Hill Road and B Street      South approach of B Street
                        (BA26)                      with Hill Road
Hill Road               Hill Road and Highland      North approach of Highland
                        Street (BA24)               Street with Hill Road
Hillbrook Road          Hillbrook Road and B Street North approach of B Street
                        (BA28)                      with Hillbrook Road
Kellerville Road        Kellerville Road and Co.    East approach of Co. Rd.
                        Rd. 330 N (BA11)            330 N with Kellerville Road
Kellerville Road        Kellerville Road and Co.    East approach of Co. Rd.
                        Rd. 300 N (BA12)            300 N with Kellerville Road
Meadowlark Lane         Meadowlark Lane and Clover  East approach of Clover
                        Street (BA6)                Street with Meadowlark Lane
Meadowlark Lane         Meadowlark Lane and         East approach of Magnolia
                        Magnolia Drive (BA8)        Drive with Meadowlark Lane
Meridian Road           Meridian Road and 15th      West approach of 15th
                        Street (BA16)               Street with Meridian Road
Meridian Road           Meridian Road and Mendel    West approach of Mendel
                        Lane (BA31)                 Lane with Meridian Road
                        Old Huntingburg Road and    East approach of Co. Rd.
Old Huntingburg Road    Co. Rd. 100 S (BA22)        100 S with Old Huntingburg
                                                    Road
                        Old Huntingburg Road and    West approach of Co. Rd.
Old Huntingburg Road    Co. Rd. 200 S (BA30)        200 S with Old Huntingburg
                                                    Road
                        Old Huntingburg Road and    East and west approaches of
Old Huntingburg Road    Co. Rd. 250 S (BA32)        Co. Rd. 250 S with Old
                                                    Huntingburg Road
Portersville Road       Portersville Road and Ann   West approach of Ann Lane
                        Lane (BA1)                  with Portersville Road
Timberlin Lane          Timberlin Lane and Cedar    South approach of Cedar
                        Court (BA36)                Court with Timberlin Lane
Timberlin Lane          Timberlin Lane and          North approach of Timberlin
                        Timberlin Drive (BA37)      Drive with Timberlin Lane
Whoderville Road        Whoderville Road and Abell  West approach of Abell Road
                        Road (BA18)                 with Whoderville Road
                                                    Southeast approach of
Whoderville Road        Whoderville Road and Burger Whoderville Road with
                        Road (BA21)                 Burger Road, north approach
                                                    of Whoderville Road
Whoderville Road        Whoderville Road and        East approach of Scherle
                        Scherle Lane (BA17)         Lane with Whoderville Road
Whoderville Road        Whoderville Road and Wright West approach of Wright
                        Road (BA20)                 Road with Whoderville Road
WITZ Road               WITZ Road and Co. Rd. 225 S East approach of Co. Rd.
                        (BA33)                      225 S with WITZ Road
Wright Road             Wright Road and Backbone    North approach of Backbone
                        Lane (BA19)                 Lane with Wright Road
 
   (C)   Boone Township.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)   Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
                          47th Street and            South approach of
47th Street               Commissioners Drive (BO48) Commissioners Drive with
                                                     47th Street
47th Street               47th Street and Harvest    South approach of Harvest
                          Lane (BO47)                Lane with 47th Street
Co. Rd. 200 W             Co. Rd. 200 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          700 N (BO15)               700 N with Co. Rd. 200 W
                                                     West approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 200 W, east       Co. Rd. 200 W and Co. Rd.  600 N with Co. Rd. 200 W,
approach of Co. Rd. 600 N 600 N (BO22)               east approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     600 N
Co. Rd. 200 W, east                                  West approach of Haysville
approach of Haysville     Haysville Road W and Co.   Road W, east approach of
Road W                    Rd. 200 W (BO14)           Haysville Road W and Co.
                                                     Rd. 200 W
Co. Rd. 400 N and Co. Rd. Co. Rd. 400 N, Co. Rd. 500 North approach of Co. Rd.
500 W                     W, and Co. Rd. 425 W       425 W with Co. Rd. 400 N
                          (BO45)                     and Co. Rd. 500 W
Co. Rd. 500 N             Co. Rd. 500 N and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          400 W (BO36)               400 W with Co. Rd. 500 N
Co. Rd. 500 N             Co. Rd. 500 N and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          425 W (BO35)               425 W with Co. Rd. 500 N
Co. Rd. 500 N             Co. Rd. 500 N and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          500 W (BO34)               500 W with Co. Rd. 500 N
Co. Rd. 500 W             Co. Rd. 500 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          570 N (BO31)               570 N with Co. Rd. 500 W
Co. Rd. 500 W             Co. Rd. 500 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          600 N (BO19)               600 N with Co. Rd. 500 W
Co. Rd. 500 W             Co. Rd. 500 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          675 N (BO18)               675 N with Co. Rd. 500 W
Co. Rd. 550 W             Co. Rd. 550 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          425 N (BO44)               425 N with Co. Rd. 550 W
                          Co. Rd. 550 W and Co. Rd.  East and west approaches
Co. Rd. 550 W             500 N (BO32)               of Co. Rd. 500 N with Co.
                                                     Rd. 550 W
Co. Rd. 550 W             Co. Rd. 550 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          580 N (BO30)               580 N with Co. Rd. 550 W
Co. Rd. 550 W             Co. Rd. 550 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          600 N (BO29)               600 N with Co. Rd. 550 W
Co. Rd. 550 W             Co. Rd. 550 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          700 N (BO12)               700 N with Co. Rd. 550 W
                                                     North approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 570 N, south      Co. Rd. 570 N and Co. Rd.  400 W with Co. Rd. 570 N,
approach of Co. Rd. 400 W 400 W (BO33)               south approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     400 W
                          Co. Rd. 580 N and Co. Rd.  North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 580 N             600 W (BO28)               of Co. Rd. 600 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 580 N
                          Co. Rd. 580 N and Co. Rd.  North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 580 N             700 W (BO27)               of Co. Rd. 700 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 580 N
Co. Rd. 700 W             Co. Rd. 700 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          500 N (BO42)               500 N with Co. Rd. 700 W
Co. Rd. 700 W and Co. Rd. Co. Rd. 700 W, Co. Rd. 600 West approach of Co. Rd.
600 W                     W, and Co. Rd. 450 N       450 N with Co. Rd. 700 W
                          (BO43)                     and Co. Rd. 600 W
                          Co. Rd. 750 W and Co. Rd.  East and west approaches
Co. Rd. 750 W             450 N (BO41)               of Co. Rd. 450 N with Co.
                                                     Rd. 750 W
                          Co. Rd. 750 W and Co. Rd.  East and west approaches
Co. Rd. 750 W             580 N (BO26)               of Co. Rd. 580 N with Co.
                                                     Rd. 750 W
Co. Rd. 800 W             Co. Rd. 800 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          450 N (BO40)               450 N with Co. Rd. 800 W
Co. Rd. 800 W             Co. Rd. 800 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          560 N (BO25)               560 N with Co. Rd. 800 W
Co. Rd. 800 W             Co. Rd. 800 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          580 N (BO24)               580 N with Co. Rd. 800 W
Co. Rd. 800 W             Co. Rd. 800 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          650 N (BO17)               650 No with Co. Rd. 800 W
Co. Rd. 900 W             Co. Rd. 900 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          560 N (BO23)               560 N with Co. Rd. 900 W
Co. Rd. 900 W             Co. Rd. 900 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          650 N (BO16)               650 N with Co. Rd. 900 W
                          Old Petersburg Road and    North and south approaches
Old Petersburg Road       Co. Rd. 900 W (BO39)       of Co. Rd. 900 W with Old
                                                     Petersburg Road
                          Portersville Road and 47th East and west approaches
Portersville Road         Street (BO46)              of 47th Street with
                                                     Portersville Road
                          Portersville Road and Co.  West approach of Co. Rd.
Portersville Road         Rd. 500 N (BO38)           500 N with Portersville
                                                     Road
                          Portersville Road and Co.  West approach of Co. Rd.
Portersville Road         Rd. 600 N (BO21)           600 N with Portersville
                                                     Road
                          Portersville Road and Co.  East approach of Co. Rd.
Portersville Road         Rd. 600 N (BO37)           600 N with Portersville
                                                     Road
                          Portersville Road and Co.  West approach of Co. Rd.
Portersville Road         Rd. 675 N (BO20)           675 N with Portersville
                                                     Road
                          Portersville Road and Co.  East approach of Co. Rd.
Portersville Road         Rd. 700 N (BO13)           700 N with Portersville
                                                     Road
                          Portersville Road and      West approach of
Portersville Road         Portersville Road W (BO3)  Portersville Road W with
                                                     Portersville Road
                          Portersville Road E and    North approach of
Portersville Road E       Portersville Road N (BO2)  Portersville Road N with
                                                     Portersville Road E
                                                     North approach of
                                                     Portersville Road, west
Portersville Road E, east Portersville Road E and    approach of Portersville
approach, south approach  Portersville Road (BO1)    Road E with the south
of Portersville Road                                 approach of Portersville
                                                     Road, east approach of
                                                     Portersville Road E
                          Portersville Road W and    North and south approaches
Portersville Road W       Co. Rd. 500 W (BO11)       of Co. Rd. 500 W with
                                                     Portersville Road W
                          Portersville Road W and    South approach of Co. Rd.
Portersville Road W       Co. Rd. 550 W (BO10)       550 W with Portersville
                                                     Road W
                          Portersville Road W and    North approach of Co. Rd.
Portersville Road W       Co. Rd. 660 W (BO9)        660 W with Portersville
                                                     Road W
                          Portersville Road W and    South approach of Co. Rd.
Portersville Road W       Co. Rd. 700 W (BO8)        700 W with Portersville
                                                     Road W
                          Portersville Road W and    South approach of Co. Rd.
Portersville Road W       Co. Rd. 750 W (BO7)        750 W with Portersville
                                                     Road W
                          Portersville Road W and    South approach of Co. Rd.
Portersville Road W       Co. Rd. 800 W (BO6)        800 W with Portersville
                                                     Road W
                          Portersville Road W and    South approach of Co. Rd.
Portersville Road W       Co. Rd. 900 W (BO4)        900 W with Portersville
                                                     Road W
                          Portersville Road W and    North approach of Himsel
Portersville Road W       Himsel Road (BO5)          Road with Portersville
                                                     Road W
 
   (D)   Cass Township.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)   Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
                          Co. Rd. 750 W and Co. Rd.  North and south approaches
-                         800 S (CA14)               of Co. Rd. 750 W, east
                                                     approach of Co. Rd. 800 S
                          Co. Rd. 900 S and Airport  East and west approaches
-                         Road (CA24)                of Co. Rd. 900 S, south
                                                     approach of Airport Road
Airport Road              Airport Road and Co. Rd.   East approach of Co. Rd.
                          900 S (CA23)               900 S with Airport Road
                          Clay Street and West       South approach of West
Clay Street, north        Street, the Community of   Street with Clay Street,
approach of West Street   St. Henry (CA48)           north approach of West
                                                     Street
Co. Rd. 100 W             Co. Rd. 100 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          925 S (CA38)               925 S with Co. Rd. 100 W
Co. Rd. 100 W             Co. Rd. 100 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          950 S (CA39)               950 S with Co. Rd. 100 W
Co. Rd. 200 W             Co. Rd. 200 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          900 S (CA25)               900 S with Co. Rd. 200 W
Co. Rd. 200 W             Co. Rd. 200 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          950 S (CA36)               950 S with Co. Rd. 200 W
                          Co. Rd. 200 W and Co. Rd.  East and west approaches
Co. Rd. 200 W             1000 S (CA37)              of Co. Rd. 1000 S with Co.
                                                     Rd. 200 W
Co. Rd. 200 W, west                                  East approach of Co. Rd.
approach of Co. Rd. 1200  Co. Rd. 200 W and Co. Rd.  1200 S with Co. Rd. 200 W,
S                         1200 S (CA58)              west approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     1200 S
Co. Rd. 500 W             Co. Rd. 500 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          900 S (CA19)               900 S with Co. Rd. 500 W
                          Co. Rd. 500 W and Co. Rd.  East and west approaches
Co. Rd. 500 W             1150 S (CA55)              of Co. Rd. 1150 S with Co.
                                                     Rd. 500 W
                          Co. Rd. 600 W and Co. Rd.  East and west approaches
Co. Rd. 600 W             1025 S (CA45)              of Co. Rd. 1025 S with Co.
                                                     Rd. 600 W
                          Co. Rd. 600 W and Co. Rd.  East and west approaches
Co. Rd. 600 W             1150 S (CA53)              of Co. Rd. 1150 S with Co.
                                                     Rd. 600 W
Co. Rd. 650 S             Co. Rd. 650 S and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          625 W (CA5)                625 W with Co. Rd. 650 S
Co. Rd. 720, west                                    East approach of Co. Rd.
approach of Co. Rd. 1200  Co. Rd. 720 and Co. Rd.    1200 S with Co. Rd. 720,
S                         1200 S (CA52)              west approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     1200 S
Co. Rd. 720 W             Co. Rd. 720 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          1025 S (CA43)              1025 S with Co. Rd. 720 W
Co. Rd. 720 W             Co. Rd. 720 W and Holland  West approach of Holland
                          Road SW (CA31)             Road SW with Co. Rd. 720 W
Co. Rd. 720 W, north      Co. Rd. 720 W and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
approach, and Co. Rd.     1150 S (CA51)              720 W with north approach
1150 S                                               of Co. Rd. 720 W
Co. Rd. 750 W             Co. Rd. 750 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          650 S (CA3)                650 S with Co. Rd. 750 W
Co. Rd. 750 W             Co. Rd. 750 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          700 S (CA4)                700 S with Co. Rd. 750 W
                                                     East approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 800 W, west       Co. Rd. 800 W and Co. Rd.  700 S with Co. Rd. 800 W,
approach of Co. Rd. 700 S 700 S (CA2)                west approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     700 S
Co. Rd. 825 W             Co. Rd. 825 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          675 S (CA1)                675 S with Co. Rd. 825 W
Co. Rd. 850 W             Co. Rd. 850 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          950 S (CA26)               950 S with Co. Rd. 850 W
Co. Rd. 900 S             Co. Rd. 900 S and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          375 W (CA22)               375 W with Co. Rd. 900 S
Co. Rd. 900 S             Co. Rd. 900 S and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          400 W (CA21)               400 W with Co. Rd. 900 S
Co. Rd. 900 S             Co. Rd. 900 S and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          450 W (CA20)               450 W with Co. Rd. 900 S
Co. Rd. 900 S             Co. Rd. 900 S and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          750 W (CA18)               750 W with Co. Rd. 900 S
Co. Rd. 900 S             Co. Rd. 900 S and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          775 W (CA17)               775 W with Co. Rd. 900 S
                          Co. Rd. 900 S and Co. Rd.  North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 900 S             850 W (CA16)               of Co. Rd. 850 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 900 S
                          Co. Rd. 1000 S and Co. Rd. North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 1000 S            100 W (CA40)               of Co. Rd. 100 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 1000 S
Co. Rd. 1000 S            Co. Rd. 1000 S and Co. Rd. North approach of Co. Rd.
                          850 W (CA27)               850 W with Co. Rd. 1000 S
Co. Rd. 1000 S, north                                South approach of Holland
approach of Holland Road  Co. Rd. 1000 S and Holland Road SW with Co. Rd. 1000
SW                        Road SW (CA28)             S, north approach of
                                                     Holland Road SW
Co. Rd. 1075 S            Co. Rd. 1075 S and Co. Rd. North approach of Co. Rd.
                          800 W (CA42)               800 W with Co. Rd. 1075 S
                          Co. Rd. 1075 S, Holland    North approach of Holland
Co. Rd. 1075 S            Road SW, and Co. Rd. 850 W Road SW, south approach of
                          (CA41)                     Co. Rd. 850 W with Co. Rd.
                                                     1075 S
                                                     South approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 1075 S, north     Co. Rd. 1075 S and Co. Rd. 720 W with Co. Rd. 1075 S,
approach of Co. Rd. 720 W 720 W (CA44)               north approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     720 W
                          Co. Rd. 1100 S and Co. Rd. North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 1100 S            100 W (CA49)               of Co. Rd. 100 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 1100 S
                          Co. Rd. 1100 S and Co. Rd. North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 1100 S            200 W (CA57)               of Co. Rd. 200 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 1100 S
                          Co. Rd. 1100 S and Market  South approach of Market
Co. Rd. 1100 S            Street, the Community of   Street with Co. Rd. 1100 S
                          St Henry (CA47)
                          Co. Rd. 1100 S and West    North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 1100 S            Street, the Community of   of West Street with Co.
                          St. Henry (CA46)           Rd. 1100 S
Co. Rd. 1200 S            Co. Rd. 1200 S and Co. Rd. North approach of Co. Rd.
                          500 W (CA56)               500 W with Co. Rd. 1200 S
                          Co. Rd. 1200 S and Co. Rd. North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 1200 S            600 W (CA54)               of Co. Rd. 600 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 1200 S
Co. Rd. 1200 S            Co. Rd. 1200 S and Co. Rd. North approach of Co. Rd.
                          850 W (CA50)               850 W with Co. Rd. 1200 S
Holland Road E            Holland Road E and Co. Rd. North approach of Co. Rd.
                          375 W (CA35)               375 W with Holland Road E
                          Holland Road E and Co. Rd. North and south approaches
Holland Road E            500 W (CA34)               of Co. Rd. 500 W with
                                                     Holland Road E
Holland Road E            Holland Road E and Co. Rd. South approach of Co. Rd.
                          600 W (CA32)               600 W with Holland Road E
Holland Road E            Holland Road E and Co. Rd. South approach of Co. Rd.
                          1025 S (CA33)              1025 S with Holland Road E
Holland Road SW           Holland Road SW and Co.    North approach of Co. Rd.
                          Rd. 775 W (CA30)           775 W with Holland Road SW
Holland Road SW           Holland Road SW and Co.    South approach of Co. Rd.
                          Rd. 800 W (CA29)           800 W with Holland Road SW
Old Road 64               Old Road 64 and Co. Rd.    North approach of Co. Rd.
                          625 W (CA15)               625 W with Old Road 64
Old Road 64               Old Road 64 and Co. Rd.    North approach of Co. Rd.
                          750 W (CA13)               750 W with Old Road 64
Old Road 64               Old Road 64 and Co. Rd.    South approach of Co. Rd.
                          750 W (CA12)               750 W with Old Road 64
Old Road 64               Old Road 64 and Co. Rd.    North approach of Co. Rd.
                          800 W (CA11)               800 W with Old Road 64
Old Road 64               Old Road 64 and Co. Rd.    South approach of Co. Rd.
                          850 W (CA10)               850 W with Old Road 64
Old Road 64               Old Road 64 and Co. Rd.    North approach of Co. Rd.
                          860 W (CA9)                860 W with Old Road 64
                          Old Road 64 and Co. Rd.    North and south approaches
Old Road 64               900 W (CA6)                of Co. Rd. 900 W with Old
                                                     Road 64
                          Old Road 64 and Zoar       South approach of Zoar
Old Road 64               Church Road (CA8)          Church Road with Old Road
                                                     64
                          Zoar Church Road and Co.   North approach of Co. Rd.
Zoar Church Road          Rd. 900 W (CA7)            900 W with Zoar Church
                                                     Road
 
   (E)   Columbia Township.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)   Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
                          Co. Rd. 900 N and Co. Rd.  East and west approaches
-                         575 E (CO1)                of Co. Rd. 900 N, south
                                                     approach of Co. Rd. 575 E
                                                     North and south approaches
                          Dubois Road NE and Co. Rd. of Dubois Road NE with Co.
-                         735 E (CO13)               Rd. 735 E, east approach
                                                     of Co. Rd. 735 E with
                                                     Dubois Road NE
Co. Rd. 475 N             Co. Rd. 475 N and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          1050 E (CO33)              1050 E with Co. Rd. 475 N
Co. Rd. 625 N and Co. Rd. Co. Rd. 625 N, Co. Rd.     North approach of Co. Rd.
1125 E                    1125 E, and Co. Rd. 650 N  650 N with Co. Rd. 625 N
                          (CO21)                     and Co. Rd. 1125 E
Co. Rd. 650 N             Co. Rd. 650 N and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          1150 E (CO22)              1150 E with Co. Rd. 650 N
Co. Rd. 735 E, south                                 North approach of Dubois
approach of Dubois Road   Co. Rd. 735 E and Dubois   Road NE with Co. Rd. 735
NE                        Road NE (CO13)             E, south approach of
                                                     Dubois Road NE
                          Co. Rd. 900 E and Co. Rd.  East and west approaches
Co. Rd. 900 E             950 N (CO5)                of Co. Rd. 950 N with Co.
                                                     Rd. 900 E
Co. Rd. 900 E             Co. Rd. 900 E and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          990 N (CO4)                990 N with Co. Rd. 900 E
Co. Rd. 900 N             Co. Rd. 900 N and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          675 E (CO2)                675 E with Co. Rd. 900 N
Co. Rd. 900 N and Crystal Co. Rd. 900 N, Crystal     North approach of Co. Rd.
Road N                    Road N, and Co. Rd. 750 E  750 E with Co. Rd. 900 N
                          (CO3)                      and Crystal Road N
                                                     West approach of Cuzco
Co. Rd. 925 E, south      Co. Rd. 925 E and Cuzco    Road W with Co. Rd. 925 E,
approach of Cuzco Road W  Road W (CO14)              south approach of Cuzco
                                                     Road W
Co. Rd. 1100 E            Co. Rd. 1100 E and Co. Rd. West approach of Co. Rd.
                          990 N (CO7)                990 N with Co. Rd. 1100 E
                                                     East approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 1125 E, west      Co. Rd. 1125 E and Co. Rd. 475 N with Co. Rd. 1125 E,
approach of Co. Rd. 475 N 475 N (CO24)               west approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     475 N
Crystal Road N            Crystal Road N and Co. Rd. West approach of Co. Rd.
                          825 N (CO8)                825 N with Crystal Road N
                          Cuzco-Norton Road and Co.  East approach of Co. Rd.
Cuzco-Norton Road         Rd. 750 N (CO12)           750 N with Cuzco-Norton
                                                     Road
Cuzco Road N              Cuzco Road N and Co. Rd.   South approach of Co. Rd.
                          1050 E (CO20)              1050 E with Cuzco Road N
                          Cuzco Road N and Cuzco-    East approach of Cuzco-
Cuzco Road N              Norton Road (CO19)         Norton Road with Cuzco
                                                     Road N
Cuzco Road N              Cuzco Road N and Old Road  West approach of Old Road
                          56 (CO9)                   56 with Cuzco Road N
                          Cuzco Road N, Cuzco Road   North approach of Main
Cuzco Road N and Cuzco    S, Main Street, and 2nd    Street, west approach of
Road S                    Street, the Community of   2nd Street with Cuzco Road
                          Cuzco (CO17)               N and Cuzco Road S
Cuzco Road S              Cuzco Road S and Co. Rd.   West approach of Co. Rd.
                          450 N (CO30)               450 N with Cuzco Road S
Cuzco Road S              Cuzco Road S and Co. Rd.   East approach of Co. Rd.
                          475 N (CO29)               475 N with Cuzco Road S
                          Cuzco Road S and Dubois    West approach of Dubois
Cuzco Road S              Cuzco Road (CO18)          Cuzco Road with Cuzco Road
                                                     S
                          Cuzco Road S and Purdue    East approach of Purdue
Cuzco Road S              Farm Road (CO32)           Farm Road with Cuzco Road
                                                     S
                          Dubois Cuzco Road and Co.  East approach of Co. Rd.
Dubois Cuzco Road         Rd. 450 N (CO28)           450 N with Dubois Cuzco
                                                     Road
                          Dubois Cuzco Road and Co.  North approach of Co. Rd.
Dubois Cuzco Road         Rd. 735 E (CO26)           735 E with Dubois Cuzco
                                                     Road
                          Dubois Cuzco Road and Co.  South approach of Co. Rd.
Dubois Cuzco Road         Rd. 760 E (CO27)           760 E with Dubois Cuzco
                                                     Road
                          Dubois Cuzco Road and Co.  North approach of Co. Rd.
Dubois Cuzco Road         Rd. 850 E (CO23)           850 E with Dubois Cuzco
                                                     Road
                          Hillham Road NW and        West approach of Wininger
Hillham Road NW           Wininger Cemetery Road     Cemetery Road with Hillham
                          (CO6)                      Road NW
Hillham Road S            Hillham Road S and Co. Rd. East approach of Co. Rd.
                          875 N (CO10)               875 N with Hillham Road S
Hillham Road S and Cuzco- Hillham Road S, Cuzco-     East approach of Co. Rd.
Norton Road               Norton Road, and Co. Rd.   780 N with Hillham Road S
                          780 N (CO11)               and Cuzco-Norton Road
                          Main Street and Cuzco Road West approach of Cuzco
Main Street               W, the Community of Cuzco  Road W with Main Street
                          (CO16)
                          Purdue Farm Road and Co.   North approach of Co. Rd.
Purdue Farm Road          Rd. 475 N (CO25)           475 N with Purdue Farm
                                                     Road
                          Purdue Farm Road and Co.   South approach of Co. Rd.
Purdue Farm Road          Rd. 1050 E (CO31)          1050 E with Purdue Farm
                                                     Road
                          Sycamore Street and Cuzco  East approach of Cuzco
Sycamore Street, west     Road W, the Community of   Road W with Sycamore
approach of Cuzco Road W  Cuzco (CO15)               Street, west approach of
                                                     Cuzco Road W
 
   (F)   Ferdinand Township.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)   Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
Club Road                 Club Road and Co. Rd. 725  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          S (FE2)                    725 S with Club Road
                          Club Road and Co. Rd. 825  East and west approaches
Club Road                 S (FE10)                   of Co. Rd. 825 S with Club
                                                     Road
Co. Rd. 75 E              Co. Rd. 75 E and Co. Rd.   West approach of Co. Rd.
                          850 S (FE8)                850 S with Co. Rd. 75 E
                          Co. Rd. 75 E and Holiday   East approach of Holiday
Co. Rd. 75 E              Lake Road (FE7)            Lake Road with Co. Rd. 75
                                                     E
                          Co. Rd. 475 E, Co. Rd.     East approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 475 E             1000 S, and Convent Road   1000 S, west approach of
                          (FE16)                     Convent Road, with Co. Rd.
                                                     475 E
Co. Rd. 500 E             Co. Rd. 500 E and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          875 S (FE3)                825 S with Co. Rd. 500 E
                                                     North approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 450 E, west       Co. Rd. 450 E and Co. Rd.  825 S with Co. Rd. 450 E,
approach of Co. Rd. 825 S 825 S (FE12)               west approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     825 S
Co. Rd. 600 E             Co. Rd. 600 E and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          700 S (FE4)                700 S with Co. Rd. 600 E
Co. Rd. 600 E             Co. Rd. 600 E and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          750 S (FE5)                750 S with Co. Rd. 600 E
Co. Rd. 825 S             Co. Rd. 825 S and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          350 E (FE11)               350 E with Co. Rd. 825 S
Co. Rd. 825 S             Co. Rd. 825 S and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          250 E (FE1)                250 E with Co. Rd. 825 S
Co. Rd. 925 S, east                                  North approach of
approach of Ferdinand     Co. Rd. 925 S and          Ferdinand Road NW with Co.
Road NW                   Ferdinand Road NW (FE13)   Rd. 925 S, east approach
                                                     of Ferdinand Road NW
                          Co. Rd. 1100 S and Mariah  South approach of Mariah
Co. Rd. 1100 S            Hill Road (FE18)           Hill Road with Co. Rd.
                                                     1100 S
                                                     North approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 1150 S, west      Co. Rd. 1150 S and Co. Rd. 540 E with Co. Rd. 1150 S,
approach of Co. Rd. 540 E 540 E (FE24)               west approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     540 E
                          Ferdinand Road E and Co.   North approach of Co. Rd.
Ferdinand Road E          Rd. 350 E (FE22)           350 E with Ferdinand Road
                                                     E
                          Ferdinand Road E and Co.   North approach of Co. Rd.
Ferdinand Road E          Rd. 475 E (FE23)           475 E with Ferdinand Road
                                                     E
                          Ferdinand Road NW and 23rd North approach of 23rd
Ferdinand Road NW         Street (FE17)              Street with Ferdinand Road
                                                     NW
                          Ferdinand Road NW and Co.  East approach of Co. Rd.
Ferdinand Road NW         Rd. 850 S (FE6)            850 S with Ferdinand Road
                                                     NW
                          Ferdinand Road NW and Co.  West approach of Co. Rd.
Ferdinand Road NW         Rd. 1000 S (FE15)          1000 S with Ferdinand Road
                                                     NW
                          Ferdinand Road NW and Co.  North approach of Co. Rd.
Ferdinand Road NW         Rd. 75 E (FE14)            75 E with Ferdinand Road
                                                     NW
                          Holiday Lake Road and Co.  North approach of Co. Rd.
Holiday Lake Road         Rd. 815 S (FE9)            815 S with Holiday Lake
                                                     Road
Mariah Hill Road          Mariah Hill Road and Co.   South approach of Co. Rd.
                          Rd. 80 E (FE20)            80 E with Mariah Hill Road
 
   (G)   Hall Township.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)   Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
                                                     West approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     1000 E with Gramwood
                                                     Drive, east approach of
                          Co. Rd. 1000 E, Pleasant   Pleasant View Lane with
-                         View Lane, and Gramwood    Gramwood Drive, north and
                          Drive (HL37)               south approaches of
                                                     Gramwood Drive with Co.
                                                     Rd. 1000 E and Pleasant
                                                     View Lane
                          Celestine Road N and Co.   East approach of Co. Rd.
Celestine Road N          Rd. 720 E (HL5)            720 E with Celestine Road
                                                     N
                          Celestine Road S and Co.   East approach of Co. Rd.
Celestine Road S          Rd. 100 S (HL42)           100 S with Celestine Road
                                                     South
Co. Rd. 175 S             Co. Rd. 175 S and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          1100 E (HL46)              1100 E with Co. Rd. 175 S
Co. Rd. 330 N             Co. Rd. 330 N and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          760 E (HL1)                760 E with Co. Rd. 330 N
Co. Rd. 330 N             Co. Rd. 330 N and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          960 E (HL2)                960 E with Co. Rd. 330 N
Co. Rd. 820 E             Co. Rd. 820 E and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          75 N (HL28)                75 N with Co. Rd. 820 E
Co. Rd. 820 E             Co. Rd. 820 E and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          175 S (HL44)               175 S with Co. Rd. 820 E
Co. Rd. 820 E             Co. Rd. 820 E and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          900 E (HL43)               900 E with Co. Rd. 820 E
Co. Rd. 900 E             Co. Rd. 900 E and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          75 N (HL29)                75 N with Co. Rd. 900 E
                          Co. Rd. 1000 E, Pleasant   North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 1000 E and        View Lane, and Gramwood    of Gramwood Drive with Co.
Pleasant View Lane        Drive (HL37)               Rd. 1000 E and Pleasant
                                                     View Lane
                          Co. Rd. 1025 E and Co. Rd. East and west approaches
Co. Rd. 1025 E            175 S (HL45)               of Co. Rd. 175 S with Co.
                                                     Rd. 1025 E
Co. Rd. 1025 E            Co. Rd. 1025 E and Merkel  East approach of Merkel
                          Road (HL41)                Road with Co. Rd. 1025 E
Cuzco Road S              Cuzco Road S and Co. Rd.   West approach of Co. Rd.
                          330 N (HL3)                330 N with Cuzco Road S
                                                     Southwest approach of Co.
Dubois Road SE, north     Dubois Road SE and Co. Rd. Rd. 720 E with Dubois Road
approach of Co. Rd. 720 E 720 E (HL4)                SE, north approach of Co.
                                                     Rd. 720 E
Ellsworth Road            Ellsworth Road and Co. Rd. North approach of Co. Rd.
                          725 E (HL26)               725 E with Ellsworth Road
Ellsworth Road            Ellsworth Road and Co. Rd. North approach of Co. Rd.
                          775 E (HL27)               775 E with Ellsworth Road
Ellsworth Road            Ellsworth Road and Co. Rd. East approach of Co. Rd.
                          820 W (HL7)                820 W with Ellsworth Road
Ellsworth Road            Ellsworth Road and Co. Rd. North approach of Co. Rd.
                          900 E (HL8)                900 E with Ellsworth Road
                          Ellsworth Road and Dubois  North approach of Dubois
Ellsworth Road            Road SE (HL6)              Road SE with Ellsworth
                                                     Road
                          Glennwood Terrace Lane and South approach of
Glennwood Terrace Lane    Charmwood Drive (HL31)     Charmwood Drive with
                                                     Glennwood Terrace Lane
                          Gramwood Drive and         North approach of
Gramwood Drive            Charmwood Drive (HL35)     Charmwood Drive with
                                                     Gramwood Drive
Gramwood Drive            Gramwood Drive and Maria   East approach of Maria
                          Court (HL39)               Court with Gramwood Drive
                          Gramwood Drive and Robert  North and south approaches
Gramwood Drive            Drive (HL34)               of Robert Drive with
                                                     Gramwood Drive
                          Lakeview Drive and         West approach of Glennwood
Lakeview Drive            Glennwood Terrace Lane     Terrace Lane with Lakeview
                          (HL32)                     Drive
Lakeview Drive            Lakeview Drive and         West approach of Gramwood
                          Gramwood Drive (HL36)      Drive with Lakeview Drive
Maria Court               Maria Court and Bertwood   South approach of Bertwood
                          Court (HL40)               Court with Maria Court
                          Pleasant View Lane and     North approach of Robert
Pleasant View Lane        Robert Drive (HL38)        Drive with Pleasant View
                                                     Lane
Robert Drive              Robert Drive and Dogwood   West approach of Dogwood
                          Court (HL33)               Court with Robert Drive
                          Robert Drive and Glennwood East and west approaches
Robert Drive              Terrace Lane (HL30)        of Glennwood Terrace Lane
                                                     with Robert Drive
 
   (H)   Hall Township, community of Celestine.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)  Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
                                                    East and south approach of
                         Ellsworth Road and Mundy   Ellsworth Road with Mundy
-                        Boulevard (HL16)           Boulevard, west approach of
                                                    Mundy Boulevard with
                                                    Ellsworth Road
                         Celestine Road N and       East approach of Bishop
Celestine Road N         Bishop Street (HL19)       Street with Celestine Road
                                                    N
                         Celestine Road N and       East and west approaches of
Celestine Road N         Ellsworth Road (HL17)      Ellsworth Road with
                                                    Celestine Road N
                         Celestine Road N and       East approach of Highland
Celestine Road N         Highland Boulevard (HL9)   Boulevard with Celestine
                                                    Road N
                         Celestine Road N and Mundy East approach of Mundy
Celestine Road N         Boulevard (HL12)           Boulevard with Celestine
                                                    Road N
                         Celestine Road N and St.   East and west approaches of
Celestine Road N         Charles Street (HL21)      St. Charles Street with
                                                    Celestine Road N
                         Celestine Road S and Main  East approach of Main Cross
Celestine Road S         Cross Street (HL47)        Street with Celestine Road
                                                    S
                         Celestine Road S and St.   East and west approaches of
Celestine Road S         Marys Street (HL23)        St. Marys Street with
                                                    Celestine Road S
                         De La Hailandiere Street   West approach of Bishop
De La Hailandiere Street and Bishop Street (HL20)   Street with De La
                                                    Hailandiere Street
                         De La Hailandiere Street   East and west approaches of
De La Hailandiere Street and St. Charles Street     St. Charles Street with De
                         (HL22)                     La Hailandiere Street
                         De La Hailandiere Street   West approach of St. Marys
De La Hailandiere Street and St. Marys Street       Street with De La
                         (HL24)                     Hailandiere Street
                         Ellsworth Road and De La   South approach of De La
Ellsworth Road           Hailandiere Street (HL18)  Hailandiere Street with
                                                    Ellsworth Road
                         Highland Boulevard and     North approach of Montana
Highland Boulevard       Montana Drive W (HL10)     Drive W with Highland
                                                    Boulevard
                         Main Cross Street and De   North approach of De La
Main Cross Street        La Hailandiere Street      Hailandiere Street with
                         (HL25)                     Main Cross Street
Montana Drive E, south                              West approach of Highland
approach of Highland     Montana Drive E and        Boulevard with Montana
Boulevard                Highland Boulevard (HL11)  Drive E, south approach of
                                                    Highland Boulevard
                         Mundy Boulevard and        North approach of Highland
Mundy Boulevard          Highland Boulevard (HL15)  Boulevard with Mundy
                                                    Boulevard
Mundy Boulevard          Mundy Boulevard and Kempf  South approach of Kempf
                         Avenue (HL14)              Avenue with Mundy Boulevard
Mundy Boulevard          Mundy Boulevard and        South approach of Messmer
                         Messmer Drive (HL13)       Drive with Mundy Boulevard
 
   (I)   Harbison Township.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)   Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
                                                     East approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 125 E, west       Co. Rd. 125 E and Co. Rd.  600 N with Co. Rd. 125 E,
approach of Co. Rd. 600 N 600 N (HB22)               west approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     600 N
Co. Rd. 150 E             Co. Rd. 150 E and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          725 N (HB16)               725 N with Co. Rd. 150 E
Co. Rd. 175 E             Co. Rd. 175 E and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          325 E (HB27)               325 E with Co. Rd. 175 E
Co. Rd. 325 E             Co. Rd. 325 E and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          300 E (HB23)               300 E with Co. Rd. 325 E
Co. Rd. 325 E             Co. Rd. 325 E and Dubois   East approach of Dubois
                          Road NW (HB24)             Road NW with Co. Rd. 325 E
Co. Rd. 400 E             Co. Rd. 400 E and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          700 N (HB18)               700 N with Co. Rd. 400 E
Co. Rd. 400 E             Co. Rd. 400 E and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          725 N (HB17)               725 N with Co. Rd. 400 E
Co. Rd. 400 E             Co. Rd. 400 E and Thales   East approach of Thales
                          Road N (HB1)               Road N with Co. Rd. 400 E
Co. Rd. 400 N             Co. Rd. 400 N and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          25 E (HB35)                25 E with Co. Rd. 400 N
Co. Rd. 400 N             Co. Rd. 400 N and Mill     South approach of Mill
                          Street (HB32)              Street with Co. Rd. 400 N
Co. Rd. 445 E             Co. Rd. 445 E and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          600 N (HB29)               600 N with Co. Rd. 445 E
                          Co. Rd. 445 E and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 445 E             600 N Extension (HB30)     600 N Extension with Co.
                                                     Rd. 445 E
Co. Rd. 600 N             Co. Rd. 600 N and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          175 E (HB21)               175 E with Co. Rd. 600 N
                          Co. Rd. 600 N and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 600 N             600 N Extension (HB28)     600 N Extension with Co.
                                                     Rd. 600 N
Dubois Road NW            Dubois Road NW and Co. Rd. North approach of Co. Rd.
                          445 E (HB31)               445 E with Dubois Road NW
Dubois Road NW            Dubois Road NW and Co. Rd. East approach of Co. Rd.
                          600 N (HB25)               600 N with Dubois Road NW
                          Hickory Grove Road and Co. East approach of Co. Rd.
Hickory Grove Road        Rd. 900 N (HB3)            900 N with Hickory Grove
                                                     Road
                          Hickory Grove Road and     West approach of Thales
Hickory Grove Road        Thales Road N (HB2)        Road N with Hickory Grove
                                                     Road
                          Haysville Road W and Co.   South approach of Co. Rd.
Haysville Road W          Rd. 150 W (HB4)            150 W with Haysville Road
                                                     W
                          Kellerville Road, Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
Kellerville Road          125 E, and Co. Rd. 400 N   125 E, west approach of
                          (HB36)                     Co. Rd. 400 N with
                                                     Kellerville Road
                          Kellerville Road and Co.   East approach of Co. Rd.
Kellerville Road          Rd. 420 N (HB34)           420 N with Kellerville
                                                     Road
                          Kellerville Road and Co.   West approach of Co. Rd.
Kellerville Road          Rd. 500 N (HB33)           500 N with Kellerville
                                                     Road
                          Kellerville Road and Co.   East approach of Co. Rd.
Kellerville Road          Rd. 520 N (HB26)           520 N with Kellerville
                                                     Road
                          Kellerville Road and Co.   East and west approaches
Kellerville Road          Rd. 600 N (HB20)           of Co. Rd. 600 N with
                                                     Kellerville Road
Old Road 45               Old Road 45 and Co. Rd.    West approach of Co. Rd.
                          600 N (HB19)               600 N with Old Road 45
 
   (J)   Harbison Township, community of Dubois.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)   Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
                                                     East and west approaches
-                         Main Street Street and 4th of Main Street, north and
                          Street (HB50)              south approaches of 4th
                                                     Street
                          2nd Street and Walnut      East and west approaches
2nd Street                Street (HB42)              of Walnut Street with 2nd
                                                     Street
4th Street                4th Street and Walnut      West approach of Walnut
                          Street (HB44)              Street with 4th Street
                                                     West approach of Vine
4th Street, east approach 4th Street and Vine Street Street with 4th Street,
of Vine Street            (HB38)                     east approach of Vine
                                                     Street
                          Main Street and 2nd Street North and south approaches
Main Street               (HB48)                     of 2nd Street with Main
                                                     Street
                          Main Street and 3rd Street North and south approaches
Main Street               (HB49)                     of 3rd Street with Main
                                                     Street
Main Street               Main Street and Agnes      North approach of Agnes
                          Street (HB46)              Street with Main Street
                          Main Street and Hill Park  South approach of Hill
Main Street               Drive (HB51)               Park Drive with Main
                                                     Street
Main Street               Main Street and Orchard    South approach of Orchard
                          Street (HB45)              Street with Main Street
Main Street               Main Street and Short      South approach of Short
                          Street (HB47)              Street with Main Street
Vine Street               Vine Street and 3rd Street South approach of 3rd
                          (HB37)                     Street with Vine Street
Vine Street               Vine Street and Neukam     North approach of Neukam
                          Street (HB39)              Street with Vine Street
                          Vine Street, Dubois Cuzco  North approach, left turn
Vine Street and Dubois    Road, and Dubois Road NE   of Dubois Road NE with
Cuzco Road                (HB40)                     Vine Street and Dubois
                                                     Road NE
                          Walnut Street and 2nd      North and south approaches
Walnut Street             Street (HB42)              of 2nd Street with Walnut
                                                     Street
                          Walnut Street and 3rd      North and south approaches
Walnut Street             Street (HB43)              of 3rd Street with Walnut
                                                     Street
Walnut Street             Walnut Street and Agnes    South approach of Agnes
                          Street (HB41)              Street with Walnut Street
 
   (K)   Harbison Township, community of Haysville.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection                Location of Stop Sign(s)
Charles Street          Charles Street and Church   South approach of Church
                        Street (HB5)                Street with Charles Street
                        Hartsfield Street and Seitz East approach of Seitz
Hartsfield Street       Street (HB6)                Street with Hartsfield
                                                    Street
                        Haysville Road W, Cemetery  East approach of Main
Haysville Road W        Street, and Main Street     Street with Haysville Road
                        (HB13)                      W
                        Haysville Road W and Church North approach of Church
Haysville Road W        Street (HB12)               Street with Haysville Road
                                                    W
                        Haysville Road W and        North approach of
Haysville Road W        Hartsfield Street (HB10)    Hartsfield Street with
                                                    Haysville Road W
                        Haysville Road W and Park   North and south approaches
Haysville Road W        Street (HB11)               of Park Street with
                                                    Haysville Road W
Park Street             Park Street and Park Drive  West approach of Park Drive
                        (HB14)                      with Park Street
Park Street             Park Street and Park Drive  West approach of Park Drive
                        (HB15)                      with Park Street
Seitz Street            Seitz Street and Church     North approach of Church
                        Street (HB8)                Street with Seitz Street
Seitz Street            Seitz Street and Church     South approach of Church
                        Street (HB9)                Street with Seitz Street
Seitz Street            Seitz Street and Park       South approach of Park
                        Street (HB7)                Street with Seitz Street
 
   (L)   Jackson Township.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)   Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
                                                     East and west approaches
                          Co. Rd. 400 S, Co. Rd. 600 of Co. Rd. 400 S, north
-                         E, and Co. Rd. 650 E       approach of Co. Rd. 600 E,
                          (JA11)                     south approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     650 E
                                                     East and west approaches
-                         Co. Rd. 650 S and Co. Rd.  of Co. Rd. 650 S, north
                          500 E (JA53)               and south approaches of
                                                     Co. Rd. 500 E
                                                     North and south approaches
-                         Co. Rd. 700 E and Co. Rd.  of Co. Rd. 700 E, east and
                          400 S (JA12)               west approaches of Co. Rd.
                                                     400 S
Club Road                 Club Road and Co. Rd. 550  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          S (JA16)                   550 S with Club Road
Club Road                 Club Road and Co. Rd. 600  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          S (JA41)                   600 S with Club Road
                          Club Road and Co. Rd. 650  East and west approaches
Club Road                 S (JA50)                   of Co. Rd. 650 S with Club
                                                     Road
Club Road                 Club Road and Co. Rd. 675  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          S (JA52)                   675 S with Club Road
Co. Rd. 50 E              Co. Rd. 50 E and Co. Rd.   East approach of Co. Rd.
                          450 S (JA13)               450 S with Co. Rd. 50 E
Co. Rd. 50 E              Co. Rd. 50 E and Deer      East approach of Deer
                          Trail (JA61)               Trail with Co. Rd. 50 E
Co. Rd. 350 S, south                                 North approach of St.
approach of St. Anthony   Co. Rd. 350 S and St.      Anthony Road W with Co.
Road W                    Anthony Road W (JA9)       Rd. 350 S, south approach
                                                     of St. Anthony Road W
Co. Rd. 400 S and Co. Rd. Co. Rd. 400 S, Co. Rd. 75  South approach of Co. Rd.
75 E                      E, and Co. Rd. 50 E (JA6)  50 E with Co. Rd. 400 S
                                                     and Co. Rd. 75 E
Co. Rd. 420 S             Co. Rd. 420 S and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          170 E (JA14)               170 E with Co. Rd. 420 S
Co. Rd. 450 S             Co. Rd. 450 S and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          450 E (JA25)               450 E with Co. Rd. 450 S
Co. Rd. 450 S             Co. Rd. 450 S and Deer     South approach of Deer
                          Trail (JA62)               Trail with Co. Rd. 450 S
                          Co. Rd. 450 S and Rolling  North approach of Rolling
Co. Rd. 450 S             Ridge Drive (JA63)         Ridge Drive with Co. Rd.
                                                     450 S
Co. Rd. 550 S             Co. Rd. 550 S and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          100 E (JA38)               100 E with Co. Rd. 550 S
Co. Rd. 550 S             Co. Rd. 550 S and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          245 E (JA40)               245 E with Co. Rd. 550 S
Co. Rd. 600 E             Co. Rd. 600 E and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          650 S (JA42)               650 S with Co. Rd. 600 E
                                                     South approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 600 S, north      Co. Rd. 600 S and Co. Rd.  245 E with Co. Rd. 600 S,
approach of Co. Rd. 245 E 245 E (JA47)               north approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     245 E
Co. Rd. 650 E             Co. Rd. 650 E and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          450 S (JA36)               450 S with Co. Rd. 650 E
Co. Rd. 650 S             Co. Rd. 650 S and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          400 E (JA51)               400 E with Co. Rd. 650 S
Co. Rd. 700 E             Co. Rd. 700 E and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          650 E (JA37)               650 E with Co. Rd. 700 E
Co. Rd. 700 S and Co. Rd. Co. Rd. 700 S, Co. Rd. 75  West approach of Co. Rd.
75 E                      E, and Co. Rd. 660 S       660 E with Co. Rd. 700 S
                          (JA43)                     and Co. Rd. 75 E
                                                     South approach of
Countrywood Estates Road, Countrywood Estates Road   Countrywood Estates Road,
east and west approaches  and Countrywood Estates    with east and west
                          Road (JA7)                 approaches of Countrywood
                                                     Estates Road
                                                     East approach of
Countrywood Estates Road, Countrywood Estates Road   Countrywood Estates Road,
west and north approaches and Countrywood Estates    with west and north
                          Road (JA8)                 approaches of Countrywood
                                                     Estates Road
                                                     East approach of Walnut
Hickory Lane, west        Hickory Lane and Walnut    Drive with Hickory Lane,
approach of Walnut Drive  Drive (JA46)               west approach of Walnut
                                                     Drive
                          Kyana Road and Kyana Road  East approach of Kyana
Kyana Road                Extension (JA54)           Road Extension with Kyana
                                                     Road
Maple Drive               Maple Drive and Hickory    South approach of Hickory
                          Lane (JA45)                Lane with Maple Drive
Maple Drive, south        Maple Drive and Oak Lane   North approach of Oak Lane
approach of Oak Lane      (JA44)                     with Maple Drive, south
                                                     approach of Oak Lane
Old Road 162              Old Road 162 and Co. Rd.   East approach of Co. Rd.
                          660 S (JA48)               660 S with Old Road 162
                          Old Road 162 and Old Road  Northwest approach of Old
Old Road 162              162 Extension (JA55)       Road 162 Extension with
                                                     Old Road 162
                                                     Southeast approach of Old
Old Road 162, north and   Old Road 162 and Old Road  Road 162 Extension, north
south approaches          162 Extension (JA49)       and south approaches of
                                                     Old Road 162
                          Old Road 162 and Old Road  North approach of Old
Old Road 162, south and   162, community of          State 162, with south and
west approaches           Bretzville (JA39)          west approaches of Old
                                                     Road 162
                          Rolling Ridge Drive and    East approach of Megan
Rolling Ridge Drive       Megan Court (JA60)         Court with Rolling Ridge
                                                     Drive
Santine Road              Santine Road and Co. Rd.   East approach of Co. Rd.
                          400 S (JA10)               400 S with Santine Road
                          Santine Road and Rolling   South approach of Rolling
Santine Road              Ridge Drive (JA59)         Ridge Drive with Santine
                                                     Road
                          Schnellville Road Road and North approach of
Schnellville Road         Celestine Road S (JA4)     Celestine Road S with
                                                     Schnellville Road
                          Schnellville Road and Co.  South approach of Co. Rd.
Schnellville Road         Rd. 600 E (JA3)            600 E with Schnellville
                                                     Road
                          Schnellville Road and Co.  South approach of Co. Rd.
Schnellville Road         Rd. 700 E (JA5)            700 E with Schnellville
                                                     Road
                          St. Anthony Road N and Co. West approach of Co. Rd.
St. Anthony Road N        Rd. 250 S (JA2)            250 S with St. Anthony
                                                     Road N
                          St. Anthony Road W and Co. East approach of Co. Rd.
St. Anthony Road W        Rd. 250 S (JA1)            250 S with St. Anthony
                                                     Road W
                                                     West approach of Co. Rd.
St. Anthony Road W, east  St. Anthony Road W and Co. 450 S with St. Anthony
approach of Co. Rd. 450 S Rd. 450 S (JA15)           Road W, east approach of
                                                     Co. Rd. 450 S
 
   (M)   Jackson Township, community of St. Anthony.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)   Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
                                                     North and south approaches
-                         Cross Street and Co. Rd.   of Cross Street, east and
                          450 S (JA22)               west approaches of Co. Rd.
                                                     450 S
                          Co. Rd. 450 S and St.      South approach of St.
Co. Rd. 450 S             Joseph Street (JA21)       Joseph Street with Co. Rd.
                                                     450 S
                                                     West approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 450 S, east       Co. Rd. 450 S and St.      450 S, south approach of
approach                  Johns Street (JA20)        St. Johns Street, with the
                                                     east approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     450 S
                                                     North approach of Sycamore
Co. Rd. 450 S, west       Co. Rd. 450 S and Sycamore Street, east approach of
approach                  Street (JA24)              Co. Rd. 450 S, with the
                                                     west approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     450 S
Cross Street              Cross Street and South     West approach of South
                          Street (JA29)              Street with Cross Street
                          Cross Street, Santine      East and west approaches
Cross Street and Santine  Road, and Indiana Street   of Indiana Street with
Road                      (JA18)                     Cross Street and Santine
                                                     Road
Ohio Street               Ohio Street and Indiana    West approach of Indiana
                          Street (JA19)              Street with Ohio Street
                                                     East approach of Co. Rd.
Ohio Street, west         Ohio Street and Co. Rd.    450 S with Ohio Street,
approach of Co. Rd. 450 S 450 S (JA23)               west approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     450 S
                          Santine Road, St. Anthony  North approach of St.
Santine Road              Road N, and Ohio Street    Anthony Road N, south
                          (JA17)                     approach of Ohio Street
                                                     with Santine Road
                          South Street and St.       South approach of St.
South Street              Anthony Road S (JA26)      Anthony Road S with South
                                                     Street
                          South Street and St.       North approach of St.
South Street              Joseph Street (JA28)       Joseph Street with South
                                                     Street
                          South Street and St. Johns North approach of St.
South Street              Street (JA27)              Johns Street with South
                                                     Street
 
   (N)   Jackson Township, community of St. Marks.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)   Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
2nd Street                2nd Street and Main Street West approach of Main
                          (JA35)                     Street with 2nd Street
                          3rd Street and Chestnut    East and west approaches
3rd Street                Street (JA31)              of Chestnut Street with
                                                     3rd Street
3rd Street                3rd Street and Main Street East approach of Main
                          (JA32)                     Street with 3rd Street
                                                     North approach of 2nd
Chestnut Street, south    Chestnut Street and 2nd    Street with Chestnut
approach of 2nd Street    Street (JA33)              Street, south approach of
                                                     2nd Street
Co. Rd. 450 E             Co. Rd. 450 E and Chestnut East approach of Chestnut
                          Street (JA30)              Street with Co. Rd. 450 E
Co. Rd. 500 E             Co. Rd. 500 E and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          450 E (JA56)               450 E with Co. Rd. 500 E
                                                     West approach of Front
Co. Rd. 500 E, east       Co. Rd. 500 E and Front    Street with Co. Rd. 500 E,
approach of Front Street  Street (JA34)              east approach of Front
                                                     Street
                                                     South approach of Co. Rd.
Front Street, north       Front Street and Co. Rd.   450 E with Front Street,
approach of Co. Rd. 450 E 450 E (JA57)               north approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     450 E
                                                     North approach of Co. Rd.
St. Anthony Road S, east  St. Anthony Road S and Co. 450 E with St. Anthony
approach of Co. Rd. 450 E Rd. 450 E (JA58)           Road S, east approach of
                                                     Co. Rd. 450 E
 
   (O)   Jefferson Township.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)   Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
                          Conservation Club Road and North approach of Co. Rd.
Conservation Club Road    Co. Rd. 1025 E (JE24)      1025 E with Conservation
                                                     Club Road
                          Conservation Club Road and North approach of Co. Rd.
Conservation Club Road    Co. Rd. 1100 E (JE23)      1100 E with Conservation
                                                     Club Road
Conservation Club Road,                              South approach of Mentor
north approach of Mentor  Conservation Club Road and Road S with Conservation
Road S                    Mentor Road S (JE28)       Club Road, north approach
                                                     of Mentor Road S
Co. Rd. 350 S, west                                  South approach of Kings
approach of Kings Ridge   Kings Ridge Road and Co.   Ridge Road with Co. Rd.
Road                      Rd. 350 S (JE17)           350 S, west approach of
                                                     Kings Ridge Road
                          Co. Rd. 1000 E and Co. Rd. Northeast approach of Co.
Co. Rd. 1000 E            450 S (JE21)               Rd. 450 S with Co. Rd.
                                                     1000 E
                          Co. Rd. 1025 E and Mentor  West approach of Mentor
Co. Rd. 1025 E            Cemetery Road (JE16)       Cemetery Road with Co. Rd.
                                                     1025 E
Co. Rd. 1175 E            Co. Rd. 1175 E and Co. Rd. West approach of Co. Rd.
                          425 S (JE22)               425 S with Co. Rd. 1175 E
                                                     Northeast approach of
Harts Gravel Road, south  Harts Gravel Road and      Kings Ridge Road with
approach of Kings Ridge   Kings Ridge Road (JE18)    Harts Gravel Road, south
Road                                                 approach of Kings Ridge
                                                     Road
Kyana Road                Kyana Road and Co. Rd. 625 East approach of Co. Rd.
                          S (JE25)                   625 S with Kyana Road
Kyana Road                Kyana Road and Co. Rd. 700 West approach of Co. Rd.
                          S (JE26)                   700 S with Kyana Road
                                                     South approach of Schnell
Kyana Road, north         Kyana Road and Schnell     Road with Kyana Road,
approach of Schnell Road  Road (JE29)                north approach of Schnell
                                                     Road
Mentor Road S             Mentor Road S and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          575 S (JE34)               575 S with Mentor Road S
                          Mentor Road S and Taylor   South approach of Taylor
Mentor Road S             Hollow Road (JE31)         Hollow Road with Mentor
                                                     Road S
                                                     West approach of Co. Rd.
Pine Ridge Road, east     Pine Ridge Road and Co.    400 S with Pine Ridge
approach of Co. Rd. 400 S Rd. 400 S (JE11)           Road, east approach of Co.
                                                     Rd. 400 S
                                                     East approach of Co. Rd.
Pine Ridge Road, west     Pine Ridge Road and Co.    400 S with Pine Ridge
approach of Co. Rd. 400 S Rd. 400 S (JE12)           Road, west approach of Co.
                                                     Rd. 400 S
                                                     West approach of Co. Rd.
Pine Ridge Road, east     Pine Ridge Road and Co.    490 S with Pine Ridge
approach of Co. Rd. 490 S Rd. 490 S (JE19)           Road, east approach of Co.
                                                     Rd. 490 S
                          Schnell Road and Co. Rd.   East and west approaches
Schnell Road              400 S (JE13)               of Co. Rd. 400 S with
                                                     Schnell Road
Schnell Road              Schnell Road and Co. Rd.   East approach of Co. Rd.
                          500 S (JE20)               500 S with Schnell Road
Schnell Road              Schnell Road and Co. Rd.   West approach of Co. Rd.
                          625 S (JE27)               625 S with Schnell Road
Schnell Road              Schnell Road and Mentor    East approach of Mentor
                          Road S (JE30)              Road S with Schnell Road
                          Schnellville Road and Co.  North approach of Co. Rd.
Schnellville Road         Rd. 820 E (JE9)            820 E with Schnellville
                                                     Road
                          Schnellville Road and Co.  North approach of Co. Rd.
Schnellville Road         Rd. 975 E (JE14)           975 E with Schnellville
                                                     Road
                          Schnellville Road and Co.  North and south approaches
Schnellville Road         Rd. 1025 E (JE15)          of Co. Rd. 1025 E with
                                                     Schnellville Road
                          Schnellville Road and      South approach of Schnell
Schnellville Road         Schnell Road (JE10)        Road with Schnellville
                                                     Road
                          Taylor Hollow Road and Co. West approach of Co. Rd.
Taylor Hollow Road        Rd. 880 E (JE32)           880 E with Taylor Hollow
                                                     Road
                          Taylor Hollow Road and     East approach of Spencer
Taylor Hollow Road        Spencer Cemetery Road      Cemetery Road with Taylor
                          (JE33)                     Hollow Road
 
   (P)   Jefferson Township, community of Schnellville.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
                        Co. Rd. 800 E and Market   East and west approaches of
Co. Rd. 800 E           Street (JE5)               Market Street with Co. Rd.
                                                   800 E
Market Street           Market Street and Elm      South approach of Elm Street
                        Street (JE2)               with Market Street
Schnellville Road       Schnellville Road and Co.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                        Rd. 800 E (JE6)            800 E with Schnellville Road
Schnellville Road       Schnellville Road and Elm  North approach of Elm Street
                        Street (JE4)               with Schnellville Road
Schnellville Road       Schnellville Road and Main East approach of Main Street
                        Street (JE8)               with Schnellville Road
                        Schnellville Road and      West approach of Market
Schnellville Road       Market Street (JE1)        Street with Schnellville
                                                   Road
Schnellville Road       Schnellville Road and Pine South approach of Pine Ridge
                        Ridge Road (JE3)           Road with Schnellville Road
                        Schnellville Road and      North approach of Walnut
Schnellville Road       Walnut Street (JE7)        Street with Schnellville
                                                   Road
 
   (Q)   Madison Township.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)   Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
                          Alder Creek Drive and Oak  North approach of Oak
Alder Creek Drive         Ridge Drive (MD36)         Ridge Drive with Alder
                                                     Creek Drive
                          Co. Rd. 50 N and Co. Rd.   North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 50 N              900 W (MD57)               of Co. Rd. 900 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 50 N
Co. Rd. 100 S             Co. Rd. 100 S and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          400 W (MD72)               400 W with Co. Rd. 100 S
                          Co. Rd. 100 S and Co. Rd.  North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 100 S             900 W (MD67)               of Co. Rd. 900 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 100 S
                                                     South approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 100 S, north      Co. Rd. 100 S and Co. Rd.  450 W with Co. Rd. 100 S,
approach of Co. Rd. 450 W 450 W (MD71)               north approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     450 W
                          Co. Rd. 150 N and Co. Rd.  North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 150 N             750 W (MD42)               of Co. Rd. 750 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 150 N
Co. Rd. 150 N             Co. Rd. 150 N and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          490 W (MD47)               490 W with Co. Rd. 150 N
Co. Rd. 150 N             Co. Rd. 150 N and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          620 W (MD43)               620 W with Co. Rd. 150 N
                          Co. Rd. 150 N and          South approach of
Co. Rd. 150 N             Wheatland Drive (MD48)     Wheatland Drive with Co.
                                                     Rd. 150 N
Co. Rd. 150 N and Co. Rd. Co. Rd. 150 N, Co. Rd. 900 South approach of Co. Rd.
900 W                     W, and Co. Rd. 875 W       875 W with Co. Rd. 150 N
                          (MD41)                     and Co. Rd. 900 W
Co. Rd. 160 S             Co. Rd. 160 S and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          900 W (MD73)               900 W with Co. Rd. 160 S
Co. Rd. 180 N             Co. Rd. 180 N and Shamrock North approach of Shamrock
                          Lane (MD34)                Lane with Co. Rd. 180 N
Co. Rd. 200 S             Co. Rd. 200 S and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          250 S (MD76)               250 S with Co. Rd. 200 S
                          Co. Rd. 300 N and Co. Rd.  North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 300 N             800 W (MD1)                of Co. Rd. 800 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 300 N
                          Co. Rd. 300 N and Co. Rd.  North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 300 N             750 W (MD2)                of Co. Rd. 750 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 300 N
Co. Rd. 400 W             Co. Rd. 400 W and Shiloh   West approach of Shiloh
                          Road (MD56)                Road with Co. Rd. 400 W
Co. Rd. 400 W             Co. Rd. 400 W and Skyview  East approach of Skyview
                          Drive (MD55)               Drive with Co. Rd. 400 W
Co. Rd. 450 W             Co. Rd. 450 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          230 N (MD30)               230 N with Co. Rd. 450 W
Co. Rd. 450 W             Co. Rd. 450 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          235 N (MD29)               235 N with Co. Rd. 450 W
Co. Rd. 460 W             Co. Rd. 460 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          235 N (MD28)               235 N with Co. Rd. 460 W
                          Co. Rd. 490 W and County   West approach of County
Co. Rd. 490 W             Farm Road (MD63)           Farm Road with Co. Rd. 490
                                                     W
Co. Rd. 490 W             Co. Rd. 490 W and Ladino   East approach of Ladino
                          Lane (MD52)                Lane with Co. Rd. 490 W
Co. Rd. 490 W             Co. Rd. 490 W and Timothy  East approach of Timothy
                          Lane (MD50)                Lane with Co. Rd. 490 W
Co. Rd. 500 W             Co. Rd. 500 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          300 N (MD4)                300 N with Co. Rd. 500 W
Co. Rd. 500 W             Co. Rd. 500 W and Flint    West approach of Flint
                          Avenue (MD87)              Avenue with Co. Rd. 500 W
Co. Rd. 500 W             Co. Rd. 500 W and          East approach of Killarney
                          Killarney Court (MD39)     Court with Co. Rd. 500 W
Co. Rd. 500 W             Co. Rd. 500 W and Oak      West approach of Oak Ridge
                          Ridge Drive (MD38)         Drive with Co. Rd. 500 W
                          Co. Rd. 500 W and St.      East approach of St.
Co. Rd. 500 W             Patrick Court (MD40)       Patrick Court with Co. Rd.
                                                     500 W
                                                     West approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 500 W, east       Co. Rd. 500 W and Co. Rd.  150 N with Co. Rd. 500 W,
approach of Co. Rd. 150 N 150 N (MD46)               east approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     150 N
Co. Rd. 550 W             Co. Rd. 550 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          300 S (MD85)               300 S with Co. Rd. 550 W
Co. Rd. 600 W             Co. Rd. 600 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          100 S (MD70)               100 S with Co. Rd. 600 W
Co. Rd. 600 W             Co. Rd. 600 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          150 N (MD44)               150 N with Co. Rd. 600 W
Co. Rd. 600 W             Co. Rd. 600 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          200 N (MD7)                200 N with Co. Rd. 600 W
Co. Rd. 600 W             Co. Rd. 600 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          250 N (MD6)                250 N with Co. Rd. 600 W
Co. Rd. 600 W             Co. Rd. 600 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          300 S (MD80)               300 S with Co. Rd. 600 W
Co. Rd. 600 W             Co. Rd. 600 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          320 N (MD3)                320 N with Co. Rd. 600 W
Co. Rd. 600 W             Co. Rd. 600 W and Ell      East approach of Ell Creek
                          Creek Road (MD75)          Road with Co. Rd. 600 W
                          Co. Rd. 600 W and Kessner  East approach of Kessner
Co. Rd. 600 W             Bridge Road (MD81)         Bridge Road with Co. Rd.
                                                     600 W
                                                     West approach of Division
Co. Rd. 600 W, east       Co. Rd. 600 W and Division Road with Co. Rd. 600 W,
approach of Division Road Road (MD60)                east approach of Division
                                                     Road
                                                     East approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 600 W, north      Co. Rd. 600 W and Co. Rd.  150 N with Co. Rd. 600 W,
approach                  150 N (MD45)               south approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     600 W with Co. Rd. 150 N
Co. Rd. 620 W             Co. Rd. 620 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          50 N (MD59)                50 N with Co. Rd. 620 W
                          Co. Rd. 650 W and Co. Rd.  East and west approaches
Co. Rd. 650 W             100 S (MD69)               of Co. Rd. 100 S with Co.
                                                     Rd. 650 W
Co. Rd. 650 W             Co. Rd. 650 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          260 S (MD78)               260 S with Co. Rd. 650 W
Co. Rd. 650 W             Co. Rd. 650 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          300 S (MD79)               300 S with Co. Rd. 650 W
                          Co. Rd. 750 W and Co. Rd.  East and west approaches
Co. Rd. 750 W             200 N (MD5)                of Co. Rd. 200 N with Co.
                                                     Rd. 750 W
Co. Rd. 800 W             Co. Rd. 800 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          50 S (MD66)                50 S with Co. Rd. 800 W
                          Co. Rd. 800 W and Co. Rd.  East and west approaches
Co. Rd. 800 W             100 S (MD68)               of Co. Rd. 100 S with Co.
                                                     Rd. 800 W
Co. Rd. 800 W             Co. Rd. 800 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          160 S (MD74)               160 S with Co. Rd. 800 W
Co. Rd. 800 W             Co. Rd. 800 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          300 S (MD77)               300 S with Co. Rd. 800 W
                                                     West approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 800 W, east       Co. Rd. 800 W and Co. Rd.  50 N with Co. Rd. 800 W,
approach of Co. Rd. 50 N  50 N (MD58)                east approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     50 N
                          Division Road and Co. Rd.  North and south approaches
Division Road             450 W (MD65)               of Co. Rd. 450 W with
                                                     Division Road
Division Road             Division Road and Stewart  North approach of Stewart
                          Road (MD62)                Road with Division Road
Flint Avenue              Flint Avenue and Fern      North approach of Fern
                          Court (MD88)               Court with Flint Avenue
Flint Avenue              Flint Avenue and Ivy Court North approach of Ivy
                          (MD89)                     Court with Flint Avenue
                          Kessner Bridge Road and    South approach of Co. Rd.
Kessner Bridge Road       Co. Rd. 550 W (MD82)       550 W with Kessner Bridge
                                                     Road
                          Kessner Bridge Road, Co.   North and south approaches
Kessner Bridge Road and   Rd. 150 S, and Ell Creek   of Ell Creek Road with
Co. Rd. 150 S             Road (MD83)                Kessner Bridge Road and
                                                     Co. Rd. 150 S
                          Ladino Lane and Hayland    North and south approaches
Ladino Lane               Drive (MD53)               of Hayland Drive with
                                                     Ladino Lane
                          Ladino Lane and Wheatland  North approach of
Ladino Lane               Drive (MD54)               Wheatland Drive with
                                                     Ladino Lane
                          Oak Ridge Drive and        South approach of
Oak Ridge Drive           Countryside Lane (MD35)    Countryside Lane with Oak
                                                     Ridge Drive
                                                     North approach of Oak
Oak Ridge Drive, east     Oak Ridge Drive and Alder  Ridge Drive, south
approach                  Creek Drive (MD37)         approach of Alder Creek
                                                     with the east approach of
                                                     Oak Ridge Drive
                          Shamrock Lane and          West approach of
Shamrock Lane             Leprechaun Lane (MD32)     Leprechaun Lane with
                                                     Shamrock Lane
Shiloh Road               Shiloh Road and Co. Rd.    West approach of Co. Rd.
                          150 N (MD49)               150 N with Shiloh Road
Shiloh Road               Shiloh Road and Co. Rd.    East approach of Co. Rd.
                          180 N (MD33)               180 N with Shiloh Road
                          Shiloh Road and Leprechaun East approach of
Shiloh Road               Lane (MD31)                Leprechaun Lane with
                                                     Shiloh Road
Stewart Road              Stewart Road and Sycamore  West approach of Sycamore
                          Lane (MD61)                Lane with Stewart Road
Stewart Road and Co. Rd.  Stewart Road, Co. Rd. 450  North approach of Co. Rd.
450 W                     W, and Co. Rd. 490 W       490 W with Stewart Road
                          (MD64)                     and Co. Rd. 450 W
Voelkel Road              Voelkel Road and Co. Rd.   West approach of Co. Rd.
                          300 S (MD86)               300 S with Voelkel Road
Voelkel Road, north                                  East approach of Ell Creek
approach of Ell Creek     Voelkel Road and Ell Creek Road with Voelkel Road,
Road                      Road (MD84)                north approach of Ell
                                                     Creek Road
Wheatland Drive           Wheatland Drive and Clover East approach of Clover
                          Court (MD51)               Court with Wheatland Drive
 
   (R)   Madison Township, community of Ireland.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection                Location of Stop Sign(s)
                                                    North and south approaches
-                       Grant Street and Main       of Grant Street, east and
                        Street (MD16)               west approaches of Main
                                                    Street
                                                    North and south approaches
-                       Walnut Street and St. James of St. James Street, east
                        Street (MD11)               and west approaches of
                                                    Walnut Street
                        Center Street and St. James North and south approaches
Center Street           Street (MD20)               of St. James Street with
                                                    Center Street
Church Avenue           Church Avenue and Darry     South approach of Darry
                        Street (MD10)               Street with Church Avenue
Church Avenue           Church Avenue and Dublin    South approach of Dublin
                        Street (MD9)                Street with Church Avenue
Clay Street             Clay Street and Grant       North approach of Grant
                        Street (MD26)               Street with Clay Street
                        Co. Rd. 250 N and Grant     North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 250 N           Street (MD19)               of Grant Street with Co.
                                                    Rd. 250 N
                        Co. Rd. 250 N and St. James North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 250 N           Street (MD18)               of St. James Street with
                                                    Co. Rd. 250 N
Co. Rd. 500 W           Co. Rd. 500 W and Center    West approach of Center
                        Street (MD22)               Street with Co. Rd. 500 W
Co. Rd. 500 W           Co. Rd. 500 W and Church    East approach of Church
                        Avenue (MD8)                Avenue with Co. Rd. 500 W
Co. Rd. 500 W           Co. Rd. 500 W and Clay      West approach of Clay
                        Street (MD27)               Street with Co. Rd. 500 W
Co. Rd. 500 W           Co. Rd. 500 W and Main      West approach of Main
                        Street (MD17)               Street with Co. Rd. 500 W
                        Co. Rd. 500 W and South     East and west approaches of
Co. Rd. 500 W           Street (MD24)               South Street with Co. Rd.
                                                    500 W
                        Co. Rd. 500 W and Walnut    East and west approaches of
Co. Rd. 500 W           Street (MD13)               Walnut Street with Co. Rd.
                                                    500 W
                        Grant Street and Center     East and west approaches of
Grant Street            Street (MD21)               Center Street with Grant
                                                    Street
                        Grant Street and South      East and west approaches of
Grant Street            Street (MD23)               South Street with Grant
                                                    Street
                        James Street and Co. R.     East and west approaches of
James Street            2550 N. (MD18)              C.R. 250 N with James
                                                    Street
South Street            South Street and Ames Lane  North approach of Ames Lane
                        (MD25)                      with South Street
                        St. James Street and Main   East approach of Main
St. James Street        Street (MD15)               Street with St. James
                                                    Street
Walnut Street           Walnut Street and Dublin    North approach of Dublin
                        Street (MD14)               Street with Walnut Street
Walnut Street           Walnut Street and Grant     South approach of Grant
                        Street (MD12)               Street with Walnut Street
 
   (S)   Marion Township.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)   Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
                          Co. Rd. 175 E and Co. Rd.  North and south approaches
-                         300 N (MR17)               of Co. Rd. 175 E, east
                                                     approach of Co. Rd. 300 N
                          Co. Rd. 325 E and Co. Rd.  North and south approaches
-                         300 N (MR21)               of Co. Rd. 325 E, west
                                                     approach of Co. Rd. 300 N
3rd Street                3rd Street and Church      East approach of Church
                          Street (MR13)              Street with 3rd Street
3rd Street                3rd Street and Liberty     East approach of Liberty
                          Street (MR12)              Street with 3rd Street
                          3rd Street and Payne       East and west approaches
3rd Street                Street (MR11)              of Payne Street with 3rd
                                                     Street
4th Street                4th Street and Church      West approach of Church
                          Street (MR14)              Street with 4th Street
4th Street                4th Street and Jackson     West approach of Jackson
                          Street (MR9)               Street with 4th Street
                          4th Street and St. Raphael East approach of St.
4th Street                Street (MR10)              Raphael Street with 4th
                                                     Street
4th Street                4th Street and Sycamore    West approach of Sycamore
                          Street (MR5)               Street with 4th Street
                          4th Street and Waterworks  West approach of
4th Street                Street (MR16)              Waterworks Street with 4th
                                                     Street
Co. Rd. 175 E             Co. Rd. 175 E and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          200 N (MR22)               200 N with Co. Rd. 175 E
Co. Rd. 175 E             Co. Rd. 175 E and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          300 N (MR17)               300 N with Co. Rd. 175 E
Co. Rd. 300 N             Co. Rd. 300 N and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          125 E (MR18)               125 E with Co. Rd. 300 N
                                                     South approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 300 N, north      Co. Rd. 175 E and Co. Rd.  175 E with Co. Rd. 300 N,
approach of Co. Rd. 175 E 300 N (MR19)               north approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     175 E
                                                     West approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 325 E, east       Co. Rd. 300 N and Co. Rd.  300 N with Co. Rd. 325 E,
approach of Co. Rd. 300 N 325 E (MR20)               east approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     300 N
                          Co. Rd. 400 E and Hall     East approach of Hall
Co. Rd. 400 E             Creek Road (MR37)          Creek Road with Co. Rd.
                                                     400 E
                                                     Northeast approach of Co.
Greener Road, south       Greener Road and Co. Rd.   Rd. 330 E with Greener
approach of Co. Rd. 330 E 330 E (MR29)               Road, south approach of
                                                     Co. Rd. 330 E
Hall Creek Road           Hall Creek Road and Co.    North approach of Co. Rd.
                          Rd. 500 E (MR30)           500 E with Hall Creek Road
                          Jackson Street and 2nd     North and south approaches
Jackson Street            Street (MR7)               of 2nd Street with Jackson
                                                     Street
                          Jackson Street and 3rd     North and south approaches
Jackson Street            Street (MR8)               of 3rd Street with Jackson
                                                     Street
                          Jackson Street and         North approach of
Jackson Street            Hemmerlein Street (MR6)    Hemmerlein Street with
                                                     Jackson Street
                          Jasper-Dubois Road and     South approach of Beaver
Jasper-Dubois Road        Beaver Lake Road (MR24)    Lake Road with Jasper-
                                                     Dubois Road
                          Jasper-Dubois Road and Co. North approach of Co. Rd.
Jasper-Dubois Road        Rd. 175 E (MR28)           175 E with Jasper-Dubois
                                                     Road
                          Jasper-Dubois Road and Co. West approach of Co. Rd.
Jasper-Dubois Road        Rd. 190 N (MR27)           190 N with Jasper-Dubois
                                                     Road
                          Jasper-Dubois Road and Co. West approach of Co. Rd.
Jasper-Dubois Road        Rd. 300 N (MR25)           300 N with Jasper-Dubois
                                                     Road
                          Jasper-Dubois Road and Co. West approach of Co. Rd.
Jasper-Dubois Road        Rd. 325 E (MR23)           325 E with Jasper-Dubois
                                                     Road
                          Jasper-Dubois Road and     East approach of
Jasper-Dubois Road        Steinbottom Road (MR26)    Steinbottom Road with
                                                     Jasper-Dubois Road
                          Santine Road and Hall      West approach of Hall
Santine Road              Creek Road (MR31)          Creek Road with Santine
                                                     Road
                          Schnellville Road, Co. Rd. North approach of Co. Rd.
Schnellville Road         330 E, and St. Anthony     330 E, south approach of
                          Road N (MR35)              St. Anthony Road N, with
                                                     Schnellville Road
                          Schnellville Road and Co.  North approach of Co. Rd.
Schnellville Road         Rd. 400 E (MR38)           400 E with Schnellville
                                                     Road
                          Schnellville Road and      North approach of Rustic
Schnellville Road         Rustic Acres Road (MR33)   Acres Road with
                                                     Schnellville Road
                          Schnellville Road and      North and south approaches
Schnellville Road         Santine Road (MR39)        of Santine Road with
                                                     Schnellville Road
                          Schnellville Road and St.  South approach of St.
Schnellville Road         Anthony Road W (MR32)      Anthony Road W with
                                                     Schnellville Road
                          St. Anthony Road N and Co. West approach of Co. Rd.
St. Anthony Road N        Rd. 230 S (MR36)           230 S with St. Anthony
                                                     Road N
                          St. Anthony Road W and Co. East and west approaches
St. Anthony Road W        Rd. 230 S (MR34)           of Co. Rd. 230 S with St.
                                                     Anthony Road W
                          Sycamore Street and 2nd    North and south approaches
Sycamore Street           Street (MR3)               of 2nd Street with
                                                     Sycamore Street
                          Sycamore Street and 3rd    North and south approaches
Sycamore Street           Street (MR4)               of 3rd Street with
                                                     Sycamore Street
                          Sycamore Street and        South approach of
Sycamore Street           Hemmerlein Street (MR1)    Hemmerlein Street with
                                                     Sycamore Street
                          Sycamore Street and Short  North approach of Short
Sycamore Street           Street (MR2)               Street with Sycamore
                                                     Street
                          Waterworks Street and 3rd  North approach of 3rd
Waterworks Street         Street (MR15)              Street with Waterworks
                                                     Street
 
   (T)   Patoka Township.
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection Location of Stop Sign(s)
Preferential Highway(s)   Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
                                                     North approach of Cherry
                          Cherry Street, Ferdinand   Street, east approach of
-                         Road NW, Co. Rd. 200 W,    Ferdinand Road NW, south
                          and Sunset Drive (PA31)    approach of Co. Rd. 200 W,
                                                     west approach of Sunset
                                                     Drive
                                                     West approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     450 S with Co. Rd. 650 W,
                          Co. Rd. 650 W, Co. Rd. 450 east approach of Duff Road
-                         S, and Duff Road SE (PA18) SE with Co. Rd. 650 W,
                                                     north and south approaches
                                                     of Co. Rd. 650 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 450 S and Duff Road SE
Co. Rd. 75 W              Co. Rd. 75 W and 1st       West approach of 1st
                          Street (PA32)              Street with Co. Rd. 75 W
Co. Rd. 75 W              Co. Rd. 75 W and Co. Rd.   West approach of Co. Rd.
                          375 S (PA13)               375 S with Co. Rd. 75 W
Co. Rd. 75 W              Co. Rd. 75 W and Co. Rd.   East approach of Co. Rd.
                          660 S (PA33)               660 S with Co. Rd. 75 W
Co. Rd. 75 W              Co. Rd. 75 W and Co. Rd.   West approach of Co. Rd.
                          700 S (PA34)               700 S with Co. Rd. 75 W
Co. Rd. 130 W             Co. Rd. 130 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          375 S (PA12)               375 S with Co. Rd. 130 W
                          Co. Rd. 350 S and Co. Rd.  North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 350 S             720 W (PA2)                of Co. Rd. 720 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 350 S
                          Co. Rd. 350 S and Co. Rd.  North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 350 S             800 W (PA1)                of Co. Rd. 800 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 350 S
                          Co. Rd. 400 S and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 400 S             400 S Extension (PA10)     400 S Extension with Co.
                                                     Rd. 400 S
Co. Rd. 400 S             Co. Rd. 400 S and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          550 W (PA9)                550 W with Co. Rd. 400 S
                          Co. Rd. 400 S and North    South approach of North
Co. Rd. 400 S             Cherry Street (PA11)       Cherry Street with Co. Rd.
                                                     400 S
Co. Rd. 400 W             Co. Rd. 400 W and Sunset   East approach of Sunset
                          Drive (PA30)               Drive with Co. Rd. 400 W
Co. Rd. 450 S             Co. Rd. 450 S and Co. Rd.  North approach of Co. Rd.
                          800 W (PA17)               800 W with Co. Rd. 450 S
Co. Rd. 500 S and Duff    Co. Rd. 500 S, Duff Road   South approach of Co. Rd.
Road SE                   SE, and Co. Rd. 525 W      525 W with Co. Rd. 500 S
                          (PA20)                     and Duff Road SE
Co. Rd. 500 W             Co. Rd. 500 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          630 S (PA25)               630 S with Co. Rd. 500 W
Co. Rd. 550 W             Co. Rd. 550 W and Voelkel  East approach of Voelkel
                          Road (PA8)                 Road with Co. Rd. 550 W
Co. Rd. 585 W             Co. Rd. 585 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          650 S (PA24)               650 S with Co. Rd. 585 W
Co. Rd. 650 W             Co. Rd. 650 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd.
                          350 S (PA6)                350 S with Co. Rd. 600 W
Co. Rd. 650 W             Co. Rd. 650 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd.
                          400 S (PA7)                400 S with Co. Rd. 600 W
                                                     South approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 700 S, north      Co. Rd. 700 S and Co. Rd.  500 W, with Co. Rd. 700 S,
approach of Co. Rd. 500 W 500 W (PA26)               north approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     500 W
                          Co. Rd. 750 S and Co. Rd.  North and south approaches
Co. Rd. 750 S             400 W (PA41)               of Co. Rd. 400 W with Co.
                                                     Rd. 750 S
Co. Rd. 750 S             Co. Rd. 750 S and Co. Rd.  South approach of Co. Rd.
                          500 W (PA40)               500 W with Co. Rd. 750 S
Co. Rd. 800 S, east                                  South approach of Holland
approach of Holland Road  Co. Rd. 800 S and Holland  Road NE with Co. Rd. 800
NE                        Road NE (PA39)             S, east approach of
                                                     Holland Road NE
                                                     South approach of Co. Rd.
Co.Rd. 850 W, north                                  850 W, west approach of
approach, Co. Rd. 825 W,  Co. Rd. 850 W and Co. Rd.  Co. Rd. 825 W, with Co.
east approach             825 W (PA22)               Rd. 850 W, north approach,
                                                     Co. Rd. 825 W, east
                                                     approach
                                                     West approach of Co. Rd.
Co. Rd. 875 W, east       Co. Rd. 875 W and Co. Rd.  450 S with Co. Rd. 875 W,
approach of Co. Rd. 450 S 450 S (PA16)               east approach of Co. Rd.
                                                     450 S
Duff Road SE              Duff Road SE and Co. Rd.   North approach of Co. Rd.
                          600 W (PA19)               600 W with Duff Road SE
                          Ferdinand Road NW and Co.  North approach of Co. Rd.
Ferdinand Road NW         Rd. 75 W (PA44)            75 W with Ferdinand Road
                                                     NW
                          Ferdinand Road NW and Co.  South approach of Co. Rd.
Ferdinand Road NW         Rd. 100 W (PA43)           100 W with Ferdinand Road
                                                     NW
                          Ferdinand Road NW and Co.  North approach of Co. Rd.
Ferdinand Road NW         Rd. 700 S (PA42)           700 S with Ferdinand Road
                                                     NW
Old Road 64               Old Road 64 and Co. Rd.    South approach of Co. Rd.
                          400 W (PA28)               400 W with Old Road 64
Old Road 64               Old Road 64 and Co. Rd.    North approach of Co. Rd.
                          500 W (PA37)               500 W with Old Road 64
Old Road 64               Old Road 64 and Co. Rd.    North approach of Co. Rd.
                          585 W (PA35)               585 W with Old Road 64
Old Road 64               Old Road 64 and Co. Rd.    West approach of Co. Rd.
                          630 S (PA29)               630 S with Old Road 64
Old Road 64               Old Road 64 and Co. Rd.    West approach of Co. Rd.
                          700 S (PA27)               700 S with Old Road 64
Old Road 64               Old Road 64 and Holland    South approach of Holland
                          Road NE (PA36)             Road NE with Old Road 64
                                                     East approach of Co. Rd.
Old Road 64, west         Old Road 64 and Co. Rd.    750 S, northeast approach
approach                  750 S (PA38)               of Old Road 64, with Old
                                                     Road 64, west approach
Patoka Road               Patoka Road and Co. Rd.    West approach of Co. Rd.
                          350 S (PA14)               350 S with Patoka Road
Patoka Road               Patoka Road and Co. Rd.    East approach of Co. Rd.
                          400 S (PA15)               400 S with Patoka Road
Patoka Road               Patoka Road and Co. Rd.    West approach of Co. Rd.
                          450 S (PA21)               450 S with Patoka Road
Patoka Road               Patoka Road and Old Road   West approach of Old Road
                          64 (PA23)                  64 with Patoka Road
 
   (U)   Patoka Township, community of Duff.
 
Preferential Highway(s) Intersection               Location of Stop Sign(s)
Co. Rd. 350 S           Co. Rd. 350 S and Nicholas North approach of Nicholas
                        Street (PA4)               Street with Co. Rd. 350 S
Co. Rd. 650 W           Co. Rd. 650 W and 2nd      East approach of 2nd Street
                        Street (PA3)               with Co. Rd. 650 W
Co. Rd. 650 W           Co. Rd. 650 W and Co. Rd.  East approach of Co. Rd. 350
                        350 S (PA45)               S with Co. Rd. 650 W
Co. Rd. 650 W           Co. Rd. 650 W and Co. Rd.  West approach of Co. Rd. 350
                        350 S (PA5)                S with Co. Rd. 650 W
 
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-15-1983; Ord. 1986-5, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 92-7, passed
10-19-1992; Ord. 93-2, passed 1-4-1993; Ord. 93-5, passed 6-21-1993; Ord. 98-
10, passed 10-5-1998; Ord. 99-8, passed 10-11-1999; Ord. 99-11, passed 11-1-
1999; Ord. 99-14, passed 12-22-1999; Ord. 2001-01, passed 5-7-2001; Ord. 2001-
6, passed 9-10-2001; Ord. 2002-7, passed 10-7-2002; Ord. 2004-08, passed 8-2-
2004; Ord. 2004-09, passed 8-2-2004; Ord. 2004-10, passed 8-2-2004; Ord. 2004-
11, passed 8-2-2004; Ord. 2004-12, passed 8-16-2004; Ord. 2004-13, passed 8-16-
2004; Ord. 2004-14, passed 8-16-2004; Ord. 2004-15, passed 8-16-2004; Ord.
2004-16, passed 9-7-2004; Ord. 2004-17, passed 9-7-2004; Ord. 2004-20, passed
10-1-2004; Ord. 2004-23, passed 11-1-2004; Ord. 2004-24, passed 12-6-2004; Ord.
2005-12, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 2006-03, passed 6-19-2006; Ord. 2006-6, passed
9-25-2006; Ord. 2006-08, passed 11-20-2006; Ord. 2007-2, passed 4-23-2007; Ord.
2007-10, passed 8-13-2007; Ord. 2007-13, passed 9-10-2007; Ord. 2007-14, passed
10-22-2007; Ord. 2008-02, passed 6-23-2008; Ord.2009-7, passed 11-2-2009; Ord.
2010-2, passed 8-9-2010; Ord. 2014-02, passed 8-4-2014 ; Ord. 2024-01, passed
1-16-2024; Ord. 2025-12, passed 9-15-2025 )
SCHEDULE IV. YIELD SIGNS.
 
Intersection                           Location of Yield Sign(s)
Co. Rd. 500 W and Co. Rd. 150 N (MD46) Right turn of Co. Rd. 500 W with Co. Rd.
                                       150 N
Vine Street, Dubois Cuzco Road, and    Right turn of the north approach of
Dubois Road NE (HB40)                  Dubois Road NE with Vine Street and
                                       Dubois Road NE
 
(Ord. 2004-23, passed 11-1-2004; Ord. 2004-23, passed 12-6-2004)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Restrictive parking
SCHEDULE I. RESTRICTIVE PARKING.
   (A)   Current restrictive parking.
 
Town    Street, Sides           Distance                Time
                                Beginning from east
Dubois  Main Street, north side edge of the pavement on All times
                                2nd street, extending
                                eastward 40 feet
                                Beginning from 325 feet
                                east of the east edge
        South Street, both      of the pavement on Co.
Ireland sides                   Rd. 500 W, extending    All times
                                eastward 50 feet to the
                                driveway for Ireland
                                Elementary School
                                Beginning from east
Ireland South Street, both      edge of the pavement on All times
        sides                   Co. Rd. 500 W extending
                                eastward 100 feet
                                Beginning from 100 feet
        South Street, south     east of the pavement on 6:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.;
Ireland side                    Co. Rd. 500 W,          2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m.
                                extending eastward 225
                                feet
 
   (B)   Violation. Any person violating the provisions of this schedule shall,
upon a finding of such violation, be liable for a fine and judgment in any
amount not to exceed $100.
(Ord. 2012-3, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. 2014-01, passed 8-4-2014; Ord. 2017-02,
passed 5-1-2017)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
91.   RECREATION AND LEISURE
      
92.   NUISANCES; PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
      
93.   ANIMALS
      
94.   FAIR HOUSING
CHAPTER 90: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
   
90.01   Household mercury; removal
   
90.02   Public way safety
   
90.03   Fire protection district
§ 90.01 HOUSEHOLD MERCURY; REMOVAL.
   (A)   The County Solid Waste Management District personnel may assist other
public, or private, sector entities in the collection of household mercury-
containing products.
   (B)   The District shall not engage in the collecting of such items when a
private sector entity in the county area offers collection services for like
items.
   (C)   The District shall not store such mercury-containing items for an
extended period, but shall deliver the same, as soon as possible, to a
qualified collector and processor thereof.
   (D)   Providing such service using District personnel will benefit the
public health, welfare, and safety of the residents of the county.
(Res. 98-1, passed 11-16-1998)
§ 90.02 PUBLIC WAY SAFETY.
   Any person who drops, discharges, or permits to be dropped, or thrown, upon
any roadway or thoroughfare, within the jurisdiction of the county, any
destructive or injurious material, including, but not limited to, litter,
garbage, trash, debris, leaves, grass clippings, or any other vegetation, shall
remove the same.
(Res. 2019-03, passed 10-7-2019)
§ 90.03 FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT.
   (A)   The name of the fire district shall be the Northeast County Fire
Protection District.
   (B)   Said District shall be composed of the following real estate located
in the county to-wit:
      (1)   All of Columbia Township;
      (2)   All of Hall Township north of a line running from the southwest
corner of section 19, township 1 south, range 3 west to the southeast corner of
section 24, township 1 south, range 3 west;
      (3)   All of Marion Township north of a line running from the southwest
corner of section 29, township 1 south, range 4 west to the southwest corner of
section 27, township 1 south, range 4 west, thence north to the half-section
line of said section 27, thence east along the half-section line to the east
section line of said section 27, thence north to the northeast corner of said
section 27, township 1 south, range 4 west, thence east to the northeast corner
of section 25, township 1 south, range 4 west; and
      (4)   All of Harbison Township east of a line running south from the
southwest corner of section 15, township 1 north, range 4 west to the southwest
corner of section 3, township 1 south, range 4 west, thence west on the south
line of section 4, township 1 south, range 4 west to the Patoka River, thence
following the Patoka River southwesterly to the south line of said township.
   (C)   Said District is established for the purpose of providing fire
protection for real and personal property located within said District, to
promote fire prevention activities within the District, and to permit
activities and functions reasonably related to fire protection and prevention.
   (D)   The need exists for the establishment of said District so as to
provide revenues for continuation of fire protection services within the
District.
   (E)   The public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and property
owners of the territory can be assured by the securing of sound financial
planning for the delivery of fire protection services.
   (F)   The costs and damages incurred because of the District is expected to
be less than the benefits to be derived because of the establishment, and such
establishment is not conditioned upon the receipt of any state or federal
grant.
   (G)   The Board of Trustees of said District shall consist of five persons
to be appointed by the County Board of Commissioners, with one such Trustee to
be appointed from each township, or part of a township, contained within the
District, and one Trustee to be appointed at large from within the District,
and with the term of each appointment, except for the original appointments, to
be for a period of four years.
(Ord. 91-13, passed 12-2-1991)
CHAPTER 91: RECREATION AND LEISURE
Section
   
91.01   Fishing, removing fish from waters
   
91.02   Flag policy
§ 91.01 FISHING, REMOVING FISH FROM WATERS.
   (A)   All statutes of the state, and rules and regulations adopted by the
State Department of National Resources pursuant to the statute regarding sport
fishing, shall be applicable to lakes located upon county-owned lakes located
upon county-owned property, except as hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   The daily bag limit per species taken from any subject lake, and the
minimum size limit per species, shall be as follows.
 
Species                  Bag Limit Minimum Size
Catfish                  2         No limit
Largemouth bass          2         14 inches
Panfish, hybrid bluegill 10        10 inches
 
   (C)   Fishing on any lake located in the south half of the northwest quarter
of section 29, township 2 south, range 4 west, shall be prohibited to the
public prior to July 1, 1999; provided, however, that subsequent to June 1,
1999, individuals 16 years of age or less may fish on said lake(s).
   (D)   The County Park Board may, and is now granted authority to, adopt and
enforce rules and regulations to:
      (1)   Establish, open, close, suspend, or limit the use of any lake on
county property;
      (2)   Establish bag and size limits on fish removed from any said lake;
      (3)   Establish limits on the number of individuals using any said lake;
and/or
      (4)   Establish any other necessary rule or regulation to administer this
section.
   (E)   Any such rule or regulation of the County Park Board may change,
amend, modify, or suspend any provision contained in divisions (B) and (C)
above. Any rule or regulation established by said County Park Board shall
become effective only after proper public notice.
   (F)   Any person who violates a provision of this section, or of a rule or
regulation adopted by the County Park Board under authority granted hereunder,
shall commit a Class C infraction.
(Ord. 99-3, passed 2-16-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.02 FLAG POLICY.
   (A)   It shall be the rule and custom of the county to fly the flag of the
United States at half-staff upon the death of currently serving, or retired,
full-time, elected county officials as a mark of respect to their memory. The
flag of the United States shall be flown at half-staff upon receipt of
knowledge of a qualifying event until internment, but never longer than three
days.
   (B)   All actions regarding the United States flag shall be accomplished
with respect for the flag, and as a mark of respect to the lives and deaths of
principal figures to the county government.
   (C)   The County Board of Commissioners shall have the flexibility to fly
flags on county property at half-staff during other periods of mourning at its
sole discretion.
   (D)   The county shall follow, and adhere to, the 4 U.S.C. Ch. 1, in all
other questions of flag use, respect, and etiquette.
(Res. 2018-03, passed 8-6-2018)
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES; PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Trash, junk
   
92.03   Weeds
   
92.04   Abandoned, junk vehicles
   
92.05   Investigation
   
92.06   Notice of violation
   
92.07   Hearing
   
92.08   Remedies
   
92.09   Costs
   
92.10   Enforcement
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED/JUNK VEHICLE.
      (1)   Any vehicle that has remained on private property without the
consent of the owner, or person in control of that property, for more than 48
hours;
      (2)   A vehicle that is mechanically inoperable, or incapable, of
movement by its own locomotion, and that is not being held for, or which is
under, repair to be completed within the next 20 days; or
      (3)   Vehicles without a valid current state registration and license
plate, and left on private property continuously in a location visible from
public property for more than 20 days.
   ACCUMULATE. As it pertains to junk and trash, any one of the following:
      (1)   Improperly collecting junk and trash in an inappropriate storage
container; or
      (2)   Collecting junk and trash in an accumulation greater than three
cubic yards.
   COMPLAINT. Written communication on the county’s designated form, electronic
or hard copy, to an enforcement agent addressing a violation of this chapter,
setting forth the nature and location of the violation, and containing the
written or electronic signature, and contact information, of the reporting
individual. COMPLAINT forms shall be made available at the offices of
enforcement agents and the County Auditor, as well as the county’s website.
   COMPOST. The product produced by the process of composting vegetative matter
and other types of organic material.
   COMPOSTING. The biological treatment process by which microorganisms
decompose the organic components of vegetative matter, and other types of
organic material, under controlled conditions to produce a usable product.
   COUNTY. The County of Dubois, State of Indiana.
   FENCE. Any structure, solid or otherwise, that is a barrier and is used as a
boundary or means of protection, confinement, or concealment. As used in this
chapter, a FENCE shall be 100% opaque. No FENCE shall be constructed of used or
discarded materials that are in disrepair, or any other items including, but
not limited to, pallets, tree trunks, trash, junk or other similar items.
Materials not specifically manufactured for fencing, such as railroad ties,
wooden doors, landscape timbers or utility poles shall not be used for, or in
the construction of a FENCE.
   GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
   HEARING AUTHORITY. The County Board of Commissioners, or any person(s)
designated as such by the Board, under the authority of I.C. 36-7-9-2.
   HIGHWAY or ROAD. The portion of the state or county public highway, or road
system, so designated on the General Highway and Transportation Map, as
amended, which are maintained by the State Department of Transportation or the
County Highway Department.
   JUNK. Accumulation of combustible and non-combustible waste materials. The
term shall include: paper; rags; tin; metals; residue from burning; household
goods including, but not limited to, mattresses, furniture, major appliances,
clothing, and other household items not intended for exposure to rain and other
inclement weather. Trash is considered JUNK.
   MOTOR VEHICLE GRAVEYARD. Any establishment, place of business, or parcel of
real estate which is maintained, used, or operated for storing, or keeping, at
any one time in excess of two non-operating, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or
dismantled motor vehicles, or parts thereof.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. All privately-owned property which is not classified
within the definition of public property.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park, or
other state, county, or municipally-owned property.
   REPORT. The same meaning as COMPLAINT.
   SCRAP METAL PROCESSING FACILITY. An establishment having facilities for
processing iron, steel, or non-ferrous metal, and whose principle product is
scrap iron, steel, or scrap for sale for smelting purposes.
   SECOND VIOLATION. A violation of this chapter that is committed by a person
within 12 months of a previous violation.
   SHERIFF. The duly-elected Sheriff, or a duly-appointed Deputy Sheriff, of
the County Sheriff’s Department.
   STANDARD CONTAINER. Sturdy, tied plastic bags, or durable metal, plastic, or
similarly constructed container designed for the storage of trash. Food scraps,
and other household garbage that attracts animals and/or rodents, must be
placed in a vermin-proof and waterproof container with a tight-fitting lid.
   SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. Any right in real property that may be
affected in a substantial way by actions authorized, or prohibited, in this
chapter, including fee interest, a life estate interest, a mortgage interest,
or an equitable interest of a contract purchaser.
   TRASH. Anything worthless, useless, or discarded; rubbish. TRASH is
considered junk.
   VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, such as an automobile, motorcycle, truck,
trailer, semi-trailer, truck tractor, bus, school bus, motor home, recreational
vehicle, house car, or motor bicycle.
   VISIBLE. Capable of being seen from any public roadway, right-of-way, or
public property, or from privately-held real property.
   WEEDS. Any growth of vegetation, other than trees, bushes, shrubs,
ornamental plants, or agricultural plants, cultivated in an orderly manner for
the purpose of producing food and/or feed.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 3-18-2019 ; Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-6-2024 )
§ 92.02 TRASH, JUNK.
   (A)   No person may establish, operate, cause, or maintain a junkyard, motor
vehicle graveyard, or scrap metal processing facility, or store, or allow
accumulation of, junk on any real estate which is visible or deemed a public
health nuisance, except for the following:
      (1)   Those which are screened by natural objects, plantings, fences, or
other appropriate means so as not to be visible;
      (2)   Those located within areas which are zoned for industrial use under
the authority of law of a municipal zoning ordinance; and
      (3)   Those located within non-zoned industrial areas, as determined by
the State Planning Agency, and approved by the Secretary of the Department of
Transportation.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner, or anyone
having a substantial property interest in real property, including open or
vacant property within the county, to deposit, or allow to remain, on that real
property any trash or junk, which items might provide food or harborage for
insects, rodents, pests, or pose a fire safety hazard.
   (C)   No person shall permit junk or trash to be situated on his or her
property so that the material can be carried by wind, water, or natural forces
to any highway, right-of-way, easement, or to the property of any other person.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to apply to county-owned or
operated recycling, or state-licensed salvage, operations.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to apply to established
compost and composting.
   (F)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to apply to the use of
standard containers, or dumpsters, for the temporary containment of trash or
junk awaiting scheduled disposal. Trash that attracts animals or rodents must
be placed in a vermin-proof and waterproof container with a tight-fitting lid.
Such containers shall be constructed, handled, and placed in a way that will
not promote a safety or health issue.
   (G)   A person who recklessly, knowingly, or intentionally places, or
leaves, junk on a highway, road, right-of-way, or on the property of another
person, commits littering. Evidence that littering was committed from a moving
vehicle, other than a public conveyance, constitutes prima facie evidence that
it was committed by the operator of the vehicle.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 3-18-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 WEEDS.
   (A)   Nothing in the chapter shall be deemed to apply to agricultural plants
or crops, such as hay and pasture.
   (B)   (1)   No owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of real estate located
within the county shall permit said real estate to become overgrown with weeds.
      (2)   The following standards shall be the criteria used in determining
that weed growth is detrimental to, or threatens, public health or safety:
         (a)   Where the real estate is located in a platted subdivision
containing two or more residential structures, grass or other vegetation in
excess of 12 inches in height shall be considered weeds; and
         (b)   In all other areas within the county, weeds, grass, or other
vegetation, excepting actively used agricultural crop land, in excess of 12
inches in height shall be considered weeds where:
            1.   The real estate is located within 50 feet of a county
intersection;
            2.   The real estate is located within a county right-of-way;
            3.   The real estate is located within 150 feet of any residential
structure located in the county; or
            4.   The real estate is in such a condition that it creates a
threat to public health or safety as a result of rodent, insect, reptile, or
mosquito harborage.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 3-18-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 ABANDONED, JUNK VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, park, or store any junk
or abandoned vehicle(s), or parts thereof, on public or private property.
   (B)   A vehicle shall not be considered an abandoned or junk vehicle if it
is stored in a garage, or other building, or an opaque structure, or within a
fenced area which blocks the vehicle from being visible.
   (C)   For purposes of this chapter, a vehicle covered by a tarpaulin, or
other plastic, vinyl, rubber, cloth, textile, or any other similar material
covering, is considered to be visible.
   (D)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to apply to farm
machinery, equipment, or implements; unless the farm machinery, equipment, or
implement is mechanically inoperable or incapable of movement by its own
locomotion, and that is not being held for, or which is under, repair to be
completed within six months, or within such extended period as may be
determined by the authorized enforcement agent.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to apply to
vehicle(s) screened by natural objects or plantings (excluding weeds), fences,
or other appropriate means so as not to be visible.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 3-18-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   The authorized enforcement agent(s) shall receive, and/or investigate,
a report or complaint. If the agent determines that another enforcement agent
holds primary responsibility, the report/complaint shall be referred to that
agent.
   (B)   In the course of the investigation, the authorized enforcement agent
may seek assistance from any other authorized enforcement agency, as needed, to
ensure the safety and well-being of the investigating authorized enforcement
agent or agency. An authorized enforcement agent may use his or her discretion
in initiating, or continuing, an investigation in the interest of his or her
safety and well-being.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 3-18-2019)
§ 92.06 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter,
except for §
92.02(G), shall receive a notice of violation. In the case of littering, an
order may be served without initial notice of violation.
   (B)   The notice of violation shall state:
      (1)   The date and location of the violation;
      (2)   The nature of the violation;
      (3)   The time period for correcting the violation;
      (4)   The potential fine(s) for the violation;
      (5)   The procedures if the violation is not corrected in the time
specified on the notice of violation; and
      (6)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person to contact
regarding the correction of the violation.
   (C)   The notice of violation shall be delivered upon an individual, or
entity, alleged to have violated this chapter by:
      (1)   Mailed by registered or certified mail, or served by an equivalent
means as permitted under I.C. 1-1-7-1, to his or her address as shown on the
most recent records of the County Auditor with return receipt requested, and
returned showing receipt of the notice of violation;
      (2)   Delivering a copy of the notice of violation personally, or by law
enforcement officials serving in the county;
      (3)   Leaving a copy of the notice of violation at his or her dwelling
house, or usual place of abode. Whenever delivery is made in this manner, the
person making the delivery also shall send, by first class mail, a copy of the
notice of violation to the last known address of the person being served, and
this fact shall be shown upon the return; and
      (4)   For the purposes of this chapter, the date of delivery will be the
date the notice of violation was sent by registered or certified mail, or the
date delivered personally or by local law enforcement, or the date the notice
of violation was left at the residence.
   (D)   The authorized enforcement agent shall be responsible for issuing the
notice of violation.
   (E)   In cases of actions violating §
92.02, a notice of violation shall be issued by the authorized enforcement
agent requiring the violator to remove, and properly dispose of, the trash and/
or junk from the premises within 30 calendar days from the date of delivering
the notice of violation, or within such extended period as may be determined by
the authorized enforcement agent.
   (F)   In cases of actions violating §
92.03, a notice of violation shall be issued by the authorized enforcement
agent requiring the violator to cut and/or remove the accumulation of weeds
from the premises within 14 calendar days from the date of delivering the
notice of violation, or within such extended period as may be determined by the
authorized enforcement agent.
   (G)   In cases of actions violating §
92.04, a notice of violation shall be issued by the authorized enforcement
agent requiring the violator to comply with said section within 30 calendar
days from the date of delivering the notice of violation, or within such
extended period as may be determined by the authorized enforcement agent.
   (H)   If the recipient of the notice of violation does not correct the
violation, an order will be issued by either the Hearing Authority or the
authorized enforcement agent, and shall be served upon the violator either in
person or by registered, or certified, mail at his or her address, as shown in
the records of the County Auditor.
   (I)   The order will state the date, time, and location for a hearing before
the Hearing Authority to present evidence and arguments as to why an order for
removal of violations, and/or a penalty, should not be issued for the described
violation.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 3-18-2019)
§ 92.07 HEARING.
   (A)   If the recipient of the notice of violation believes he or she has
received the notice in error, or believes he or she is not in violation of this
chapter, the recipient is entitled to appear at the hearing before the Property
Maintenance Hearing Authority to present evidence and arguments as to why the
notice of violation was issued in error or a penalty should not be assessed.
   (B)   In a proceeding to enforce this chapter brought before the Hearing
Authority, a violation of this chapter must be proven by a preponderance of the
evidence.
   (C)   The Hearing Authority may affirm, modify, or rescind the notice of
violation.
   (D)   If the notice of violation is affirmed or modified by the Hearing
Authority, the recipient has the right to appeal the Hearing Authority’s
decision by filing a verified complaint, including the findings of fact and the
action taken by the Hearing Authority, with the County Circuit Court within 14
calendar days after the date when the action was taken.
   (E)   If the County Commissioners designate a third party as the Hearing
Authority, the Hearing Authority will issue a report, with all supporting
evidence, to the County Commissioners within 14 calendar days.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 3-18-2019; Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-6-2024)
§ 92.08 REMEDIES.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners may bring actions in the County
Circuit Court for mandatory or injunctive relief for the enforcement of, and to
secure compliance with, any order, or orders, to otherwise provide for the
enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   Any such action for mandatory or injunctive relief may be joined with
an action to recover the penalties, costs, and expenses provided in this
chapter. In the event any legal action is necessary to enforce this chapter,
the county may seek recovery of costs and expenses reasonably incurred to
enforce the provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to,
reasonable attorney’s fees.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 3-18-2019)
§ 92.09 COSTS.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners may authorize the removal of the
trash, junk, or weeds as listed in the order. The removal of trash, junk, or
weeds can be performed either by the county’s own workers and equipment, or by
a contractor hired at the direction of the Board for this purpose. Compliance
with abandoned and/or junk vehicle violations on public rights-of-way or
property will be handled by the County Sheriff’s Department.
   (B)   The County Auditor’s Office shall issue an invoice to the owner(s) of
the property for the total costs incurred by the county to bring the property
into compliance with this chapter, plus any fines that have not been paid.
Payment is due no later than 30 days following the date of the invoice.
   (C)   (1)   If the fine and the costs incurred by the county are not paid
when due, they may be added to the property taxes and/or become a lien against
the property. The lien attaches when notice of the lien is recorded in the
office of the County Recorder in which the property is located. The lien is
superior to all other liens except liens for taxes, in an amount that does not
exceed:
         (a)   Then thousand dollars for real property that:
            1.   Contains one or more occupied or unoccupied single- or double-
family dwellings or the appurtenances or additions to those dwellings;
            2.   Is unimproved; or
         (b)   Twenty thousand dollars for all other real property not
described in division (C)(1)(a) above.
      (2)   Further action, including, but not limited to, wage garnishment and
the attachment of judgments, may be pursued through court action.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 3-18-2019 ; Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-6-2024 )
§ 92.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The county may enforce this chapter through any other means provided
by law, including, but not limited to, I.C. 36-1-6, the Enforcement of
Ordinances.
   (B)   The County Board of Commissioners shall utilize an existing line item
in the Board’s budget entitled “Chapter Violation Enforcement” for the
enforcement of this chapter. The County Council shall appropriate funds for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   (C)   All fines, penalties, and cleanup costs paid, or revenue received, if
any, pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into the county’s General
Fund, which shall be administered under the direction of the County Board of
Commissioners.
   (D)   The funds appropriated into the county’s chapter violation enforcement
shall be used for the following purposes:
      (1)   The removal and cleanup of trash, junk, weeds, abandoned and/or
junk vehicles;
      (2)   Court fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred to enforce this
chapter;
      (3)   Educational materials to inform residents of, and the publicizing
of, this chapter; and
      (4)   Other expenditures as deemed appropriate by the County Board of
Commissioners.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 3-18-2019)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Upon the failure, or refusal, of an owner, occupant, agent, or person in
possession of the premises (who was the recipient(s) of the notice of
violation) to correct the violation as stated in the notice of violation, he or
she shall be subject up to a $1,000 fine for any violation.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 3-18-2019)
CHAPTER 93: ANIMALS
Section
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Identification
   
93.03   Removal of collar
   
93.04   Cruelty
   
93.05   Enticing animals
   
93.06   Vaccinations
   
93.07   Stray animals
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. A living creature, wild or domestic, but shall not mean, or include,
a human being.
   AT LARGE. Not under control of the owner, or other person having charge,
care, or control, either by leash, cord, chain, enclosure, or reasonable
supervision.
   HARBORING. Allowing, or permitting, any animal to frequent, or remain, on a
person’s premises, including within any structure or enclosure thereon.
   OWNER. A person or entity keeping, or harboring, any animal, including a
dog.
   PERSON. Any individual, group of individuals, association, corporation, or
any other legal entity.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 93.02 IDENTIFICATION.
   Every owner shall cause each dog in the owner’s keeping, or harboring, to
wear a collar, to which shall be affixed a metallic identification tag, on
which the name and address of the owner has been clearly printed, engraved, or
stamped.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 93.03 REMOVAL OF COLLAR.
   It shall be unlawful, and in violation of this chapter, for any person,
other than with the owner’s consent, to remove the collar or tag from any dog.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 12-6-1993) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 CRUELTY.
   It shall be unlawful, and in violation of this chapter, for any person to
cruelly treat, or neglect, any domesticated animal, including:
   (A)   Inhumane beating or malicious killing;
   (B)   Under feeding or abandoning an animal in that person’s care; and/or
   (C)   Failing to provide water, shelter, or medical care, or treatment, for
such animal.
(Ord. 2009-3, passed 2-23-2009) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 ENTICING ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful to entice any animal away from the premises of the
owner, or person in lawful possession of said animal, with the intent of
depriving such owner, keeper, or person in possession from continued possession
of said animal.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 12-6-1993) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 VACCINATIONS.
   No owner shall keep, maintain, or harbor any dog over six months of age
which has not been vaccinated by a licensed veterinary doctor with an anti-
rabies vaccine on an annual basis.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 12-6-1993) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 STRAY ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person owning, or having charge, care, or control of, any animal
shall cause, permit, or allow such animal to run at large off of the property,
or premises, of the owner, or of the person having charge, care, or control of
such animal, and any such animal running at large is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance.
   (B)   Any stray animal, or animal running at large, may be taken under
control by any law enforcement officer and, at the officer’s discretion, either
returned to the owner, or impounded at a location approved by the county for
temporary maintenance of stray animals for a period of not less than three
days, after which three-day period said animal, if not claimed by its owner,
may be sold or destroyed. If said animal is claimed by its owner, all costs of
maintaining said animal, including reasonable boarding fee, shall, in addition
to any penalty hereinafter set forth, be paid by said owner prior to the
release of said animal, provided, however, that nothing herein shall prevent
any law enforcement officer from immediately destroying any vicious,
uncontrollable, or diseased animal.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 12-6-1993) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be required to pay
the sum of $25 as penalty for the first such violation, and shall be required
to pay a penalty of not less than $25, nor more than $100, for each subsequent
violation. The destruction of any impounded animal shall not release the owner
thereof from any penalty or costs described in this chapter, plus attorney’s
fees incurred in the collection thereof.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 12-6-1993)
CHAPTER 94: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
94.01   Policy statement
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Unlawful practice
   
94.04   Discrimination
   
94.05   Interference, coercion, intimidation; prevention
   
94.06   Equal access to housing HUD programs
   
94.07   Exemptions
   
94.08   Enforcement
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   It shall be the policy of the county to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits, as provided for
under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, being Public Law 90-284, as
amended, the federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, being
Public Law 93-383, as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 94-4, passed 2-7-1994)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Any person who:
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-2)
   COMMISSION. The State Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C. 22-9-
1-4 et seq.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)
   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint under
I.C. 22-9.5-6.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)
   DISABILITY. With respect to an individual:
      (1)   A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits at least
one of the major life activities of the individual;
      (2)   A record of an impairment described in division (1) of this
definition above; or
      (3)   Being regarded as having an impairment described in division (1) of
this definition above.
(I.C. 22-9-5-6)
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An unlawful act under §§
94.04 and
94.05, or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure, that
is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale, or lease, for the
construction, or location, of a building, structure, or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a
residence by one or more families.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-8)
   FAMILIAL STATUS. One or more individuals (who have not attained the age of
18 years) being domiciled with a parent, or another person having legal custody
of such individual, or the written permission of such parent, or other person.
The protections afforded against discrimination on this basis of FAMILIAL
STATUS shall apply to any person who is pregnant, or is in the process of
securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18
years.
   FAMILY. A single individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9) with the status of such
family, as defined in this section.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under U.S.C. Title 11, receivers, and fiduciaries.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for
a consideration the right to occupy the premises owned by the occupant.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)
(Ord. 94-4, passed 2-7-1994)
§ 94.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, §
94.07, and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale
or rental of housing set forth in I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in §
94.04(A) shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings, except as exempted by division (B) below and I.C. 22-
9.5-3;
   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) below, nothing in §
94.04(A) shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold, or rented, by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses
at any one time, provided that, in the sale of such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale, or who
was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption
shall apply only to one such sale within any 24-month period. The private
individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or reserved on his
or her behalf title to, or any right to all, or a portion of, the proceeds from
the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one
time;
      (2)   The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be
excepted from application of this section only if such house is sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use, in any manner, of the sales or rental
facilities, or services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesperson, or
any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee
or agent of any such broker, agent, or salesperson, or person; and
         (b)   Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
94.04(A)(3), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstracters, title companies, and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title.
      (3)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied, or
intended to be occupied, by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale, or rental, of any
dwelling, or any interest therein;
      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities, or services, in two or more transactions
involving the sale, or rental, of any dwelling, or any interest therein; or
      (3)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling unit designed, or intended,
for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Ord. 94-4, passed 2-7-1994)
§ 94.04 DISCRIMINATION.
   (A)   Sale or rental of housing. As made applicable by §
94.03, and except as exempted by §§
94.03(B) and
94.07, it shall be unlawful:
      (1)   To refuse to sell, or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer,
or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion,
sex, familial status, or national origin;
      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale, or rental, of a dwelling, or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
familial status, or national origin;
      (3)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or
published, any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale,
or rental, of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial
status, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference,
limitation, or discrimination;
      (4)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status, or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available;
      (5)   For profit, to induce, or attempt to induce, any person to sell or
rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry, or perspective entry,
into the neighborhood of a person, or persons, of a particular race, color,
religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin;
      (6)   (a)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable, or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability
of:
            1.   That buyer or renter;
            2.   A person residing in, or intending to reside in, that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
            3.   Any person associated with that person.
         (b)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale, or rental, of a dwelling, or in the provision of services,
or facilities, in connection with such dwelling, because of a disability of:
            1.   That buyer or renter;
            2.   A person residing in, or intending to reside in, that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
            3.   Any person associated with that person.
         (c)   For the purposes of this division (A), DISCRIMINATION includes:
            1.   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the disabled person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied, or to be occupied, by
such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification
on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
            2.   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules,
policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to
afford such person equal opportunity to use, and enjoy, a dwelling; or
            3.   In connection with the design and construction of covered
multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months
after September 13, 1988, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in
such a manner that:
               a.   The public use, and common use, portions of such dwellings
are readily accessible to, and usable by, disabled persons;
               b.   Within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently
wide to allow passage by disabled persons in wheelchairs; and
               c.   All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design: an accessible route into, and through, the
dwelling; light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other
environmental controls in accessible locations; reinforcements in bathroom
walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and usable kitchens and
bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
      (7)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, and of the American National Standard for buildings
and facilities providing accessibility, and usability, for physically disabled
people (commonly cited as “ANSI A117.1”) suffices to satisfy the requirements
of division (A)(6)(c)3.c. above; and
      (8)   Nothing in this division (A) requires that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.
   (B)   Residential real estate-related transactions.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions, to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin.
      (2)   As used in this division (B), the term RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-
RELATED TRANSACTIONS means any of the following:
         (a)   The making or purchasing of loans, or providing other financial
assistance:
            1.   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling; or
            2.   Secured by residential real estate.
         (b)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real
property.
      (3)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business
of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors
other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, disability, or familial
status.
   (C)   Provision of brokerage services. It shall be unlawful to deny any
person access to, or membership or participation in, any multiple-listing
service, real estate brokers’ organization, or other service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to
discriminate against him or her in the terms or conditions of such access,
membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status, or national origin.
(Ord. 94-4, passed 2-7-1994) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 INTERFERENCE, COERCION, INTIMIDATION; PREVENTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere
with any person in the exercise, or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her
having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or
encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted
or protected by §§
94.03 and
94.04.
   (B)   Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force, or threat
of force, willfully injures, intimidates, or interferes with, or attempts to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with:
      (1)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status, or national origin, and because he or she is, or
has been, selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting,
or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or occupation, of any
dwelling, or applying for, or participating in, any service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or
      (2)   Any person because he or she is, or has been, or in order to
intimidate such person, or any other person or any class of persons, from:
         (a)   Participating, without discrimination, on account of race,
color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin, in any
of the activities, services, organizations, or facilities; or
         (b)   Any citizen because he or she is, or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen, or any other citizen, from lawfully aiding, or
encouraging, other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in
division (B)(2)(a) above.
(Ord. 94-4, passed 2-7-1994) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 EQUAL ACCESS TO HOUSING HUD PROGRAMS.
   Pursuant to 24 C.F.R. part 5.403 and 24 C.F.R. part 574.3, the definition of
FAMILY is revised to include families regardless of the actual or perceived
sexual orientation, gender identity, or marital status of its members.
(Ord. 2023-14, passed 10-2-2023)
§ 94.07 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions, defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq., shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those activities or
organizations set forth in divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society, or any non-profit institution or organization
operated, supervised, or controlled by, or in conjunction with, a religious
organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or
occupancy of dwellings which it owns, or operates, for other than a commercial
purpose, to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such
persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race,
color, or national origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a
private club not in fact open to the public, which, as an incident to its
primary purpose, or purposes, provides lodgings which it owns, or operates, for
other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such
lodgings to its members, or from giving preference to its members.
   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply
with respect to housing for older persons.
      (2)   As used in this division (C), HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS means
housings:
         (a)   Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary
of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development, or the State Civil
Rights Commission, determines is specifically designed, and operated, to assist
elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program);
         (b)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or
older; or
         (c)   Intended, and operated, for occupancy by at least one person 55
years of age or older per unit.
(Ord. 94-4, passed 2-7-1994; Ord. 2023-14, passed 10-2-2023)
§ 94.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering this
chapter, and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commission as set forth in
division (B) below, shall be vested in the County Auditor.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the county, because
of a lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully administer
enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this chapter, herein
elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the articles of this
chapter by complainants to the State Civil Rights Commission (“Commission”) for
administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6, and the said
County Auditor shall refer all said complaints to the Commission as provided
for under division (A) above for purposes of investigation, resolution, and
appropriate relief, as provided for under I.C. 22-9.5-6.
   (C)   All departments and agencies of the county shall administer their
departments, programs, and activities relating to housing and urban development
in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter, and shall
cooperate with the County Auditor and the Commission to further such purposes.
   (D)   The County Auditor, or the designee thereof, shall provide information
to the extent available on remedies available to any aggrieved person, or
complainant, requesting such information.
(Ord. 94-4, passed 2-7-1994; Ord. 2023-14, passed 10-2-2023)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Participating lawfully in speech, or peaceful assembly, opposing any
denial of the opportunity to participate, as set forth in §
94.05(B)(2)(b), shall be fined not more than $1,000, or imprisoned not more
than one year, or both; and if bodily injury results, shall be fined not more
than $10,000, or imprisoned for not more than ten years, or both; and if death
results, shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for life.
(Ord. 94-4, passed 2-7-1994)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS
      
111.   RETAIL FOOD, BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT
      
112.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
113.   TATTOO, BODY PIERCING BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS
Section
   
110.01   Adoption
   
110.02   Public hearing; County Board of Commissioners
   
110.03   Duties of franchisee upon approval
   
110.04   Period for review
   
110.05   Disclosure; validity
   
110.06   Refund
   
110.07   Violations
§ 110.01 ADOPTION.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners hereby adopts the rules and
regulations set forth by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant to §
623(b) of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992
(47 U.S.C. § 543(b)) for the review of the basic service tier of cable
television services, and equipment necessary for the provision of such service
tier.
   (B)   Such rules and regulations promulgated by the Federal Communications
Commission are, by reference, made a part of this chapter.
   (C)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
       BASIC SERVICE TIER OF CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES. A separately available
service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier of
service, including, as a minimum, but not limited to, all signals of domestic
television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal
secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of
such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable
system), any public, educational, and governmental programming required by the
franchise to be carried on the basic tier, and any additional video programming
signals or service added to the basic tier by the cable operator.
      EQUIPMENT NECESSARY TO PROVIDE SAID BASIC TIER OF SERVICE. Items of
associated equipment necessary for the reception of basic cable service by a
subscriber, including, but not limited to, converter boxes, remote control
units, additional outlets, and installations.
(Ord. 93-6, passed 11-15-1993)
§ 110.02 PUBLIC HEARING; COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
   The Board of Commissioners shall provide the grantee of the cable television
franchise, the public, and interested parties with an opportunity to be heard
at a public hearing before the said Board of Commissioners upon not less than
ten days written notice to the grantee of the cable television franchise of the
time and place of the public hearing, provided further that said notice shall
indicate that the purpose of the public hearing is to receive the views of the
grantee and interested parties on issues pertaining to regulation of the basic
service tier of cable television services, and equipment necessary to provide
said basic tier of service; and, provided further, that notice of said public
hearing shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least
ten days before the date of this hearing, and provided further, that an agenda
for said public hearing shall be posted in a public place at the County
Courthouse at least ten days prior to said public hearing, and that any other
notice required by I.C. 5-14-1.5 shall be given.
(Ord. 93-6, passed 11-15-1993)
§ 110.03 DUTIES OF FRANCHISEE UPON APPROVAL.
   Upon the adoption of this chapter, and the certification of the county by
the Federal Communications Commission, the county shall immediately notify the
cable operator by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the county
intends to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and
associated equipment, as authorized by the Cable Television Consumer Protection
and Competition Act of 1992. Upon receipt of said notice from the county, the
cable operator shall, within 30 days, file with the county its current rates
for the basic service tier and associated equipment, along with any additional
documentation justifying the reasonableness of its rates.
(Ord. 93-6, passed 11-15-1993)
§ 110.04 PERIOD FOR REVIEW.
   (A)   The county shall establish that the period for review of rates of the
basic service tier of cable television services, and the equipment necessary to
provide said basic tier of service, shall be 30 days from the submission by the
grantee of the cable television franchise of the Federal Communications
Commission Form 393. If the County Commissioners take no action within 30 days
from the date the cable operator files its basic cable rates with the county,
the proposed rates will continue in effect.
   (B)   In the event that additional time for review of the Federal
Communications Commission Form 393 submitted by the grantee is necessary, the
Board of Commissioners, or its designee, shall issue a brief written order
prior to the end of the 30-day review period, with a copy of said order to be
sent by certified United States mail to the grantee, providing for an
additional 90-day period for review of rates of the basic service tier, and the
equipment necessary to provide said basic tier of service. During the extended
review period, and before taking action on the proposed rate, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold at least one public hearing in which interested
citizens may express their views and record objections.
   (C)   The county shall establish that the period for review of the basic
service tier of cable television services, and the equipment necessary to
provide said basic tier of service, shall be 90 days from the submission by the
grantee of information and forms prescribed by the Federal Communications
Commission for a showing of cost-of-service, as defined by the Federal
Communications Commission.
   (D)   In the event that additional time for review of the cost-of-service
showing submitted by the grantee is necessary, the Board of Commissioners, or
its designee, shall issue a brief written order prior to the end of the 90-day
review period with a copy of said order to be sent by certified United States
mail to the grantee, providing for an additional 150-day period for review of
rates of the basic service tier, and the equipment necessary to provide said
basic tier of service. During the extended review period, and before taking
action on the proposed rate, the Board of Commissioners shall hold at least one
public hearing in which interested citizens may express their views and record
objections.
   (E)   Upon completion of its review of the proposed rates for the basic
service tier of cable television services, and the equipment necessary to
provide said basic tier of service, the Board of Commissioners shall adopt its
decision by formal resolution. Said resolution shall indicate the reasons for
the decision. Upon passage of the resolution, the Board of Commissioners shall
publish the resolution in pamphlet form.
   (F)   In the event that the cable operator’s proposed rates exceed the
reasonable rate standard as established by the Federal Communications
Commission in its rules and regulations, the Board of Commissioners may order
the rates reduced by rollbacks or refunds to subscribers, in the manner so
prescribed by the Federal Communications Commission.
(Ord. 93-6, passed 11-15-1993)
§ 110.05 DISCLOSURE; VALIDITY.
   In considering information provided by the grantee as a part of review of
its rates for the basic service tier of cable television services, and the
equipment necessary to provide said basic tier of service, the county shall not
disclose to the public the content of any records, forms, reports,
calculations, or other documents, as provided, which the grantee has indicated
as being of a proprietary interest, or constituting a trade secret in nature.
The county officer responsible for administration of the State Freedom of
Information Act shall retain the right to determine the validity of the
grantee’s claim of proprietary interest, or trade secrecy, in accordance with
the provisions of the state’s Access to Public Records Act (I.C. 5-14-3).
(Ord. 93-6, passed 11-15-1993)
§ 110.06 REFUND.
   The county may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion
of previously paid rates under the following circumstances:
   (A)   A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in
excess of the permitted basic cable service tier charge, or above the actual
cost of equipment; or
   (B)   The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued
by the county.
(Ord. 93-6, passed 11-15-1993)
§ 110.07 VIOLATIONS.
   Failure by the cable operator to comply with the terms and conditions
established by this chapter shall constitute a violation of the county facility
license, and any and all extensions, or renewals thereof, and shall be subject
to the penalties provided therein.
(Ord. 93-6, passed 11-15-1993)
CHAPTER 111: RETAIL FOOD, BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT
Section
   
111.01   Purpose
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Submission, approval, plans of construction
   
111.04   Permit requirements, procedures
   
111.05   Sanitation, education requirements
   
111.06   Unwholesome, adulterated, misbranded food
   
111.07   Disease control
   
111.08   Inspection, correction of violations; revocation of permit
   
111.09   Temporary food establishment violations, revocation of permit
   
111.10   Temporary suspension of permit
   
111.11   Violations
   
111.12   Enforcement
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard public health, and to
establish sanitary regulations for bed and breakfast establishments, retail
food establishments, seasonal retail food establishments, mobile retail food
establishments, and temporary retail food establishments, in the county.
   (B)   The county prohibits sale of adulterated, unwholesome, or misbranded
food; regulates inspection of such establishments; provides for compliance and
the enforcement of this chapter; provides penalties for violations of said
chapter; and incorporates by reference I.C. 16-42-1, I.C. 16-42-2, I.C. 16-42-
5, and the State Department of Health Rule(s) 410 I.A.C. 7-15.5, 410 I.A.C. 7-
24, 410 I.A.C. 7-21-47, 410 I.A.C. 7-22, and 410 I.A.C. 7-23.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 11-4-2019)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   410 I.A.C. 7-24. The State Department of Health Retail Food Establishment
Sanitation Requirements, which is the state regulation governing retail food
establishments.
   ADULTERATED. The meaning set forth in I.C. 16-42-1 through 16-42-5.
   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. An operator-occupied residence that:
      (1)   Provides sleeping accommodations to the public for a fee;
      (2)   Has no more than 14 guest rooms;
      (3)   Provides breakfast to its guests as part of the fee; and
      (4)   Provides sleeping accommodations for no more than 30 consecutive
days to a particular guest.
(410 I.A.C. 7-15.5)
   CERTIFIED FOOD HANDLER. A food handler who holds a certificate recognized by
the Conference of Food Protection, or an equivalent nationally recognized
certification program, as determined by the Department.
   CLOSED. Fitted together snugly, leaving no openings large enough to permit
the entrance of vermin.
   COMMISSARY. A permitted facility used to receive, store, and prepare food
items to be sold at another location.
   CONFLICT OF INTEREST. A situation in which the private financial interest of
a county official, a county official’s spouse, ex-spouse, siblings, in-laws,
children, and/or unemancipated child, may influence the county official’s
judgement in the performance of a public duty.
(68 I.A.C. 9-5-1(3))
   CORROSION-RESISTANT MATERIALS. Materials that maintain their original
surface characteristics under prolonged influence of the food to be contacted,
the normal use of cleaning compounds and sanitizing solutions, and other
conditions of use.
   CRITICAL ITEM. A violation of the 410 I.A.C. 7-24 Retail Food Establishment
Sanitation Requirements that, if in non-compliance, is more likely than other
violations to contribute to food contamination, illness, or environmental
degradation. CRITICAL ITEMS will be denoted as such on the inspection form.
   EASILY CLEANABLE. Surfaces are readily accessible, and made of such
materials and finish, and so fabricated that residue may be effectively removed
by normal cleaning methods.
   EMPLOYEE. The permit holder, an individual having supervisory or management
duties, person on the payroll, family member, volunteer person performing work
under contractual agreement, or any other person working in a retail food
establishment.
   EQUIPMENT. Items other than utensils used in the storage, preparation,
display, and transportation of food such as stoves, ovens, hoods, slicers,
grinders, mixers, scales, meat blocks, tables, food shelving, reach-in
refrigerators and freezers, sinks, ice makers, and similar items used in the
operation of a bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment,
seasonal retail food establishment, mobile retail food establishment, or
temporary retail food establishment. This item does not include fork lift
trucks or dollies.
   FOOD. Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or
ingredient used, or intended for use, or for sale in whole, or in part, for
human consumption.
   FOOD-CONTACT SURFACE. Surfaces of equipment and utensils with which food
normally comes in contact, and those surfaces from which food, or other
contaminants, may drain, drip, or splash back onto surfaces normally in contact
with food.
   FOODBORNE DISEASE OUTBREAK. An incident in which:
      (1)   Two or more persons experience a similar illness after ingestion of
a common food;
      (2)   Epidemiological analysis implicates the food as the source of the
illness; or
      (3)   A single case of illness from botulism or chemical poisoning.
   HACCP PLAN. A written document that delineates the formal procedures for
following the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point principles developed by
the National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods.
   HAZARD. A biological, chemical, or physical property that may cause an
unacceptable consumer health risk.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The County Health Department, which is the full time
County Health Department and includes the County Board of Health, the County
Health Officer, and authorized representatives of the Health Officer.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The County Health Officer, or his or her duly-authorized
representative.
   HEARING OFFICER. An individual, or panel of individuals, acting in the
capacity of a HEARING OFFICER in proceedings. The HEARING OFFICER is not the
Health Officer, or any other employee of the County Health Department. The
HEARING OFFICER shall be the County Board of Health, or a subcommittee of the
County Board of Health.
   HERMETICALLY SEALED CONTAINER. A container designed, and intended, to be
secure against the entry of microorganisms, and to maintain the commercial
sterility of its contents after processing.
   IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD. A significant threat or danger to health that is
considered to exist when there is evidence to show that a product, practice,
circumstance, or event creates a situation that requires immediate correction,
or cessation, of operation to prevent illness based on:
      (1)   The number of potentially ill persons; and
      (2)   The nature, severity, and duration of the anticipated illness.
   INSPECTION REPORT. The document prepared by the County Health Department
that is completed as the result of the inspection, and provided to the
operator.
   KITCHENWARE. All multi-use utensils other than tableware.
   LAW. All applicable state and local statutes, ordinances, rules, and
regulations.
   mg/l. Milligrams per liter, which is the metric equivalent of parts per
million (ppm).
   MISBRANDED. The meaning set forth in I.C. 16-42-1 through 16-42-4 and 410
I.A.C. 7-5.
   MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Any retail food establishment without a
fixed location which is capable of being readily moved intact, from location to
location, that is wheeled, on skids, mounted on a vehicle, a marine vessel,
pushcart, or trailer.
   NEW RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment which has not been
previously issued a permit; a permitted retail food establishment which has
ceased operation for six or more consecutive months; or has changed ownership.
   NON-POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOODS. Foods with a water activity (Aw) value of
0.85 or less, foods with a hydrogen ion concentration (pH) level of 4.6 or
below when measured at 75°F, or foods for which laboratory evidence exists that
demonstrates that rapid, or progressive, growth of infectious and toxigenic
microorganisms, or slower growth of clostridium botulinum, cannot occur. Some
examples include candies, cookies, commercial pastries, fresh uncut fruits and
vegetables, and commercially prepared unopened, hermetically sealed containers
which do not require refrigeration.
   OPERATOR. The person who has a primary oversight responsibility for
operation of the establishment through ownership or lease, or contractual
agreement, and who is responsible for the storage, preparation, display,
transportation, or serving of food to the public.
   ORDER. A County Health Department action of particular applicability that
determines the legal rights, duties, privileges, immunities, or other legal
interests of one or more specific persons. The term includes a PERMIT.
   PACKAGED. Bottled, canned, carton, bagged, or securely wrapped.
   PERMIT. The document issued by the County Health Department that authorizes
a person to operate a bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, mobile retail food establishment, commissary, and/or temporary
food establishment.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other
legal entity.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. The individual present in a bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, mobile retail food establishment,
and/or temporary retail food establishment who is the supervisor of the
establishment at the time of inspection. If no individual is the apparent
supervisor, then any employee present is the PERSON IN CHARGE.
   POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD. Any food that is natural or synthetic, and is in
a form capable of supporting:
      (1)   The rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic
microorganisms; or
      (2)   The growth and toxin production of clostridium botulinum.
   POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD includes foods that are of animal origin that are
raw or heat treated; foods of plant origin that are heat treated, or consist of
raw seed sprouts; cut melons; and garlic and oil mixtures. The term includes
foods with a water activity (Aw) value above 0.85, and foods with a pH level
above 4.6 when measured at 75°F.
   RECONSTITUTED. Dehydrated food products recombined with water or other
liquids.
   REGULATORY AUTHORITY. The state and/or local enforcement authority having
jurisdiction over the bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, mobile retail food establishment, and/or temporary retail food
establishment.
   RESTRICTED USE PESTICIDE. A pesticide product that contains the active
ingredients specified in the 40 C.F.R. § 152.175 that are classified for
restricted use, and that are limited to use by, or under direct supervision of,
a certified applicator.
   RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. 
      (1)   An operation as follows that:
         (a)   Stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides
food for human consumption, such as the following:
            1.   A restaurant;
            2.   A satellite or catered feeding location;
            3.   A catering operation if the operation provides food directly
to a consumer, or to a conveyance used to transport people;
            4.   A market;
            5.   A grocery store;
            6.   A convenience store;
            7.   A vending location;
            8.   A conveyance used to transport people;
            9.   An institution;
            10.   A food bank;
            11.   A commissary;
            12.   A cottage industry;
            13.   A hospice facility as defined in I.C. 16-25-1.1;
            14.   A health care facility as defined in I.C. 16-21-2; and
            15.   A child care facility as defined in I.C. 12-13-5, such as the
following:
               a.   Permitted child care centers permitted under 470 I.A.C. 3-
4.7;
               b.   Permitted child care institutions permitted under 465
I.A.C. 2-9, 465 I.A.C. 2-10, and 465 I.A.C. 2-11; and
               c.   Registered child care ministries registered under 470
I.A.C. 3-4.5.
         (b)   Relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly, or
indirectly through delivery service, such as home delivery of grocery orders or
restaurant takeout orders, or delivery service that is provided by common
carriers.
      (2)   The term includes the following:
         (a)   An element of the operation, such as a transportation vehicle or
a central preparation facility, that supplies a vending location or satellite
feeding location, unless the vending or feeding location is permitted by the
regulatory authority;
         (b)   An operation that is conducted in a facility or location, where
consumption is on or off the premises, and regardless of whether there is a
charge for the food, that is:
            1.   Mobile;
            2.   Stationary;
            3.   Temporary; or
            4.   Permanent.
      (3)   The term does not include the following:
         (a)   An establishment that offers only pre-packaged foods that are
not potentially hazardous;
         (b)   A produce stand that offers only whole, uncut fresh fruits and
vegetables;
         (c)   A food processing plant operated under I.C. 16-42-5;
         (d)   A private home where food is prepared by a member of an
organization that is operating under I.C. 16-18-2-137(b);
         (e)   An area where food that is prepared, as specified in division
(4)(d) above, is sold or offered for human consumption;
         (f)   A bed and breakfast establishment, as defined and regulated
under I.C. 16-41-31-1 and 410 I.A.C. 7-15.5;
         (g)   A private home that receives catered or home delivered food; and
         (h)   A private home.
   SAFE MATERIALS.
      (1)   Articles manufactured from, or composed of, materials that may not
reasonably be expected to result, directly or indirectly, in their becoming a
component, or otherwise affecting, the characteristics of any food;
      (2)   A food additive or color additive, as defined in § 201(s) or (t) of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, and which are used as specified in §§
409 or 706 of the Act;
      (3)   Other materials which are not food additives or color additives, as
defined in § 201(s) or (t) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, and
which are used in conformity with applicable regulations of the Food and Drug
Administration;
      (4)   Articles used in conformity with the requirements of the State
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (I.C. 16-42-2-1 and I.C. 16-42-2-4). Other
materials are safe only if they are used in conformity with all applicable laws
and rules of the State Board of Health; and
      (5)   Applied to potentially hazardous foods means food temperatures of
41°F or below, or 135°F or above.
   SANITIZE. Effective bactericidal treatment by a process that provides enough
accumulative heat or concentration of chemicals on a clean surface that, when
evaluated for efficacy, yields a reduction of five logs, which is equal to a
99.999% reduction of representative disease microorganisms of public health
importance.
   SEASONAL RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A retail food establishment, or mobile
retail food establishment, that operates not more than eight months in a
calendar year.
   SEWAGE. The water-carried waste derived from ordinary living processes,
including, but not limited to, human excreta and wastewater derived from water
closets, urinals, laundries, sinks, utensil-washing machines, bathing
facilities, or similar facilities or appliances.
   SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES. Cups, containers, lids, closures, plates, knives,
forks, spoons, stirrers, paddles, straws, napkins, wrapping materials,
toothpicks, and similar articles intended for one-time, one-person use and then
discarded. The term does not include SINGLE-USE ARTICLES such as number ten
cans, aluminum pie pans, bread wrappers, and similar articles into which food
has been packaged by the manufacturer.
   TABLEWARE. Multi-use eating and drinking utensils, including flatware
(knives, forks, and spoons).
   TEMPORARY RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A retail food establishment, or mobile
retail food establishment, that operates at a fixed location for a period of
time not more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or
celebration, such as a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, or similar
transitory gathering.
   UTENSIL. Any food-contact implement used in the storage, preparation,
transportation, or dispensing of food.
   WHOLESOME. In sound condition, clean, free from adulteration, and otherwise
suitable for use as human food.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 11-4-2019)
§ 111.03 SUBMISSION, APPROVAL, PLANS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Before a bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment,
seasonal retail food establishment, mobile retail food establishment, or
portion thereof, except for a temporary retail food establishment or vending
machine location, is constructed, altered, or remodeled, or before an existing
structure is converted to the use as a bed and breakfast establishment, retail
food establishment, mobile retail food establishment, or portion thereof, the
owner, operator, or designated agent shall submit plans and specifications for
the bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail
food establishment, mobile retail food establishment, or portion thereof, to
the County Health Department for review and approval. The plans and
specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical
plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of
proposed fixed equipment and facilities.
      (1)   A transmittal letter shall be submitted with the plans and
specifications. This letter shall identify and summarize the plans or projects,
and shall indicate the owner, operator, or designated agent. The County Health
Department shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the
requirements of this section. No bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, or mobile retail food
establishment shall be constructed, remodeled, or converted except in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the County Health
Department.
      (2)   A fee for the review of such plans shall be assessed.
   (B)   The owner, or other authorized agent, of an existing, or proposed, bed
and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food
establishment, and/or mobile retail food establishment, shall submit to the
County Health Department properly prepared plans and specifications for review
and approval before:
      (1)   The construction of a bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, and/or mobile retail food
establishment;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing structure for use as a bed and
breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food
establishment, or mobile retail food establishment; or
      (3)   The remodeling of a bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, and/or mobile retail food
establishment, or a change of type of bed and breakfast establishment, retail
food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, and/or mobile retail
food establishment, or food operation, if the County Health Department
determines that plans and specifications are necessary to ensure compliance
with this section.
         (a)   The plans and specifications for a bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment,
and/or mobile retail food establishment shall include the type of operation,
type of food preparation (as specified in Appendix B of the published version
of 410 I.A.C. 7-24), and the menu.
         (b)   The plans and specifications shall be deemed satisfactory and
approved by the County Health Department before a permit can be issued.
         (c)   A pre-operational inspection shows that the bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment,
and/or mobile retail food establishment is built, or remodeled, in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications, and that the establishment is in
compliance with this chapter, 410 I.A.C. 7-24, and/or 410 I.A.C. 7-15.5.
   (C)   If an application for a plan review and/or permit to operate a bed and
breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food
establishment, mobile retail food establishment, and/or temporary retail food
establishment is denied, the County Health Department shall provide the
applicant with a notice within five to seven business days that includes:
      (1)   The specific reasons and rule citations for the application and/or
permit denial;
      (2)   The actions, if any, that the applicant must take to qualify for
the application and/or permit; and
      (3)   Advisement of the applicant’s right of appeal, and the process and
time frames for appeal, that are provided in law.
   (D)   When plans and specifications required by this section are to be
submitted to the County Health Department, the County Health Department shall
inspect the bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment,
seasonal retail food establishment, or mobile retail food establishment prior
to the start of operations to determine compliance with the approved plans and
specifications, and with the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 11-4-2019)
§ 111.04 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment,
mobile retail food establishment, or temporary retail food establishment in the
county if the person does not possess a valid permit from the Health
Department. A separate permit shall be required for each bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment,
mobile retail food establishment, or temporary retail food establishment
operated by any person. When separate areas for food service or preparation are
located in one building, and are operated by one owner, the establishment shall
be considered as one establishment, and only one permit shall be required.
   (B)   Only persons who comply with the applicable requirements of this
section shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. A permit shall
be issued to any person upon application, and only after inspection of the bed
and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food
establishment, mobile retail food establishment, or temporary retail food
establishment, and upon approval by the County Health Department. No permit, or
renewal thereof, shall be denied or revoked on arbitrary or capricious grounds.
   (C)   The permit for a bed and breakfast establishment, or retail food
establishment, shall be for a term of one year, beginning January 1 and
expiring December 31 of the calendar year, and shall be renewed annually.
Failure to pay the fee for the renewal of a permit by December 15 of the
current calendar year shall result in the assessment of a delinquent fee
against the bed and breakfast establishment, or retail food establishment. The
delinquent fee shall be in addition to the annual fee.
   (D)   The permit for a seasonal retail food establishment shall be for a
term of not more than eight months in a calendar year, and shall be renewed
annually. The fee for the permit shall be due, and payable, at the time of
application to, and approval by, the County Health Department.
   (E)   The permit for a mobile retail food establishment shall be for a term
beginning the date of application to, and approval by, the Health Department,
and expiring December 31 of the calendar year, and shall be renewed annually.
Failure to pay the fee for the renewal of a permit by December 15 of the
current calendar year shall result in the assessment of a delinquent fee
against the mobile retail food establishment. The delinquent fee shall be in
addition to the annual fee. Each mobile retail food establishment shall be
permitted and charged a fee. The type of permit and fee will be determined by
the County Health Department.
      (1)   Mobile retail food establishment units shall operate from a
commissary permitted by the Health Department. Each unit shall report, at least
daily, to such commissary for all food and other supplies, and for cleaning and
servicing operations. A commissary must be separate from living and sleeping
quarters, and meet all the requirements of 410 I.A.C. 7-24 for a retail food
establishment. This commissary must be inspected by the Health Department, and
a separate operating license and fee is required for each commissary.
      (2)   Mobile retail food establishments shall provide proof of a permit
for the commissary if the commissary is not located in the county. Commissaries
operating in jurisdictions not requiring an individual permit shall not be
acceptable for servicing a mobile retail food establishment permitted in the
county.
   (F)   The permit for a temporary retail food establishment shall be for a
term beginning the date of application to, and approval by, the County Health
Department, and expiring at 12:00 a.m. on the last day of the event listed on
the application, and shall expire no later than 14 consecutive days after the
date the establishment begins operating. The fee for the permit shall be due,
and payable, at the time of application to, and approval by, the County Health
Department.
   (G)   Any permit issued by the County Health Department shall contain the
permit number, name, and address of the establishment, the name of the person
to whom the permit is granted, the type of establishment to which the permit is
being issued, the issuance and expiration date(s), the name of the Health
Officer, the name of the food safety specialist, and any such pertinent data as
may be required by the Health Department. The permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in the bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, mobile retail food
establishment, or temporary retail food establishment.
   (H)   A permit is not transferable to another location or to another person.
In the event of a change of ownership by conveyance, sale contract, lease, or
other means, the current permit shall become void and a new permit shall be
required.
      (1)   A permit shall not be issued to a bed and breakfast establishment,
retail food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, or mobile retail
food establishment under new ownership until it is in full compliance with all
applicable state and local laws.
      (2)   In the event the County Health Department is not notified of a
change of ownership of a bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, or mobile retail food
establishment, a permit for the next year shall not be issued until:
         (a)   The bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment,
seasonal retail food establishment, or mobile retail food establishment is in
full compliance with all applicable state and local laws; and
         (b)   The past year’s permit is paid for in full, including delinquent
fees. No permits shall be issued or renewed until all fines have been paid in
full.
   (I)   No permit shall be required, and no permittee shall be paid, for any
bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail
mobile food establishment, mobile retail food establishment, or temporary
retail food establishment operated by any charitable, educational, government,
religious, or other non-profit organization exempt from income tax under the
Internal Revenue Code.
   (J)   A person desiring to operate a bed and breakfast establishment, retail
food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, mobile retail food
establishment, or temporary retail food establishment shall submit, to the
County Health Department, a written application for a permit on a form provided
by the County Health Department.
      (1)   The application shall include:
         (a)   The date, name of business, telephone number, physical address,
mailing address, email address for notifications, name of owner(s), owner’s
emergency telephone number, owner’s mailing address, days and hours of
operation, name and certificate expiration date of certified food handler(s),
type of business, if off-site catering is available, foods to be served, and
the name of the on-site supervisor(s); and
         (b)   A statement signed by the applicant that:
            1.   Attests to the accuracy of the information provided in the
application; and
            2.   Affirms that the applicant will:
               a.   Comply with this chapter; and
               b.   Allow the County Health Department access to the bed and
breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, mobile retail food
establishment, or temporary retail food establishment and records, as specified
in 410 I.A.C. 7-15.5 and 410 I.A.C. 7-24.
   (K)   To qualify for a permit, an applicant must:
      (1)   Be an owner and/or operator of the bed and breakfast establishment,
retail food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, mobile retail
food establishment, and/or temporary food establishment;
      (2)   Comply with the requirements of this chapter;
      (3)   Agree to allow access to the bed and breakfast establishment,
retail food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, mobile retail
food establishment, and/or temporary food establishment, and provide required
information; and
      (4)   Pay the applicable permit fees at the time the application is
submitted.
   (L)   If an application for a plan review and/or permit to operate a bed and
breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food
establishment, mobile retail food establishment, and/or temporary food
establishment is denied, the County Health Department shall provide the
applicant with a notice that includes:
      (1)   The specific reasons and rule citations for the application and/or
permit denial;
      (2)   The actions, if any, that the applicant must take to qualify for
the application and/or permit; and
      (3)   Advisement of the applicant’s right of appeal and the process, and
time frames, for appeal that are provided in law.
   (M)   In the event of a change of ownership, the County Health Department
may renew a permit for an existing bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, and/or mobile retail food
establishment, or may issue a permit to a new owner of an existing bed and
breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food
establishment, and/or mobile retail food establishment after a properly
completed application is submitted, reviewed, and approved, the fees are paid,
and an inspection shows that the establishment is in compliance with this
chapter.
   (N)   Upon acceptance of the permit issued by the County Health Department,
the operator, in order to retain the permit, shall:
      (1)   Comply with the provisions of this chapter, and all laws and rules
adopted by reference herein, and the conditions of any variances granted by the
State Department of Health;
      (2)   Immediately discontinue affected operations, and notify the County
Health Department if an imminent health hazard may exist;
      (3)   Allow representatives of the County Health Department access to the
bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail
food establishment, and/or mobile retail food establishment at all reasonable
times;
      (4)   Comply with directives of the County Health Department including
time frames for corrective actions specified in inspection reports, notices,
orders, warnings, and other directives issued by the County Health Department
in regard to the operator’s bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, and/or mobile retail food
establishment, or in response to community emergencies;
      (5)   Accept notices issued, and served, by the County Health Department;
      (6)   Be subject to the administrative, civil, injunctive, and criminal
remedies authorized by law for failure to comply with this chapter, or a
directive of the County Health Department; and
      (7)   Post the permit in a location in the bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment,
and/or mobile retail food establishment that is conspicuous to consumers.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 11-4-2019) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.05 SANITATION, EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All bed and breakfast establishments, retail food establishments,
seasonal retail food establishments, mobile retail food establishments, and
temporary retail food establishments shall comply with the sanitation
requirements specified by the State Department of Health, as now provided in
its Rule 410 I.A.C. 7-24, or as the same may be changed or amended. This rule,
and any changes or amendments to it that may be adopted or promulgated, are
incorporated by reference, and made part of this section.
   (B)   Under the State Retail Food Establishment Sanitation Requirements, 410
I.A.C. 7-22-15, it is law to employ at least one certified food handler per
establishment.
      (1)   This person is required to oversee the storage, preparation,
display, or serving of food to the public.
      (2)   A food establishment’s designated certified food handler must not
allow his or her certification to expire, and the certified food handler shall
become recertified as defined in § 13 of the above mentioned code.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 11-4-2019)
§ 111.06 UNWHOLESOME, ADULTERATED, MISBRANDED FOOD.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, through a bed and
breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food
establishment, mobile retail food establishment, or temporary retail food
establishment, any food that is unwholesome, adulterated, or misbranded.
   (B)   Samples of food may be taken and examined by the County Health
Department as often as may be necessary to determine freedom from
contamination, adulteration, or misbranding. The County Health Department may,
on written notice to the owner or operator, impound and forbid the sale of any
food that is unwholesome, adulterated, or misbranded, or that it has probable
cause to believe is unfit for human consumption, unwholesome, adulterated, or
misbranded. However, in the case of misbranding that can be corrected by proper
labeling, such food may be released to the operator for correct labeling under
the supervision of the County Health Department. The County Health Department
may also cause to be removed, or destroyed, any dairy product, meat, meat
product, seafood, poultry, poultry product, confectionery, bakery product,
vegetable, fruit, or other perishable article that, in its opinion, is unsound,
contains any filthy, decomposed, or putrid substance, or may be poisonous or
deleterious to health, or otherwise unsafe.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 11-4-2019) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.07 DISEASE CONTROL.
   (A)   No employee, while infected with a disease in a communicable form that
can be transmitted by foods, or who is a carrier of organisms that cause such a
disease, or while afflicted with a boil, an infected wound, or an acute
respiratory infection, shall work in a bed and breakfast establishment, retail
food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, mobile retail food
establishment, or temporary retail food establishment in any capacity in which
there is a likelihood of such person contaminating food, or food-contact
surfaces, with pathogenic organisms, or transmitting disease to other persons.
If the person in charge of any bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, mobile retail food
establishment, or temporary retail food establishment has reason to believe
that any employee has contracted any disease which can be transmitted by food,
he or she shall notify the County Health Department immediately.
   (B)   When the Health Department has reason to believe there exists a
possibility of transmission of infection from any bed and breakfast
establishment employee, retail food establishment employee, seasonal retail
food establishment employee, mobile retail food establishment employee, or
temporary retail food establishment employee, the County Health Department is
authorized to require any, or all, of the following measures:
      (1)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from all bed and breakfast
establishments, retail food establishments, seasonal retail food
establishments, mobile retail food establishments, and temporary retail food
establishments;
      (2)   The immediate closing of the bed and breakfast establishment,
retail food establishment, seasonal retail food establishments, mobile retail
food establishment, or temporary retail food establishment concerned until no
further danger of disease outbreak exists in the opinion of the County Health
Department; and/or
      (3)   Adequate medical examination of the employee, and of his or her
associates, with such laboratory examinations as may be indicated, at no cost
to the County Health Department.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 11-4-2019) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.08 INSPECTION, CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS; REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Each bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment,
seasonal retail food establishment, or mobile retail food establishment will
receive unannounced compliance inspections at a frequency determined by the
County Health Department using a risk-based analysis of the establishment. Each
bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail
food establishment, and mobile retail food establishment shall be inspected by
the Health Department at least once a year.
   (B)   The person operating the bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, or mobile retail food
establishment shall, upon the request of the County Health Department, permit
the County Health Department access to all parts of such bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment,
or mobile retail food establishment, and shall permit the County Health
Department to collect evidence and exhibits, and to copy any, or all, records
relative to the enforcement of this section.
   (C)   At the conclusion of the inspection, the County Health Department
shall provide a copy of the completed inspection report, and the notice to
correct violations, to the operator, or to the person in charge, as required
under I.C. 16-20-8-5.
   (D)   If, during the inspection of any bed and breakfast establishment,
retail food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, or mobile retail
food establishment, the County Health Department discovers the violation of any
of the requirements in the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written
order listing such violations to the owner, or to the person in charge, and
shall fix a time within which the owner, or the person in charge, of such bed
and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food
establishment, or mobile retail food establishment shall abate and remedy such
violations. A copy of the written order shall be filed with the records of the
County Health Department, as required under I.C. 16-20-8-5.
   (E)   If, at the conclusion of the inspection, the person operating the bed
and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food
establishment, or mobile retail food establishment refuses to sign an
acknowledgment of receipt, it will not affect the operator’s obligation to
correct the violations noted in the inspection report within the time frames
specified. A refusal to sign an acknowledgment of receipt is noted in the
inspection report, and conveyed to the County Health Department’s historical
record for the bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment,
seasonal retail food establishment, or mobile retail food establishment. The
operator is not necessarily in agreement with the findings of the County Health
Department inspection by an acknowledgment of receipt.
   (F)   All critical violations shall be corrected within the period of time
specified by the County Health Department, but in any event, not to exceed ten
days following an inspection. Within 15 days after the inspection the owner, or
person in charge, of the bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, or mobile retail food
establishment may be required to submit a written report to the County Health
Department stating the action taken to correct the critical items. Purchase
orders, or work contracts with a work completion date satisfactory to the
County Health Department, may be accepted as interim corrective action.
   (G)   If, upon a second and final inspection, the County Health Department
finds that such bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment,
seasonal retail food establishment, or mobile retail food establishment person,
or employee, is violating any of the provisions of this chapter that were in
violation on the previous inspection, and concerning which a written order was
issued:
      (1)   The County Health Department may promptly issue a written order to
the owner, or to the person in charge, of such bed and breakfast establishment,
retail food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, or mobile retail
food establishment to appear for an administrative hearing at a certain time
and place, no later than ten days from the date of final inspection, to show
cause why a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter should not be
revoked; or
      (2)   The County Health Department shall furnish evidence of the
violation(s) to the County Attorney, and he or she shall prosecute all persons
violating the provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   If, at the administrative hearing, the owner, or person in charge,
should fail to show cause as to why his or her permit should not be suspended
or revoked, the County Health Department shall suspend or revoke the permit of
such bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal
retail food establishment, or mobile retail food establishment, and shall
promptly give written notice of such action to the owner, or person in charge.
   (I)   The County Health Department shall maintain a permanent record of its
proceedings, which shall be filed in the office of the County Health
Department.
   (J)   Those establishments having their permit suspended, or revoked, by the
County Health Department shall be placarded by the County Health Department
with an official notice to the effect that the establishment is closed by order
of the County Health Department. It shall be illegal to remove, damage, or
deface such notice prior to the establishment being allowed to resume operation
by the County Health Department.
   (K)   Except as specified in § 176 (Trade Secrets) of 410 I.A.C. 7-24, the
County Health Department shall treat the inspection report as a public
document, and shall make it available for disclosure to a person who requests
it as provided in law. (See I.C. 16-20-8-6.)
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 11-4-2019) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.09 TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT VIOLATIONS, REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The County Health Department may inspect a temporary retail food
establishment for which a permit is required under the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   If, during the inspection of any temporary retail food establishment,
the County Health Department discovers the violations of any of the
requirements in the provisions of this chapter, it shall order the immediate
correction of the violation(s).
   (C)   The person operating the temporary retail food establishment shall,
upon the request of the County Health Department, permit the County Health
Department access to all parts of the temporary retail food establishment, and
shall permit the collecting of evidence and exhibits, and the copying of any,
or all, records relative to the enforcement of this chapter.
   (D)   Upon failure of any person maintaining, or operating, a temporary
retail food establishment to comply with any order of the County Health
Department, it shall be the duty of the County Health Department to immediately
revoke, or suspend, the permit of such person and establishment, and to forbid
the further sale, or serving, of food therein.
   (E)   Any person continuing to sell, or serve, food in such temporary retail
food establishment whose permit has been revoked, or suspended, shall be
subject to the penalties specified in §
111.99.
   (F)   Those establishments having their permit suspended, or revoked, by the
County Health Department shall be placarded by the County Health Department
with an official notice to the effect that the establishment is closed by order
of the County Health Department. It shall be illegal to remove, damage, or
deface such notice prior to the establishment being allowed to resume operation
by the County Health Department.
   (G)   Except as specified in § 176 (Trade Secrets) of 410 I.A.C. 7-24, the
County Health Department shall treat the inspection report as a public
document, and shall make it available for disclosure to a person who requests
it as provided in law. (See I.C. 16-20-8-6.)
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 11-4-2019)
§ 111.10 TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Any permit issued under this chapter may be temporarily suspended by
the County Health Department without notice, or hearing, for a period not to
exceed 30 days for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   An imminent health hazard, such as lack of refrigeration, sewage
backup into the bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment,
seasonal retail food establishment, or mobile retail food establishment, loss
of hot water supply, major rodent or insect infestation, fire, flood, or an
extended power outage. The bed and breakfast establishment, retail food
establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, or mobile retail food
establishment shall immediately cease retail food operations. An operator need
not discontinue operations in an area of an establishment that is unaffected by
the imminent health hazard;
      (2)   Unsanitary, or other conditions, that, in the County Health
Department’s opinion, endangers the public’s health;
      (3)   Interference with the County Health Department in the performance
of its duties; and/or
      (4)   Undue harassment of the County Health Department Food Safety
Specialist in the performance of his or her duties.
   (B)   Any person whose permit has been suspended may, at any time, make
application to the County Health Department for the reinstatement of his or her
permit.
   (C)   The County Health Department shall conduct an administrative
proceeding for suspension and/or revocation of the bed and breakfast
establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment,
mobile retail food establishment, and/or temporary food establishment permit,
which shall occur no later than five days from written application from the bed
and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment, seasonal retail food
establishment, mobile retail food establishment, and/or temporary food
establishment permit.
   (D)   Any such suspension order shall be issued by the County Health
Department, in writing, and served upon the owner, or person in charge, by
leaving a copy at his or her usual place of business, or by delivery of
registered, or certified, mail to such address. Operations shall not be resumed
until authorized by the County Health Department.
   (E)   If a bed and breakfast establishment, retail food establishment,
seasonal retail food establishment, mobile retail food establishment, and/or
temporary retail food establishment has discontinued operations for the reasons
stated in division (A) above, or otherwise according to law, the operator must
obtain approval from the County Health Department before resuming operations.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 11-4-2019)
§ 111.11 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   A person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter commits a
chapter violation.
   (B)   Each day of operation of a bed and breakfast establishment, retail
food establishment, seasonal retail food establishment, mobile retail food
establishment, or temporary retail food establishment in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, or after the expiration of the time limit for
abating insanitary conditions, and completing improvements to abate such
conditions as ordered by the County Health Department, shall constitute a
distinct and separate violation.
   (C)   In addition to the violations prescribed in divisions (A) and (B)
above, the County Health Department may seek injunctive relief, and all the
remedies available, in a court of equity.
   (D)   In addition to the violations prescribed in divisions (A) and (B)
above, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable
for the costs of litigation including, but not limited to, attorney fees,
deposition fees, the costs of expert witnesses, lab testing expenses, and court
costs.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 11-4-2019)
§ 111.12 ENFORCEMENT.
   This chapter shall be enforced by the County Health Department, with the
assistance of the County Attorney, or his or her appointed deputies, and, in
appropriate cases, by the County Prosecuting Attorney.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 11-4-2019)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   In the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the County
Health Department may proceed, and/or recommend, one or more enforcement
options.
      (1)   The County Board of Health may adopt a policy for the issuing of
citations based on violation of the retail food establishment and/or bed and
breakfast establishment requirements. For this purpose, the Health Department
is hereby designated as the Ordinance Violations Clerk, and a civil penalty for
such violation may be imposed according to a penalty schedule to be adopted by
the County Board of Health, but with no single civil penalty to exceed $1,000.
Penalties so collected shall be deposited into the county’s General Fund.
Appeals from any citation shall follow the procedure set forth in §
111.10(B).
      (2)   The County Health Officer may issue an order to abate based on a
condition that may transmit, generate, or promote disease. Failure on the part
of the operator to comply with the order may result in the enforcement of the
order in the court of jurisdiction by the initiation of an action by the County
Attorney or County Prosecuting Attorney. (See I.C. 16-20-1-25.)
      (3)   If the action concerning public health is a chapter violation, the
County Attorney, or County Prosecuting Attorney, may institute a proceeding in
the courts for the enforcement of the chapter violation, in that manner set
forth by I.C. 34-28-5-1. The maximum penalty, which may be levied for such
violation, may not exceed $1,000.
   (B)   If the action concerning public health is a criminal offense, the
County Prosecuting Attorney may institute a proceeding in the courts for
enforcement. (See I.C. 16-20-1-25.)
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 11-4-2019)
CHAPTER 112: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Purpose; rationale and findings
   
112.02   Definitions
   
112.03   Classifications
   
112.04   License required
   
112.05   Issuance of license
   
112.06   Fees
   
112.07   Inspection
Licensing Regulations
   
112.20   Expiration of license
   
112.21   Suspension
   
112.22   Revocation
   
112.23   Hearing; license denial; revocation, suspension; appeal
   
112.24   Transfer of license
   
112.25   Hours of operation
   
112.26   Regulations on sexually-explicit films, videos
   
112.27   Loitering; exterior lighting, visibility; monitoring requirements
   
112.28   Enforcement
   
112.29   Existing businesses; applicability
   
112.30   Prohibited activities
   
112.31   Proof of violation, business licensee liability
   
112.32   Failure of county; applicant licensee rights
   
112.33   Location
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 PURPOSE; RATIONALE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-
oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, moral, and general
welfare of the citizens of the county, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually-oriented
businesses within the county. The provisions of this chapter have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation, or restriction, on the content, or
reasonable access, to any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented
materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by
the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this chapter to condone, or legitimize, the distribution
of obscene material.
   (B)   Rationale and findings. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary
effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to
the Board of Commissioners, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing
constructions incorporated in the cases of:
      (1)   Ginsburg V. U.S., 383 US 463 (1966); Ginsburg V. State, 390 US 629
(1968); Roth V. U.S., 354 U.S. 476 (1957); U.S. V. O’Brien, 391 U.S. 367
(1968); City of Littleton V. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City
of Los Angeles V. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); Pap’s A.M. V. City
of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton V. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475
U.S. 41 (1986); Young V. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes V.
Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California V. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109
(1972); Hollywood Theatre Corporation V. City of Indianapolis, 34 NE 2d 28 (IN
1941); Schultz V. City of Cumberland, 26 F.Supp.2d 1128 (W.D. Wise 1998), 228
F.3d 831 (7th Cir. 2000); Blue Canary Corp. V. City of Milwaukee, 270 F.3d 1156
(7th Cir. 2001); Matney V. County of Kenosha, 86 F.3d 692 (7th Cir. 1996); Berg
V. Health & Hospital Corp., 865 F.2d 797 (1989); DiMa Corp. V. Town of Hallie,
185 F.3d 823 (1999); Graff V. City of Chicago, 9 F.3d 1309 (1993); North Avenue
Novelties, Inc. V. City of Chicago, 88 F.3d 441 (1996); Chulchian V. City of
Indianapolis, 663 F.2d 27 (7th Cir. 1980); Bigg Wolf Discount Video V.
Montgomery County, 256 F.Supp.2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); World Wide Video of
Washington, Inc. V. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben’s Bar,
Inc. V. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); LLEH, Inc. V.
Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); People V. Goldsmith, 287 NE 2d
177 (ILL. 1972) ; Logan V. State, 836 NE 2d 467 (IN. 2005); and Albright V.
State, 461 NE 2d 744 (IN. 1984);
      (2)   Based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in, and
around, sexually-oriented businesses, including, but not limited to: Austin,
Texas, 1997 and 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana, 1984; Garden Grove, California,
1991; Houston, Texas, 1983 and 1997; Phoenix, Arizona, 1979 and 1995-98; Los
Angeles, California, 1977; Whittier, California, 1978; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma,
1992 and 1986; Dallas, Texas, 1997; Amarillo, Texas, 1977; New York, New York
Times Square, 1980 and 1994; and the Report of the Attorney General’s Working
Group On The Regulation of Sexually-Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State
of Minnesota); Environmental Research Group of Philadelphia (March 31, 1996);
Tucson, Arizona, 1990; Beaumont, Texas, 1982; and One Slip, New York, 1980; and
      (3)   Based upon a review of state statutes, including I.C. 22-14-3-1,
I.C. 35-45-4-1, I.C. 35-49-1-9, I.C. 35-49-2-1, I.C. 35-49-3-2, and other
statutes, the Board of Commissioners finds:
         (a)   Sexually-oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses,
are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but
not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of
disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug
trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter,
and sexual assault and exploitation;
         (b)   Sexually-oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive
land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and
should be separated from other sexually-oriented businesses to minimize the
secondary effects associated with such uses, and to prevent an unnecessary
concentration of sexually-oriented businesses in one area; and
         (c)   Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a
harm which the county has a substantial government interest in preventing and/
or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary
effects, which is the county’s rationale for this chapter, exists independent
of any comparative analysis between sexually-oriented and non-sexually-oriented
businesses. Additionally, the county’s interest in regulating sexually-oriented
businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or
future sexually-oriented businesses that may locate in the county. The county
finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this chapter are reasonably
believed to be relevant to said secondary effects.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Auditor of the county.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. A commercial establishment which, as a principal part of
its business, offers for sale, or rental, for any form of consideration, any
one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs,
digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas. A PRINCIPAL PART OF ITS BUSINESS means that the
commercial establishment:
      (1)   Has at least 35% of its displayed merchandise which consists of
said items;
      (2)   Has at least 35% of the wholesale value of its displayed
merchandise which consists of said items;
      (3)   Has at least 35% of the retail value of its displayed merchandise
which consists of said items;
      (4)   Derives at least 35% of its revenues from the sale, or rental, for
any form of consideration of said items;
      (5)   Maintains a section of at least 35% of its interior business space
for the sale, or rental, of said items; or
      (6)   Maintains an ADULT ARCADE, which means any place to which the
public is permitted, or invited, wherein coin-operated or slug-operated, or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time,
and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon
matter exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or
other commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served,
which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude.
   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Any commercial establishment which
regularly offers rooms with a capacity of more than five, but less than 50,
persons, wherein films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar
visual images that are distinguished, or characterized, by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly
presented for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT MOTEL. A motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, other photographic reproductions, or live
performances which are characterized by the display of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; and which advertises the availability
of such material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by
means of any on- or off-premises advertising, including, but not limited to,
newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio, or television;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions, which
are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, are regularly shown to more than five
persons for any form of consideration.
   ADULT SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any building, premises, structure, or other
facility that uses at least 35% of the building, premises, structure, or other
facility for commercial activities involving the display of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The Board of Commissioners of the county.
   CHARACTERIZED BY. Describing the essential character or quality of an item.
As applied in this chapter, no business shall be classified as a sexually-
oriented business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-
17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America.
   COUNTY. The County of Dubois, State of Indiana.
   EMPLOY, EMPLOYEE, and EMPLOYMENT. Any person who performs any service on the
premises of a sexually-oriented business, on a full-time, part-time, or
contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. EMPLOYEE does not include a person
exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises, or for
the delivery of goods to the premises.
   ESTABLISH OR ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually-
oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business; and/or
      (3)   The addition of any sexually-oriented business to any other
existing sexually-oriented business.
   HEARING BODY. The Board of Commissioners.
   INFLUENTIAL INTEREST. Any of the following:
      (1)   The actual power to operate the sexually-oriented business, or
control the operation, management, or policies of the sexually-oriented
business, or the legal entity which operates the sexually-oriented business;
      (2)   Ownership of a financial interest of 30% or more of a business, or
of any class of voting securities of a business; and/or
      (3)   Holding an office (for example, president, vice president,
secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, and the like) in a
legal entity which operates the sexually-oriented business.
   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually-oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual, or individuals, listed as
an applicant on the application for a sexually-oriented business license. In
the case of an employee, it shall mean the person in whose name the sexually-
oriented business employee license has been issued.
   NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
   OPERATOR or CAUSE TO OPERATE. To cause to function, or to put or keep in a
state of doing business. OPERATOR means any person on the premises of a
sexually-oriented business who causes the business to function, or who puts, or
keeps in operation, the business, or who is authorized to manage the business
or exercise overall operational control of the business premises. A person may
be found to be operating, or CAUSING TO BE OPERATED, a sexually-oriented
business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the
business.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
   PREMISES. The real property upon which the sexually-oriented business is
located, and all appurtenances thereto, and buildings thereon, including, but
not limited to, the sexually-oriented business, the grounds, any trailers,
private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto,
under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in
the application for a business license pursuant to §
112.04.
   REGULARLY. The consistent and repeated doing of the act so described.
   SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIO. A place where persons regularly appear in a state of
semi-nudity for money, or any form of consideration, in order to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons. This definition does not apply to any place where persons
appearing in a state of semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
      (1)   By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely, or
partly, by taxation;
      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains, and operates,
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely, or partly, by taxation; or
      (3)   In a structure:
         (a)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure,
and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for
viewing; and
         (b)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class.
   SEMI-NUDE or STATE OF SEMI-NUDITY. The showing of the female breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola, and extending across the width of
the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This
definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but
shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts
exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing
apparel, provided the areola is not exposed, in whole or in part.
   SEXUAL DEVICE. Any three-dimensional object designed and marketed for
stimulation of the male or female human genital organ or anus, or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, and shall include devices
such as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the
human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include
devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted
diseases, or for preventing pregnancy.
   SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. A commercial establishment that regularly features
sexual devices. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include any
pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated
to providing medical or healthcare products, or services, nor shall this
definition be construed to include commercial establishments which do not
restrict access to any portion of their premises by reason of age.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purposes, purports to offer, for any form of
consideration, physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
any persons when one, or more, of the persons is semi-nude.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult bookstore, an adult cabaret, an adult
mini-motion picture theater, an adult motel, an adult motion picture theater,
an adult service establishment, a semi-nude model studio, a sexual device shop,
or a sexual encounter center, as defined in this section. The term SEXUALLY-
ORIENTED BUSINESS shall also include an adult drive-in theater, an adult live
entertainment arcade, and an adult motion picture arcade.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.
      (1)   Any of the following specified crimes for which less than five
years elapsed since the date of conviction, or the date of release from
confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date:
         (a)   Rape, sexual assault, public indecency, statutory rape, rape of
a child, sexual exploitation of a minor, indecent exposure;
         (b)   Prostitution, patronizing prostitution, promoting prostitution;
         (c)   Obscenity;
         (d)   Dealing in controlled substances; and
         (e)   Racketeering, tax evasion, money laundering.
      (2)   Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the
foregoing offenses; or
      (3)   Any offense in another jurisdiction that had the predicate act(s)
been committed in the state would have constituted any of the foregoing
offenses.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following:
      (1)   Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; and
      (2)   Excretory functions as a part of, or in connection with, any of the
activities described in division (1) above.
   SUBSTANTIAL. At least 35% of the item(s) so modified.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL. Any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; and/or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership, or control, of the business, except for transfer
by bequest, or other operation of law, upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control.
   VIEWING ROOM. The room, booth, or area where a patron of a sexually-oriented
business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette,
or other video reproduction.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 112.03 CLASSIFICATIONS.
   The classifications for sexually-oriented businesses shall be as follows:
   (A)   Adult bookstore;
   (B)   Adult cabaret;
   (C)   Adult motel;
   (D)   Adult mini-motion picture theater;
   (E)   Adult motion picture theater;
   (F)   Adult service establishment;
   (G)   Semi-nude model studio;
   (H)   Sexual device shop; and
   (I)   Sexual encounter center.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 112.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually-oriented
business in the county without a valid sexually-oriented business license.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be an employee, as defined in §
112.02, of a sexually-oriented business in the county without a valid sexually-
oriented business employee license.
   (C)   (1)   An applicant for a sexually-oriented business license, or a
sexually-oriented business employee license, shall file in person, at the
office of the Administrator, a completed application made on a form provided by
the Administrator. The application shall be signed, as required by division (E)
below, and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when
it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information
and/or items required in divisions (C)(1)(a) through (C)(1)(g) below,
accompanied by the appropriate fee identified in §
112.06:
         (a)   The applicant’s full true name, and any other names used by the
applicant in the preceding five years;
         (b)   Current business address, or another mailing address, of the
applicant;
         (c)   Written proof of age, in the form of a driver’s license, or a
copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document
issued by a governmental agency;
         (d)   If the application is for a sexually-oriented business license,
the business name, location, legal description, mailing address, and phone
number of the sexually-oriented business;
         (e)   If the application is for a sexually-oriented business license,
the name and business address of the statutory agent, or other agent authorized
to receive service of process;
         (f)   A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of, or
has pled guilty or nolo contendere, to a specified criminal activity, as
defined in §
112.02, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the
date, place, and jurisdiction of each, as well as the dates of conviction and
release from confinement, where applicable; and
         (g)   A statement of whether any sexually-oriented business, in which
an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years
(and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest):
            1.   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or
            2.   Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking.
      (2)   The information provided pursuant to divisions (C)(1)(a) through
(C)(1)(g) above shall be supplemented, in writing, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the Administrator within ten working days of a change of
circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or
incomplete.
   (D)   An application for a sexually-oriented business license shall be
accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is
located, and a sketch, or diagram, showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The
sketch, or diagram, need not be professionally prepared, but shall be drawn to
a designated scale, or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who are
required to comply with §§
112.26 and
112.30 shall submit a diagram indicating that the interior configuration meets
the requirements of those sections.
   (E)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is an
individual, he or she shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If
a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is other than an
individual, each person with an influential interest in the business shall sign
the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified
under §
112.05, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
   (F)   The information provided by an applicant in connection with an
application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the office
of the Administrator on a confidential basis, and such information may be
disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required by law or
court order.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.05 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon the filing of a completed application under §
112.04(C) for a sexually-oriented business license, the Administrator shall
immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant, which temporary license
shall expire upon the final decision of the county to deny or grant an annual
license. Within 20 days of the filing date of a completed sexually-oriented
business license application, the Administrator shall issue a license to the
applicant, or issue to the applicant a letter of intent to deny the
application. The Administrator shall issue a license unless:
      (1)   An applicant is less than 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant has failed to provide information, as required by §
112.04, for issuance of a license, or has falsely answered a question, or
request for information, on the application form;
      (3)   The license application fee required by this chapter has not been
paid;
      (4)   The sexually-oriented business, as defined herein, is not in
compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this chapter, or is
not in compliance with locational requirements of this chapter, or the
locational requirements of any other county ordinance;
      (5)   Any sexually-oriented business in which the applicant has had an
influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during
which the applicant had the influential interest):
         (a)   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or
         (b)   Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking.
      (6)   An applicant has been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo
contendere to, a specified criminal activity, as defined in §
112.02.
   (B)   Upon the filing of a completed application under §
112.04(C) for a sexually-oriented business employee license, the Administrator
shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant, which temporary
license shall expire upon the final decision of the county to deny or grant an
annual license. Within 20 days of the filing date of a completed sexually-
oriented business employee license application, the Administrator shall either
issue a license, or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license, to the
applicant. The Administrator shall approve the issuance of a license unless:
      (1)   The applicant is less than 18 years of age;
      (2)   The applicant has failed to provide information, as required by §
112.04, for issuance of a license, or has falsely answered a question, or
request for information, on the application form;
      (3)   The license application fee required by this chapter has not been
paid;
      (4)   Any sexually-oriented business in which the applicant has had an
influential interest has, in the previous five years (and at a time during
which the applicant had the influential interest):
         (a)   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or
         (b)   Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking.
      (5)   The applicant has been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo
contendere to, a specified criminal activity, as defined in §
112.02.
   (C)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person, or persons, to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to
the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually-
oriented business, the address of the sexually-oriented business. The sexually-
oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at, or near,
the entrance to the sexually-oriented business so that it may be read at any
time. A sexually-oriented business employee shall keep the employee’s license
on his or her person, or on the premises where the licensee is then working or
performing.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 112.06 FEES.
   The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually-oriented business
licenses, and sexually-oriented business employee licenses, shall be as
follows: $100 for the initial fee for a sexually-oriented business license, and
$50 for annual renewal; $50 for the initial sexually-oriented business employee
license, and $25 for annual renewal.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 112.07 INSPECTION.
   Sexually-oriented businesses, and sexually-oriented business employees,
shall permit the Administrator, and his or her agents, to inspect, from time to
time on an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually-oriented business
premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with the specific regulations of this chapter, during those times when the
sexually-oriented business is occupied by patrons, or is open to the public.
This section shall be narrowly construed by the county to authorize reasonable
inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this chapter, but not to
authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006)
LICENSING REGULATIONS
§ 112.20 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from
the date of issuance, unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may
be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee, as provided in §§
112.04 and
112.06.
   (B)   Application for renewal should be made pursuant to the procedures set
forth in §
112.04 at least 90 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 90
days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be
affected.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 112.21 SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The county shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a
sexually-oriented business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the
sexually-oriented business licensee has knowingly violated this chapter, or has
knowingly allowed an employee to violate this chapter.
   (B)   The county shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a
sexually-oriented business employee license if the employee has knowingly
violated this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 112.22 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The county shall issue a letter of intent to revoke a sexually-
oriented business license, or a sexually-oriented business employee license, as
applicable, if the licensee knowingly violates this chapter, or has knowingly
allowed an employee to violate this chapter, and the licensee’s license has
been suspended within the previous 12-month period.
   (B)   The county shall issue written intent to revoke a sexually-oriented
business license, or a sexually-oriented business employee license, as
applicable, if:
      (1)   The licensee has knowingly given false information in the
application for the sexually-oriented business license;
      (2)   The licensee has knowingly, or recklessly, engaged in, or allowed,
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (3)   The licensee has knowingly, or recklessly, engaged in, or allowed,
prostitution solicitation, or engage in any other criminal acts on the
premises;
      (4)   The licensee knowingly, or recklessly, operated the sexually-
oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally
suspended or revoked; or
      (5)   The licensee has knowingly, or recklessly, engaged in, or allowed,
any specified sexual activity to occur in, or on, the licensed premises.
   (C)   The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which
serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal,
that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation
purposes.
   (D)   When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in §
112.23, the Board of Commissioners revokes a license, the revocation shall
continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented
business license, or sexually-oriented business employee license, for one year
from the date the revocation becomes effective.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 112.23 HEARING; LICENSE DENIAL; REVOCATION, SUSPENSION; APPEAL.
   (A)   When the Administrator issues a written notice of intent to deny,
suspend, or revoke a license, the Administrator shall immediately send such
notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this chapter for such
action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or
certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business
address, or other mailing address, on file with the Administrator for the
respondent. The notice shall specify a date, not less than ten days, nor more
than 20 days, after the date the notice is issued, on which the Board of
Commissioners shall conduct a hearing on the Administrator’s intent to deny,
suspend, or revoke the license.
      (1)   At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to
present all of the respondent’s arguments, and to be represented by counsel,
present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross examine any of
the Administrator’s witnesses. The Administrator shall also be represented by
counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying,
suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two
days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements
of due process and proper administration of justice. The Board of Commissioners
shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision
pursuant to this chapter, to the respondent within five days after the hearing.
Ten days after the Board issues its written decision, said decision shall be
deemed final, and any temporary license shall expire.
      (2)   If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the
decision shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to
appeal, or challenge, such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction. If
the Board of Commissioners’ decision finds that no grounds exist for denial,
suspension, or revocation of the license, the Board of Commissioners shall,
contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the Administrator to
immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, and to
notify the respondent, in writing by certified mail, of such action. If the
respondent is not yet licensed, the Administrator shall contemporaneously
therewith issue the license to the applicant.
   (B)   If any court action challenging the Board of Commissioners’ decision
is initiated, the Board of Commissioners shall prepare, and transmit to the
court, a transcript of the hearing within ten days after receiving written
notice of the filing of the court action. The Board of Commissioners shall
consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply
with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt
judicial review of the proceedings. The following shall apply to any sexually-
oriented business that is lawfully in operation, in all respects, as of the
effective date of this chapter: Upon the filing of any court action to appeal,
challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the county’s enforcement of the
denial, suspension, or revocation, the county shall immediately issue the
respondent a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the
respondent to continue operation of the sexually-oriented business, or to
continue employment as a sexually-oriented business employee, and will expire
upon the court’s entry of a judgment on the respondent’s appeal, or other
action to restrain, or otherwise enjoin, the county’s enforcement.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 112.24 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually-oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the sexually-oriented
business license application.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.25 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No sexually-oriented business shall be, or remain, open for business between
12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.26 REGULATIONS ON SEXUALLY-EXPLICIT FILMS, VIDEOS.
   (A)   A person who operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually-oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, through
any mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, videocassette, or
other visual reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of
specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with
the following requirements.
      (1)   Each application for a sexually-oriented business license shall
contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator’s
stations, viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, video cameras, and
monitors installed for monitoring purposes, and restrooms, and shall designate
all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms
shall not contain video reproduction equipment. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally-prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or
architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be
oriented to the north, or to some designated street or object, and shall be
drawn to a designated scale, or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the
various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Administrator may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted, and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of
the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted in the application filed pursuant to division (A)(1) above.
      (3)   The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles, as
measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any
employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described
above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons, or
open for business.
      (4)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no specified sexual activity occurs in, or on,
the licensed premises.
      (5)   It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in
well-lighted entry areas of the business, stating all of the following:
         (a)   The occupancy of viewing rooms is limited to one person;
         (b)   Sexual activity on the premises is prohibited;
         (c)   The making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited;
         (d)   Violators will be required to leave the premises; and
         (e)   Violations of divisions (A)(5)(a) through (A)(5)(c) above are
unlawful.
      (6)   It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations
articulated in divisions (A)(5)(a) though (A)(5)(d) above.
      (7)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a operator’s station of every area of
the premises, including the interior of each viewing room, but excluding
restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An
operator’s station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. If the
premises has two or more operator’s stations designated, then the interior of
the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the operator’s stations. The view required in
this division (A)(7) must be by direct line of sight from the operator’s
station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is
on duty and situated in each operator’s station at all times that any patron is
on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the
duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area
specified in this division (A)(7) remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains,
walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials, or enclosures, at all
times that any patron is present on the premises.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to
knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.27 LOITERING; EXTERIOR LIGHTING, VISIBILITY; MONITORING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually-oriented business
to:
      (1)   Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on
such property;
      (2)   Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of
persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once
every 90 minutes, or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and
monitors; and
      (3)   Provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual
inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. If used, video cameras
and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises is open
for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator’s station.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to
knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.
   (C)   No sexually-oriented business shall erect a fence, wall, or other
barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for the establishment
from being visible from a public right-of-way.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.28 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any sexually-oriented business which engages in repeated, or
continuing, violations of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. For
the purposes of this chapter, REPEATED VIOLATIONS shall mean three or more
violations of this chapter within a one-year period dating from the time of any
violation, and a CONTINUING VIOLATION shall mean a violation of this chapter
lasting for three or more consecutive days.
   (B)   The county’s legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil
proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this chapter to prosecute,
restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings, including injunction,
shall be brought in the name of the county, provided, however, that nothing in
this section, and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such
proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this chapter, or any of
the laws or ordinances in force in the county, or to exempt anyone violating
this chapter, or any part of the said laws, from any penalty which may be
incurred.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 112.29 EXISTING BUSINESSES; APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter is necessary to the immediate preservation of the public health
and safety, to prevent the negative secondary effects of sexually-oriented
businesses, and therefore shall become effective immediately upon passage. All
sexually-oriented businesses lawfully operating in all respects, and all
sexually-oriented business employees working in a lawfully operating sexually-
oriented business, on the effective date of this chapter, are hereby granted a
de facto temporary license to continue operation or employment without a
license for a period of 30 days following the effective date of this chapter.
By the end of said 30 days, all sexually-oriented businesses, and sexually-
oriented business employees, shall apply for a license under this chapter.
During said 30 days, all requirements of this chapter, except for the
requirement of obtaining a license, shall be in full force and effect.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 112.30 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a sexually-oriented business to knowingly violate
the following regulations, or to knowingly allow an employee, or any other
person, to violate the following regulations:
      (1)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a patron, employee, or
any other person to knowingly, or intentionally, in a sexually-oriented
business, appear in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such public nudity
is expressive in nature;
      (2)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to knowingly,
or intentionally, in a sexually-oriented business, appear in a semi-nude
condition, unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, remains at
least six feet from any patron or customer, and on a stage at least 18 inches
from the floor in a room of at least 1,000 square feet;
      (3)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any employee who
regularly appears semi-nude in a sexually-oriented business to knowingly, or
intentionally, touch a customer, or the clothing of a customer, on the premises
of a sexually-oriented business;
      (4)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell,
use, possess, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually-
oriented business; and
      (5)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly
allow a person under 18 years of age to be, or remain, on the premises of a
sexually-oriented business.
   (B)   A sign in a form to be prescribed by the Administrator, and
summarizing the provisions of divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5) above, shall be
posted near the entrance of the sexually-oriented business in such a manner as
to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.31 PROOF OF VIOLATION, BUSINESS LICENSEE LIABILITY.
   This chapter does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental
state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing, or reckless,
mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this
chapter. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this
chapter, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension, or
revocation, of that employee’s license shall be imputed to the sexually-
oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this chapter,
or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an
officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or
controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly, or recklessly,
allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability
that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 112.32 FAILURE OF COUNTY; APPLICANT LICENSEE RIGHTS.
   In the event that a county official is required to take an act, or do a
thing, pursuant to this chapter within a prescribed time, and fails to take
such act, or do such thing, within the time prescribed, said failure shall not
prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If
the act required of the county official under this chapter, and not completed
in the time prescribed, includes the approval of condition(s) necessary for
approval by the county of an applicant’s, or licensee’s, application for a
sexually-oriented business license, or a sexually-oriented business employee’s
license (including a renewal), the condition shall be deemed met the day after
the deadline for the county’s action has passed.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 112.33 LOCATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a
sexually-oriented business in the county, unless said sexually-oriented
business is at least:
      (1)   One thousand feet from any parcel occupied by another sexually-
oriented business, or by a business licensed by the state to sell alcohol at
the premises; and
      (2)   One thousand feet from any parcel occupied by any church, public or
private elementary or secondary school, daycare center or preschool, public
park, or any residence.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a
straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of any building or structure on the premises
where the sexually-oriented business is located to the closest property line of
the property containing the church, public or private elementary or secondary
school, daycare center or preschool, public park, or any residence.
   (C)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any county ordinance, a
non-conforming sexually-oriented business lawfully existing in all respects
under law prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to operate
for one year following that date in order to make a reasonable recoupment of
its investment in its current location. At the conclusion of said one year, the
use will no longer be recognized as a lawful non-conforming use, provided that
a non-conforming sexually-oriented business may apply for one, or more, six-
month extensions of the original one-year period upon a showing of financial
hardship. An application for an initial extension based upon a showing of
financial hardship (“hardship extension”) shall be made at least 60 days before
the conclusion of the aforementioned one-year period. If a hardship extension
is granted, subsequent applications for hardship extensions shall be made at
least 60 days before the conclusion of the non-conforming sexually-oriented
business’s current extension period.
   (D)   An application for a hardship extension shall be filed, in writing,
with the Administrator, and shall include evidence of purchase and improvement
costs, income earned and lost, depreciation, and costs of relocation. Within
ten days after receiving the application, the Administrator shall schedule a
public hearing on the application before the Board of Commissioners, which
public hearing shall be conducted within 30 days after the Administrator’s
receipt of the application. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing
shall be published at least ten days before the hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation published within the county, and shall contain the
particular location for which the hardship extension is requested. The Board of
Commissioners shall issue a written decision within ten days after the public
hearing on the application for a hardship extension. The hardship extension
shall be granted upon a showing that the non-conforming sexually-oriented
business is unable, absent the extension, to make a reasonable recoupment of
its investment in its currently lawful, non-conforming use location.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-19-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 113: TATTOO, BODY PIERCING BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Purpose
   
113.02   Definitions
   
113.03   Operator responsibilities
   
113.04   Responsibilities; minimum training, certification requirements
   
113.05   Patron records
   
113.06   Hand washing
   
113.07   Illness
   
113.08   Tattooing equipment
   
113.09   Needles, instruments, contaminated sharps
   
113.10   Personal protective equipment
   
113.11   Reusable equipment
   
113.12   Dyes, pigments, jewelry
   
113.13   Work environment
   
113.14   Treatment, transportation of infectious waste
   
113.15   Prohibited acts
Licensing Regulations
   
113.30   Permits
   
113.31   Inspections
   
113.32   Procedures when violations are noted
   
113.33   Permit suspension; revocation; closure orders
   
113.34   Enforcement
   
113.35   Injunction
   
113.36   Expense
 
   
113.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 PURPOSE.
   All places, individuals, and businesses that offer to affix any type of
permanent tattoo to a person shall be regulated by this chapter, and shall
maintain the premises in which tattoos and piercings are performed, and
equipment used in the process, in a sanitary manner.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   All definitions set forth in 410 I.A.C. 1-5 and I.C. 35-45-21-4(b),
and as amended hereafter, are hereby incorporated by reference (and are not
being repeated in this chapter). TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING, as defined in 410
I.A.C. 1-5 for the purposes of this chapter, does not include practices that
are considered medical or dental procedures by a state medical or dental board.
Nor does this definition include piercing of the lobe of the ear with pre-
sterilized, single use, stud-and-clasp ear-piercing systems. Unless the context
specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the additional terms used in
this chapter shall be as follows in division (B) below.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BODY. A human body.
      BRANDING. A form of extreme body modifications and scarification using a
superheated metal object, chemical, or electricity to burn an image into the
human body.
      CONTAMINATED SHARP. Any object that can cut or penetrate the skin,
including, but not limited to needles, razors, scalpels, and other similar
objects used to penetrate the skin.
      CUTTING. A method of extreme body modification and scarification which
creates scars on the skin by using a sharp object, such as a scalpel or knife,
to cut into the skin. CUTTING is differentiated from a method called skin
peeling in that no tissue is removed to create the scar during the cutting
method.
      DEPARTMENT. The County Health Department.
      DERMAL PUNCHING. A method of creating piercings in the body, which
removes a segment of tissue, as opposed to traditional piercing, which makes a
half moon shaped slice in the tissue. It is generally used when large gauge
jewelry insertion is desired at the time of the procedure.
      EXTREME BODY MODIFICATION. Any method, other than tattoo, permanent
makeup, or body piercing methods, used to alter the human skin.
      FACILITY. The meaning set forth in 410 I.A.C. 1-3-7.
      HEALTH OFFICER. The duly-appointed County Health Officer, as set forth in
I.C. 16-20-2-16. The County Health Officer, or his or her authorized designee,
shall enforce this chapter. The HEALTH OFFICER may designate a representative
in the Health Department to perform those duties and responsibilities of the
HEALTH OFFICER.
      IMPLANTATION. A form of extreme body modification where items, such as
shaped metal or other foreign bodies, are placed under the skin to produce the
outline and texture of the desired image on the surface of the skin, or a
protrusion from the surface of the body.
      NULLIFICATION. The voluntary removal of body parts. Most commonly this
means castration (and sometimes penectomy), amputation of fingers or toes, or,
in extreme cases, removal of full limbs.
      SCARIFICATION. A form of extreme body modification that uses methods, or
techniques, to produce scars on the human body for decorative purposes.
Examples of SCARIFICATION methods include branding, cutting, and skin peeling.
      SKIN PEELING. A technique of extreme body modification and scarification
which consists of cutting on the human body the outline of a design and
removing the center, thereby creating a scar where the skin was removed.
      SUSPENSION PIERCING. The act of hanging the human body from, or partially
from, hooks pierced through the flesh in various places around the body.
      TONGUE BIFURCATION. A non-surgical process in which the tongue is split
with the use of lasers or nylon material.
      TONGUE SPLITTING. A surgical procedure in which the tongue is cut
centrally from its tip part of the way towards its base, forking the end.
      UNREGULATED (UNAPPROVED AND APPROVED) INVASIVE BODY MODIFICATION. The act
of performing branding, cutting, dermal punching, implantation, scarification,
skin peeling, tongue splitting, suspension piercing, or any other extreme body
modification not otherwise specifically approved in these regulations, or use
of any drug or cosmetic other than topical over-the-counter anesthetic, and/or
performing any recognized medical procedure not specifically approved in these
regulations by any person other than a licensed medical professional.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 113.03 OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The tattoo and body piercing facility operator has the responsibility to
notify the County Health Department of any change of ownership or employment of
licensed tattoo artists at the permitted facility within five business days of
its occurrence. Failure to notify the County Department of Health within five
business days will result in a $25 fine for each occurrence.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 113.04 RESPONSIBILITIES; MINIMUM TRAINING, CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The following information shall be kept on file on the premises of a
tattoo and body piercing facility, and available for inspection by the County
Health Department upon request:
      (1)   Full name, date of birth, gender, and identification photos of all
operators/artists;
      (2)   Proof that all artists and operators are a minimum of 18 years of
age; and
      (3)   Each artist and operator should be able to provide documentation of
the following information upon request of the Health Department:
         (a)   That each artist and operator has completed the hepatitis B
vaccination series;
         (b)   That antibody testing has revealed that the employee is immune
to hepatitis B, or that the vaccine is contraindicated for medical reasons;
         (c)   If the artist and operator have not completed the hepatitis B
vaccination series, he or she shall provide documentation showing at least the
first of the series of hepatitis B vaccination has been received, and must show
proof of completion of the series within six months of the issue of the first
permit; and
         (d)   A bloodborne pathogen training certification updated annually.
   (B)   All artists and operators must:
      (1)   Possess a valid artist permit issued by the County Health
Department, and shall be posted at the facility in the place where the tattoos
or body piercing are performed, and shall be clearly visible to the public;
      (2)   Prepare the skin area before a procedure by cleaning with
germicidal soap, rinsing with water, and disinfecting with an antiseptic
solution;
      (3)   Require all oral piercings to be preceded by the patron performing
a minimum of a one minute vigorous application of an antiseptic mouthwash;
      (4)   Protect the tattooed area after a procedure by applying
antibacterial ointment, and a single use, non-adherent bandage with an
impermeable cover that must be worn until the patron leaves the facility;
      (5)   Provide each patron, or legal guardian (if patron is less than 18
years of age), verbal and written guidelines for the after care of the tattoo
or body piercing; and
      (6)   The written public education materials shall:
         (a)   Provide guidelines to the patron regarding methods for proper
cleansing, side effects, activity restrictions, infection prevention, such as
the use of bactericidal creams and ointments, soap, and appropriate barrier
dressings where indicated;
         (b)   Advise the patron to consult a physician or dentist, as
appropriate, at any indication of infection, such as fever, pus-like drainage,
or pain at the site;
         (c)   Contain the name, address, and phone number of the facility; and
         (d)   The patron’s record, as set forth in §
113.05, shall be signed and dated by the patron and the artist.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.05 PATRON RECORDS.
   (A)   Records of each patron shall be maintained for two years following the
date of the procedure, and available for review upon request.
   (B)   The record shall include the following:
      (1)   Patron’s name;
      (2)   Patron’s address;
      (3)   Patron’s age (age must be verified by a valid government issued
photo ID);
      (4)   Date that the tattoo or body piercing occurred;
      (5)   Design of the tattoo;
      (6)   Location of the tattoo or body piercing on the patron’s body;
      (7)   The full name of the tattoo artist or body piercer who performed
the work;
      (8)   Jewelry, or other decoration, used, including jewelry material
type;
      (9)   Signature of the artist and patron indicating the after care
guidelines have been reviewed, and a written copy received by the patron; and
      (10)   Signature indicating proper parental consent when performing
tattoo and body piercing activities on any minor, as required by law. I.C. 35-
45-21-4 requires the parent to be present and provide consent in writing. The
parent must also show valid ID, and provide a copy of the minor’s birth
certificate.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 113.06 HAND WASHING.
   Hand washing facilities shall be readily accessible in the same room where
tattooing or body piercing is provided. A hand sink, supplied with running
water at a temperature of a minimum of 100F, liquid antibacterial soap, single
use paper towels, and a waste receptacle shall be located in close proximity
(within 25 feet) of each artist’s station, and shall be readily accessible, and
available, without passing through any door or barrier.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 113.07 ILLNESS.
   Tattoo artists and piercers who are experiencing symptoms of acute disease
that include, but are not limited to, the following shall refrain from tattoos
and body piercings:
   (A)   Diarrhea;
   (B)   Vomiting;
   (C)   Fever;
   (D)   Rash;
   (E)   Productive cough;
   (F)   Jaundice; or
   (G)   Draining (or open) skin infections, boils, impetigo, and scabies.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.08 TATTOOING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Petroleum jellies, soaps, and other products used in the application
of stencils shall be dispensed and applied on the area to receive a tattoo or
body piercing with sterile gauze, or other sterile applicator, to prevent
contamination of the original container and its contents. The applicator, or
gauze, shall be applied to the skin only once and then discarded.
   (B)   All supplies used in the activity of tattooing or body piercing that
come into contact with the tattooing or piercing station must be disposed of
after single use.
   (C)   If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied
with a single-use article only.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 113.09 NEEDLES, INSTRUMENTS, CONTAMINATED SHARPS.
   (A)   Needles shall be individually packaged and sterilized prior to use.
   (B)   Needles shall be single use only.
   (C)   Needles, instruments, and contaminated sharps shall be discarded in
sharps containers immediately after use.
   (D)   Contaminated needles shall not be bent or broken, or otherwise
manipulated, by hand.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.10 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT.
   Appropriate personal protective equipment shall be worn as follows:
   (A)   A clean, protective clothing layer shall be worn whenever there is a
reasonable anticipated risk of contamination of clothing by blood;
   (B)   Masks in combination with eye protection devices, such as goggles, or
glasses with a solid side shield or chin length face shield, shall be worn
whenever splashes, spray splatter, or droplets of blood may be generated, and
eye, nose, or mouth contamination can be reasonably anticipated; and
   (C)   Disposable gloves shall be worn during the tattoo and piercing
process. Gloves shall be changed, and properly disposed of, each time there is
an interruption in the application/act, when the gloves become torn or
punctured, or when the ability to function as a barrier is compromised.
Disposable gloves shall not be reused.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 113.11 REUSABLE EQUIPMENT.
   If an autoclave is being utilized to sterilize any reusable items, it must
be properly calibrated, and monthly spore testing of the autoclave is
mandatory. A copy of the results of all spore tests must be submitted to the
County Health Department monthly.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 113.12 DYES, PIGMENTS, JEWELRY.
   (A)   All insertable jewelry is to be sterilized and kept in an individual,
sterile, closed container, or package with an expiration date.
   (B)   All jewelry placed in new piercings must be made of one of the
following:
      (1)   Solid 14k (or higher) white or yellow nickel-free gold;
      (2)   Surgical implant stainless steel, CrNMo 316LVM, ASTM F-138;
      (3)   Niobium;
      (4)   Surgical implant grades of titanium;
      (5)   Solid platinum; and/or
      (6)   Inert plastics.
   (C)   Mill certificates from the manufacturer, or an independent assay, must
be available to prove material compositions. Jewelry must have a mirror finish
and be free of nicks, scratches, burns, and polishing compounds.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.13 WORK ENVIRONMENT.
   (A)   Tattoo and body piercing facilities shall be equipped with artificial
light sources equivalent to at least 20 footcandles of light at a distance of
30 inches above the floor throughout the establishment. A minimum of 70
footcandles of light shall be provided at the level where the tattooing is
being performed. Spotlighting may be used to achieve this required degree of
illumination.
   (B)   Tattoo and body piercing areas shall be separated from waiting
patrons, or observers, by a non-absorbent panel, a door, or by a minimum of a
ten-foot distance apart. If, however, the patron is a minor, then the parent/
legal guardian must be present during the procedure. If the facility allows it,
the patron may sign a written consent allowing an observer to watch the
procedure without space restrictions.
   (C)   All walls and floors near equipment used for tattooing and body
piercing activities shall be smooth, non-absorbent, and easily cleanable
surfaces, and be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times.
   (D)   During a procedure, a facility shall place single use disposable
barriers on equipment that cannot be sterilized. Barriers shall be discarded
immediately after each use. If used, disposable table or chair paper, or cover,
shall be changed between patrons.
   (E)   Lavatory facilities shall be available to employees at all times the
facility is open for operation, and they must be located within the same
physical structure/building. The lavatory(s) shall be equipped with a toilet,
hand sink, and covered waste receptacle.
   (F)   An additional hand sink, other than the one located in the lavatory,
shall be located in close proximity (within 25 feet) of each artist’s station,
and shall be readily accessible, and available, without passing through any
door or barrier. These hand sinks shall be supplied with running water at a
minimum temperature of 100F, liquid antibacterial soap, paper towels, and a
waste receptacle.
   (G)   Equipment and supplies used in the course of tattoo and body piercing
services, or disinfection and sterilization procedures, shall not be stored or
utilized within the lavatory.
   (H)   No tattooing or piercing shall be conducted in any room used as living
quarters, or in any room that opens directly into living or sleeping quarters.
   (I)   Eating, drinking, smoking, or applying cosmetics shall not be allowed
in work areas where there is a likelihood of exposure to blood.
   (J)   Disinfectant solutions shall be:
      (1)   A hospital grade, tuberculocidal EPA-registered disinfectant; or
      (2)   Sodium hypochlorite, 0.50% concentration, by volume; the solution
shall be dated, and shall not be used if older than 24 hours.
   (K)   Live animals shall be excluded from areas where tattooing is being
conducted. This does not apply to the following:
      (1)   Patrol dogs accompanying law enforcement; and
      (2)   Guide dogs.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.14 TREATMENT, TRANSPORTATION OF INFECTIOUS MATERIAL.
   (A)   Prior to approval of any permit, the operator must submit proof of a
current contract with an infectious waste removal company, or agreement with
other agencies where treated infectious waste will be disposed. The operator
must document how the infectious waste was treated and/or disposed. An operator
must maintain these records for a period of two years following each pick up of
such infectious waste or disposal, and allow inspection of such records by the
County Health Department upon request.
   (B)   The infectious waste must be disposed of at least annually. A copy of
the transporting infectious waste off-site form, in accordance to 410 I.A.C. 1-
3-28, must be on file at the facility, and available for review by the County
Health Department upon request.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 113.15 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   The following activities are strictly prohibited:
   (A)   Branding;
   (B)   Cutting;
   (C)   Dermal piercing;
   (D)   Implantation;
   (E)   Nullification;
   (F)   Scarification;
   (G)   Skin peeling;
   (H)   Suspension piercing;
   (I)   Tongue bifurcation; and
   (J)   Tongue splitting.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012) Penalty, see §
113.99
LICENSING REGULATIONS
§ 113.30 PERMITS.
   (A)   Businesses. Each tattoo and body piercing facility/operation shall
obtain a permit from the County Department of Health. The permit shall provide
the name and address of the owner of the business, and the name and address of
each tattoo artist and body piercer located at each location. The permit shall
not be transferable. The permit expires on December 31 of each year. Should a
facility fail to obtain the permit prior to the opening of a tattoo and body
piercing facility, or should any permittee fail to renew his or her permit on,
or before, the expiration date of December 31, a late fee will be assessed for
the tattoo and body piercing facility. Any holder of a permit shall be subject
to inspection as set forth herein. The County Health Department shall provide
the appropriate application forms for this permit. Said permit shall be posted
at the facility in the area where the tattoo or body piercing services are
performed, and shall be clearly visible to the public.
   (B)   Tattoo artist or body piercer. Every person that desires to perform
any tattoo or body piercing activities shall, before doing so, obtain a tattoo
artist permit, body piercer permit, or a tattoo artist and body piercer permit
from the County Health Department. No person shall tattoo or body pierce
another person unless he or she has first obtained a permit from the County
Health Department. No person shall, in an effort to advertise or solicit
business with the intent to perform tattoo or body piercing activities, use, or
assume, the title of tattooist or body piercer, or designate, or represent,
themselves to be a tattooist or body piercer unless he or she has first
obtained a permit from the County Health Department. The applicant must satisfy
the minimum requirements as set forth in §
94.04(A). The permit shall not be transferable. The permit expires on December
31 of each year. Should a tattoo artist or body piercer fail to obtain the
permit prior to performing any tattoo or body piercing, or should any permittee
fail to renew his or her permit on, or before, the expiration date of December
31, a late fee will be assessed. Any holder of a permit shall be subject to
inspection, as set forth herein. The County Health Department shall provide the
appropriate application forms for this permit. Said permits shall be posted at
the facility in the place where the tattoos or body piercing are performed, and
shall be clearly visible to the public.
   (C)   Temporary tattoo and body piercing facility. Each temporary tattoo and
body piercing facility operation shall obtain a permit from the County Health
Department. The permit shall provide the name and address of the owner of the
business, and the name and address of each tattoo artist and body piercer
operating at each location. The permit shall be valid for a period not to
exceed seven days. Any holder of a permit shall be subject to inspection as set
forth herein. Should a tattoo artist or body piercer fail to obtain the permit
prior to performing any tattoo or body piercing, a late fee will be assessed.
Said permit shall be posted at the temporary tattoo and body piercing facility
in the area where the tattoo or body piercing services are performed, and shall
be clearly visible to the public.
   (D)   Owner/operator. In the event that a tattoo and body piercing facility
is a sole proprietorship, and the owner shall also perform tattooing or body
piercing for his or her business, the owner shall only be required to obtain a
business permit as described in this section.
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to an act
of a health care professional (as defined in I.C. 16-27-2-1) licensed under
I.C. Title 25, when the act is performed in the course of the health care
professional’s practice.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.31 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The County Health Department shall conduct inspections of each
facility located in the county. The County Health Department shall conduct a
minimum of two inspections per year for fixed facilities. Additional
inspections may be conducted by the County Health Department as it determines
necessary, and/or in response to complaints submitted.
   (B)   The results of the inspections shall be provided to each operator in
written form. Violations noted by the County Health Department shall be
corrected immediately, or within the time frame set forth on the inspection
report. The Department shall conduct follow up inspections to determine
compliance with this chapter, as deemed necessary.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 113.32 PROCEDURES WHEN VIOLATIONS ARE NOTED.
   (A)   If, during the inspection of any facility, the Health Officer
discovers the violation of any provision of this chapter, as amended, he or she
shall issue a written report listing such violations, and the remedial action
(s) to be taken. A copy of said report shall be delivered to the permittee (or
his or her authorized representative) by hand delivering the report to him or
her on site, or mailing the notice by certified mail to the address listed by
the permittee as his or her mailing address on the permit application.
   (B)   A copy of the written order shall be filed in the records of the
County Health Department, and be made available to the public as required.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 113.33 PERMIT SUSPENSION; REVOCATION; CLOSURE ORDERS.
   The Health Officer may order the suspension, or revocation, of any permit
issued for a facility, which order shall include the prohibition of any further
operation, for the following reasons:
   (A)   Interference with the Health Officer, or his or her authorized
representatives, in the performance of his or her duties. INTERFERENCE shall be
defined as the process of obstructing, hampering, or blocking the Health
Officer in the performance of his or her duties;
   (B)   As a result of the willful and/or continuous violation of any
provision of this chapter:
      (1)   Such order shall be effective immediately;
      (2)   Upon written request to the Health Officer, the permittee shall be
afforded a hearing; and
      (3)   The Health Officer, or his or her designee, shall conduct a
reinspection upon the request of the permittee. When the Health Officer
determines that the necessary corrective action(s) have been taken, operation
of the facility may be resumed.
   (C)   A person, or business, subject to a permit suspension, or revocation,
shall have ten days to file for judicial review of the County Health
Department’s orders. Failure to file for judicial review will make this order
final and conclusive.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.34 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Health Officer may bring an action in the Circuit or Superior Court to
enforce this chapter. The Health Officer shall be entitled to recover all costs
and expenses associated with any action for enforcement of this chapter,
including reasonable attorney’s fees.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 113.35 INJUNCTION.
   The Health Officer may bring an action for an injunction in the County
Circuit Court to restrain any person from violating the provisions of this
chapter, to cause such violation(s) to be prevented, abated, or removed.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 113.36 EXPENSE.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable
to the County Health Department for the expense, loss, or damage occasioned by
reason of such violation, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who willfully violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $2,500 for each violation. Each day
of the existence of any violation of this chapter shall be considered a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-18-2012)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
   
130.01   County Courthouse and County Annex security
   
130.02   Smoking, nicotine inside county buildings
   
130.03   Sale of cannabinoids prohibited
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 COUNTY COURTHOUSE AND COUNTY ANNEX SECURITY.
   (A)   Authority. The following shall be authorized agents in the enforcement
of this section. Law enforcement officials serving in the county, and their
representatives and/or agents are authorized to investigate violations and to
perform all actions necessary for the enforcement and administration of this
section and may be referred to as “Enforcement Agents.”
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 35-47-11.1-4(5), no person shall possess a firearm in
any building that contains the courtroom of the County Circuit Court, the
County Superior Court, or the County Small Claims Court, including, but not
limited to, the County Courthouse located at One Courthouse Square, Jasper,
Indiana, and the County Annex located at 602 Main Street, Jasper, Indiana.
   (B)   All persons, except those persons noted in division (G) below, are
prohibited from entering the County Courthouse or the County Annex while
carrying any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon, as defined by state law;
      (2)   A firearm, as defined by I.C. 35-47-1-5;
      (3)   An electric stun weapon, as defined by I.C. 35-47-8-1;
      (4)   A stun gun, as defined by I.C. 35-47-8-2;
      (5)   A taser, as defined by I.C. 35-47-8-3;
      (6)   A knife;
      (7)   An explosive device;
      (8)   A club;
      (9)   Any other object that, in the manner in which it is used, or is
intended to be used is readily capable of causing serious bodily injury, as
defined by state law; or
      (10)   A biological disease, virus, or organism that is capable of
causing serious bodily injury.
   (C)   During normal business hours, any individual, including employees
(with the exception of those individuals set forth below in divisions (C)(1)
through (4), may enter or exit the County Courthouse only through the east
entrance.
      (1)   County law enforcement officers and those individuals in their
custody;
      (2)   County maintenance staff;
      (3)   Department heads receiving deliveries from a vendor; and
      (4)   Any other individual with authorization from the County Board of
Commissioners.
   (E)   Any person who enters the County Courthouse or the County Annex is
deemed to consent to a search of their person or property for deadly weapons
and any other items outlined in division (B) above. Any person refusing to
comply with this section will be denied entrance into the County Courthouse or
County Annex.
   (F)   Deadly weapons and other items listed in division (B) above, found in
the County Courthouse or the County Annex will be confiscated, and if legal to
possess, returned to the owner after the payment of the fine set out in
division (H) below.
   (G)   (1)   The following persons, who are in the County Courthouse or the
County Annex for official business and duly authorized to carry deadly weapons,
are exempt from this section:
         (a)   A federal, state, or local law enforcement officer;
         (b)   State Department of Corrections officers;
         (c)   A judicial officer; and
         (d)   A person who has been employed by the Board of County
Commissioners as a security officer or who has been authorized by the Board of
Commissioners, or by a judge of the County Circuit or Superior Court, to
possess a firearm.
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel and other individuals listed as exempt in
this division (G) that are appearing at the County Courthouse or the County
Annex in the normal course of business may be allowed to retain their firearms
while in the County Courthouse or the County Annex. Off-duty law enforcement
officers who are in the County Courthouse or the County Annex appearing for a
hearing in a civil matter in which they, or a family member, are an interested
party, witness or litigant will not be allowed to enter the County Courthouse
or the County Annex with a firearm (does not include when the officer is
appearing as a witness in a criminal matter, regardless of whether he or she is
on or off duty).
   (H)   Employees of the county are subject to the provisions of this chapter;
however, employees of the county who carry chemical spray devices for personal
protection are allowed to do so.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 10-21-2019; Ord. 2024-03, passed 2-20-2024) Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.02 SMOKING, NICOTINE INSIDE COUNTY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Smoking, or use of products derived from tobacco, tobacco-free
alternatives, or recreational drugs or products, shall be prohibited in all
buildings and structures owned, leased, operated, or otherwise occupied by the
county, including all areas within said buildings and structures, or any
addition thereto, and in any area outside such building within eight feet from
each entrance thereto, or within eight feet from any air intake to said
building.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PRODUCTS DERIVED FROM TOBACCO. Includes, without being limited to,
cigarettes (including clove, bidis, and kreteks), electronic cigarettes,
aerosol or vapor nicotine delivery devices, cigars and cigarillos, pipe
tobacco, hookah-smoked products, and oral tobacco (spit and spitless,
smokeless, chew, and snuff).
      RECREATIONAL DRUG. A drug, often illegal, such as marijuana, cocaine, or
meth, occasionally used without medical justification for its psychoactive
effects.
      SMOKE or SMOKING. To ignite, or cause to be ignited, tobacco or a tobacco
product, or derivative, which includes, but is not limited to, e-cigarettes, or
other devices utilized for vaping, such that the product, or derivative, emits
a gas, or cloud, which may be, or is, intended to be inhaled by any person. It
shall include exhaling from, burning, or carrying any lighted, or heated,
tobacco, or plant product, intended for inhalation, whether natural or
synthetic. To SMOKE also includes the use with any such tobacco, or plant
product, of a pipe or hookah; of any electronic smoking device which creates,
in any manner, an aerosol or vapor, in any form; or of any other oral smoking
device.
      TOBACCO. Any of several plants belonging to the genus Nicotiana, of the
nightshade family, whose leaves are prepared for smoking or chewing, or as
snuff; the prepared leaves, as used in cigarettes, cigars, and pipes, or any
product, or products, made from such leaves; and any of the various similar
plants, or other genera.
   (C)   This section is not intended to prohibit medically prescribed products
or replacement products, including, but not limited to, gum, lozenges, patches,
or like products used to assist the user as a health aid.
   (D)   Application of this section as to use of tobacco products in the
County Security Center may be revised by rules established by the County
Sheriff.
(Ord. 2018-4, passed 12-17-2018) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 SALE OF CANNABINOIDS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Sale. Products containing synthetic cannabinoids (“products”), such as
K2/Spice, or similar products which contain one, or more, of the following
chemical compounds:
      (1)   (6ar, 10ar)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2methyloctan-2-y1)-
6a, 7, 10, 10a- tertrahydrobenzo (c) chromen-1-01, also known as HU-210;
      (2)   1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole, also known as JWH-018;
      (3)   1-buytl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole, also known as JWH-073; or
      (4)   Any other equivalent compound, or derivative, shall not be sold,
marketed, offered for sale, used, possessed, or purchased within the county.
   (B)   Public places. Products containing synthetic cannabinoids (“products”)
may not be burned, incinerated, or ignited in any public place, or on any
property owned, leased, or controlled by the county.
   (C)   Violations.
      (1)   Any person, or entity, found in violation, for the first time, of
any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalty imposed for a
Class B infraction, as set forth in I.C. 34-28-5-4. Accordingly, this section
shall be enforced by the provisions of I.C. 34-28-5.
      (2)   Any person, or entity, found in violation for the second, and
subsequent times, of any provision of this section shall be subject to the
penalty imposed for a Class A infraction, as set forth in I.C. 34-28-5-4.
Accordingly, this section shall be enforced by the provisions of I.C. 34-28-5.
      (3)   In addition to the foregoing, any person, or entity, found to be in
violation of any provision of this section shall also be responsible for the
reasonable costs associated with the enforcement thereof, including, but not
limited to, attorney fees, laboratory fees, expert witness fees, other
personnel costs, and court costs in any action taken to enforce the provisions
of this section.
      (4)   Each violation of any provision contained in this section shall
constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 11-1-2010) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person in violation of §
130.01 shall be subject to enforcement by law enforcement officials serving in
the county, and the Board of Commissioners, which shall be authorized to
impose, as a penalty, a fine not to exceed $2,500, provided that nothing herein
shall prevent prosecution of said violation in any court of record.
   (C)   A person who smokes or uses tobacco, or prohibited products, in an
area where smoking tobacco, or related products, are prohibited by the
provisions of §
130.02 shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding
$250 per infraction. Each day on which a violation of §
130.02 occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. The
principal agency charged with responsibility for the enforcement of §
130.02 shall be in the County Sheriff’s Department.
(Ord. 2018-4, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 2019-07, passed 10-21-2019 ; Ord. 2024-
03, passed 2-20-2024 )
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   SUBDIVISION STANDARDS; PLATTING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Construction, maintenance of sidewalks
   
150.02   Unsafe buildings
   
150.03   Placement of structures, improvements, barriers
   
150.04   Burying drainage pipe on personal property
   
150.05   Unimproved roads
Uniform Numbering System for Houses
   
150.20   Purpose
   
150.21   Relation to health, welfare
   
150.22   Conformity
   
150.23   Base lines, sequences
   
150.24   Administrative office
   
150.25   Numbers other than on public streets, roads
   
150.26   Standards for posting of house numbers
   
150.27   Renumbering of houses, structures
   
150.28   Notification of local agencies
Commercial Solar Energy Systems
   
150.35   Definitions
   
150.36   CSE system siting limits
   
150.37   CSE system site vegetation plan
   
150.38   Enclosure of CSE system
   
150.39   Location of CSE system infrastructure
   
150.40   Minimizing glare and vehicular traffic disruption by CSE systems
   
150.41   CSE system mitigation requirements
   
150.42   CSE system sound limits
   
150.43   Repair of damage related to CSE systems
   
150.44   CSE system decommission plans and site restoration plans
   
150.45   CSE system abandonment
   
150.46   Responsibilities of project owner
 
   
150.99   Penalty
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 2024-16, passed 10-28-2024, imposed a 36-month moratorium on tax
abatements and other subsidies for commercial solar development systems in the
county
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   For new sidewalks, construction:
      (1)   Will conform to § 604 of the State Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications;
      (2)   Will conform, and be designed, in accordance to the Americans with
Disabilities Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.;
      (3)   All plans shall be submitted to the County Board of Commissioners
for review and approval;
      (4)   All sidewalks constructed, altered, or repaired must be designed to
accommodate, and not obstruct, the drainage, and as to not negatively affect
the adjacent streets; and
      (5)   All sidewalks constructed, altered, or repaired must comply with §
150.03.
   (B)   For the maintenance of existing sidewalks:
      (1)   The property owner is responsible for the maintenance of existing
sidewalks in the public right-of-way;
      (2)   All maintenance and alterations to existing sidewalks must still
conform to § 604 of the State Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications;
      (3)   All maintenance and alterations to existing sidewalks must still
conform to the Americans with Disabilities Act; and
      (4)   All maintenance and alterations to existing sidewalks are subject
to review by the County ADA Coordinator.
   (C)   For sidewalk specifications:
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete with a
28-day compressive strength of 3,500 psi;
      (2)   Sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and four inches thick;
and
      (3)   Sidewalks shall have a cross slope of one-quarter inch per foot for
drainage purposes.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 8-3-2015)
§ 150.02 UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners hereby adopts, pursuant to I.C. 36-
7-9-3, as amended, said chapter being entitled “Enforcement of Building
Standards”, as the County Code relative to unsafe buildings and premises in the
county. The administrative and enforcement agency will be the County Health
Department. This includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   I.C. 36-7-9-2, Definitions;
      (2)   I.C. 36-7-9-3, Ordinances adopting this chapter;
      (3)   I.C. 36-7-9-4, Unsafe buildings and unsafe premises described;
      (4)   I.C. 36-7-9-4.5, Legislative findings; vacant or deteriorated
structures;
      (5)   I.C. 36-7-9-5, Orders; contents; notice; expiration;
      (6)   I.C. 36-7-9-6, Modification or rescission of orders;
      (7)   I.C. 36-7-9-7, Hearings; Hearing Authority findings and action;
additional period for ordered actions; continuous enforcement order;
performance bond; record of findings; collection of penalties;
      (8)   I.C. 36-7-9-7.5, Non-compliance with order to repair, or
rehabilitate, unsafe building; civil penalties;
      (9)   I.C. 36-7-9-8, Appeals;
      (10)   I.C. 36-7-9-9, Emergency action; recovery of costs; challenge of
determination of emergency;
      (11)   I.C. 36-7-9-10, Action to enforce orders;
      (12)   I.C. 36-7-9-11, Liability for costs for performance of work
required by orders;
      (13)   I.C. 36-7-9-12, Liability for cost of emergency action taken or
performance of work required by others;
      (14)   I.C. 36-7-9-13, Notice of unpaid costs; filing with the Clerk of
Court; hearing; judgment lien;
      (15)   I.C. 36-7-9-13.5, Unpaid costs for unsafe premises repairs, or
emergency actions taken; collection;
      (16)   I.C. 36-7-9-14, Unsafe Building Fund; deposits and expenditures;
      (17)   I.C. 36-7-9-15, Transfer of money to the Unsafe Building Fund;
      (18)   I.C. 36-7-9-16, Inspection warrants;
      (19)   I.C. 36-7-9-17, Civil actions regarding unsafe premises; treble
damages under second, or subsequent, judgments;
      (20)   I.C. 36-7-9-18, Injunctions;
      (21)   I.C. 36-7-9-18.1, Performance bond;
      (22)   I.C. 36-7-9-19, Civil forfeitures;
      (23)   I.C. 36-7-9-20, Appointment of receiver; conditions;
rehabilitation of property by owner, mortgagee, or person with substantial
interest;
      (24)   I.C. 36-7-9-20.5, Property determined unsafe and abandoned;
receiver; sale proceed; fee simple estate subject to easements, liens and
encumbrances;
      (25)   I.C. 36-7-9-21, Court order authorizing performance of work;
judgment for costs;
      (26)   I.C. 36-7-9-22, Emergencies; court order authorizing action to
make premises safe; judgement for costs;
      (27)   I.C. 36-7-9-23, Change of venue and judge;
      (28)   I.C. 36-7-9-24, Priority of actions;
      (29)   I.C. 36-7-9-25, Manner of serving notice;
      (30)   I.C. 36-7-9-26, Recording of orders, statements of rescission,
statements of public bids, and records of actions taken by hearing authority;
      (31)   I.C. 36-7-9-27, Transfers of property by persons not complying
with orders;
      (32)   I.C. 36-7-9-28, Violations; penalties; and
      (33)   I.C. 36-7-9-29, Order of action related to unsafe premises;
written information required.
   (B)   This section expressly includes all subsequent amendments made to said
state code sections, or by said County Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. 2018-2, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 150.03 PLACEMENT OF STRUCTURES, IMPROVEMENTS, BARRIERS.
   (A)   No person shall construct, build, establish, alter, install, place, or
cause to be constructed, built, established, altered, installed, or placed, on
the right-of-way of a public street, highway, or roadway, or the area dedicated
for public street, highway, or roadway, any trench, structure, barrier,
improvement, pipe, conduit, culvert, ground surface alteration, or other
alteration of existing conditions without first having obtained a permit
therefor from the Supervisor of the County Highway Department.
   (B)   The County Highway Supervisor shall, from time to time, prepare and
submit to the County Board of Commissioners policies, requirements,
regulations, and specifications which shall be applicable to projects on the
public right-of-way for which permits are required. Following the adoption of
such policies, requirements, regulations, and specifications by the County
Board of Commissioners, the Highway Department Supervisor shall issue permits
upon the filing of the application, supported by documentation that a proposed
project will comply with such adopted policies, requirements, regulations, and
specifications, and such bond as the Supervisor determines to be necessary. No
project shall be so constructed, altered, or repaired as to prevent free and
unobstructed passage over, on, or across said right-of-way in a safe manner, or
in such a way as to interfere with the proper drainage and safeguarding
thereof.
   (C)   Any trench, structure, barrier, improvement, pipe, conduit, culvert,
ground surface alteration, or other alteration of an existing right-of-way
condition performed, constructed, or installed, under a permit issued
hereunder, shall be subject to removal by the County Highway Department, after
written notice and without compensation, in the event that the County Highway
Supervisor should determine that such removal is required for public safety,
does not comply with the application, or is necessary to perform highway
improvement or repair.
   (D)   The County Highway Supervisor may, from time to time, inspect, or
cause to be inspected, any work performed on the county right-of-way to see to
the enforcement of the provisions of this section. Notice shall be given to
said Supervisor prior to such work as to the date and time when the work will
be performed, and when filling, or refilling, of any trench, cut, excavation,
or ditch will occur.
   (E)   Any construction, trench, structure, barrier, improvement, pipe,
conduit, culvert, ground surface alteration, or alteration of the existing
condition upon a public, or dedicated, street, highway, or roadway right-of-way
in violation of the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance, and shall be abated in the same manner as other nuisances
under statutes, regulations, and/or ordinances of the state and county.
(Ord. 02-04, passed 5-20-2002) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.04 BURYING DRAINAGE PIPE ON PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Persons desiring to bury drainage pipe in the road ditch along their
property must first contact the County Highway Superintendent or County
Engineer for a site review.
   (B)   The County Highway Superintendent, or County Engineer, will make a
site review of the proposed location to determine the size and slope of the
pipe required.
   (C)   Any downspout tiles, basement drains, or other surface or groundwater
tiles are to enter the pipe at an inlet box.
   (D)   Minimum pipe diameter is 12 inches, and existing conditions must allow
a minimum of one foot of backfill on top of the pipe.
   (E)   The landowner is responsible for the proper installation and
maintenance of the pipe and inlet structures, keeping them free of silt,
debris, and functioning properly for the lifetime of the structures.
(Ord. 1986-7, passed - -)
§ 150.05 UNIMPROVED ROADS.
   (A)   A 50-foot wide minimum right-of-way width must be acquired by the
party desiring the improvement from the adjacent property owners on behalf of
the county.
   (B)   Trees along the 50-foot right-of-way 12 inches or greater in diameter
are to be cut and removed by the parties desiring the improvement.
   (C)   The grading and shaping of the road bed, side slopes, and ditches will
be a joint venture between the county and developing parties. The county
highway forces will use their standard equipment to final grade and shape the
slopes, roadbed, and ditches. The developing parties will provide the large
volume cut, and fill the earth work as directed by the county. This includes,
but is not limited to, hiring dozers, hi-lifts, rippers, and scrapers, as
required.
   (D)   The pipes, bridges, and drainage structures will be provided by the
county.
   (E)   The rock required for a 18-foot wide, six-inch deep roadbed will be
purchased by the developing parties at the F.O.B. pick up, and priced at the
quarry. The county will transport, spread, and grade the rock to the desired
profile.
   (F)   Upon satisfactory completion of divisions (A) through (E) above, the
road will become an improved aggregate road for regular public use, and will be
maintained by the county in a manner that is similar to aggregate roads of the
area.
(Ord. 2 1988, passed 5-2-1988)
UNIFORM NUMBERING SYSTEM FOR HOUSES
§ 150.20 PURPOSE.
   A plan for the orderly and systematic numbering of houses and structures
located within the jurisdictional area of the Board of Commissioners is hereby
enacted (herein after, “Uniform Numbering System”). Any and all ordinances
previously adopted by the Board of Commissioners regarding the numbering of
houses and structures are hereby deemed repealed.
(Ord. 2000-1, passed 4-17-2000)
§ 150.21 RELATION TO HEALTH, WELFARE.
   The numbering of houses, and other structures, in an orderly and systematic
manner will make the location for such houses, and structures, more expeditious
in cases of fire emergencies, in situations involving immediate need for
medical attention for members of the family or occupants of a building, and in
instances where police protection may be required with haste. An orderly and
systematic house numbering process will also enhance the delivery of goods and
services, as well as increase the efficiency of operations, such as postal
delivery.
(Ord. 2000-1, passed 4-17-2000)
§ 150.22 CONFORMITY.
   From the effective date of this subchapter, the numbering of all houses and
structures located on lots, or parcels of land, abutting public streets, or
roads, within the jurisdictional area of the Board of Commissioners shall be
accomplished in conformity with the Uniform Numbering System as herein
described. At the time of issuance of any permit for the construction of a
house or structure, a number shall be assigned by the designated county agency
to said house or structure as hereinafter provided. Such number shall be
included on the permit, and no permit authorizing the occupancy of a house or
structure shall be issued, and no final inspection of a building performed for
the purpose of permitting its occupancy shall be deemed complete unless such
house or structure displays, at the time of inspection, the officially assigned
number in full compliance with the standards of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2000-1, passed 4-17-2000)
§ 150.23 BASE LINES, SEQUENCES.
   (A)   The base lines for the Uniform Numbering System shall be as described
below, and numbers shall be assigned in each of the four cardinal directions,
increasing from zero at the point of intersection of the base lines.
      (1)   The east and west base line shall be the line dividing township 1
south and township 2 south.
      (2)   The north and south base line shall be the line dividing range 4
west and range 5 west.
   (B)   The general rule shall be 500 numbers to one-half mile, except in
certain areas where the irregular direction of the county highways makes
variations necessary.
   (C)   All streets and roads, and parts thereof, running north and south
shall add either the word “North” or “South” to the end of their official name,
as is appropriate for their location in relationship to the described east and
west base line in division (A)(1) above. All streets and roads, and parts
thereof, running east and west shall add either the word “East” or “West” to
the end of their official name, as is appropriate for their location in
relationship to the described north and south base line in division (A)(2)
above.
   (D)   All streets and roads, and parts thereof, that run at an angle, or in
a curved manner in relationship to the four cardinal directions, shall be
considered, and have assigned to their name, the one cardinal direction in
which they predominately traverse in the county.
   (E)   Even numbers shall be assigned to the east side of north and south
streets and roads, and the south side of east and west streets and roads. Odd
numbers shall be assigned to the west side of north and south streets and
roads, and the north side of east and west streets and roads.
   (F)   The official name of each street or road within the jurisdictional
area of the Board of Commissioners shall be established by said Board.
(Ord. 2000-1, passed 4-17-2000)
§ 150.24 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE.
   The Board of Commissioners shall designate a county department, or a county
officer or employee, which shall act as the administrative office (hereinafter
“administrative office”) in charge of issuing numbers to houses or structures
in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. The administrative office
shall issue numbers to all new houses or structures, renumber houses and
structures whenever it becomes necessary to do so in the implementation of the
Uniform Numbering System, and cause the numbering of all existing homes or
structures which are not numbered to be numbered in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter. Barns, sheds, and outbuildings not used for a
habitation, or business, shall not be numbered.
(Ord. 2000-1, passed 4-17-2000)
§ 150.25 NUMBERS OTHER THAN ON PUBLIC STREETS, ROADS.
   The administrative office may, if it deems proper and necessary for the
implementation of the Uniform Numbering System, assign numbers to houses or
structures that are situated on private streets, or roads, within the
jurisdictional area of the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. 2000-1, passed 4-17-2000)
§ 150.26 STANDARDS FOR POSTING OF HOUSE NUMBERS.
   The owner, or occupant, of a house or structure located within the
jurisdictional area of the Board of Commissioners shall post officially
assigned numbers in a location providing easy identification from the abutting
street or road. Such numbers shall be a minimum of three inches in height, and
shall contrast with the background on which placed. If the house or structure
is located more than 75 feet from the roadway, then the numbers shall also be
attached to a fixture near the street or road, and be visible from both
directions. Said fixture may be a roadside rural mailbox. If the house or
structure is located less than 75 feet from the roadway, and a roadside fixture
is not used, the number must be affixed in a clearly visible location on the
front of the house or structure. Each unit of a multi-family dwelling shall be
addressed separately.
(Ord. 2000-1, passed 4-17-2000)
§ 150.27 RENUMBERING OF HOUSES, STRUCTURES.
   Houses and structures that were numbered prior to the effective date of this
subchapter shall be renumbered in order that the same may comply with the
Uniform Numbering System, and so that the numerical harmony throughout an area,
or areas, is substantially achieved. The administrative office shall authorize
such changes.
(Ord. 2000-1, passed 4-17-2000)
§ 150.28 NOTIFICATION OF LOCAL AGENCIES.
   The administrative office shall provide a uniform system of notification of
the issuance of numbers, or the renumbering of houses and structures.
Notifications shall be made reasonably ahead of impending changes so as to
allow major interested groups and agencies to plan, and to prepare, for the
proposed changes. The administrative office shall keep accurate records and
shall, from time to time, prepare and make available to the County Board of
Commissioners a report of the status of the implementation of the Uniform
Numbering System. In the assignment of house numbers, the administrative office
shall use its best judgment, and shall carefully consider, and evaluate, all
contingencies, and shall, with due regard to the sensitive nature of the job
assigned to it, be considerate of the citizens of the county.
(Ord. 2000-1, passed 4-17-2000)
COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
§ 150.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM or CSE SYSTEM. A system that:
      (1)   Has a nameplate capacity of at least ten megawatts; and
      (2)   Captures and converts solar energy into electricity:
         (a)   For the purpose of selling the electricity at wholesale; and
         (b)   For use in locations other than where it is generated.
      (3)   COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM includes solar panels, collection
and feeder lines, generation tie lines, substations, ancillary buildings, solar
monitoring stations, and accessory equipment or structures.
   COMMERCIAL SOLAR REGULATION. Any ordinance or regulation, including:
      (1)   Zoning or land use ordinance or regulation; or
      (2)   General or specific planning ordinance or regulation that is
adopted by a unit and that concerns the permitting, construction, installation,
siting, modification, operation, or decommissioning of CSE systems in the unit.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that
is occupied as, or is designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one
of more families or individuals.
   FORCE MAJEURE EVENT. Includes the following:
      (1)   Fire, flood, tornado, or other natural disasters or acts of God;
      (2)   War, civil strife, a terrorist attack, or other similar acts of
violence;
      (3)   Other unforseen events or events over which a project owner has no
control.
   NONPARTICIPATING PROPERTY. A lot or parcel of real property:
      (1)   That is not owned by a project owner;
      (2)   With respect to which:
         (a)   The project owner does not seek: (i) to install or locate one
(1) or more CSE systems or other facilities related to a CSE system project
(including power lines, temporary or permanent access roads, or other temporary
or permanent infrastructure); or (ii) to otherwise enter into a lease or any
other agreement with the owner of the property for use of all or part of the
property in connection with a CSE system project; or
         (b)   The owner of the property does not consent: (i) to having one
(1) or more CSE systems or other facilities related to a CSE system project
(including power lines, temporary or permanent access roads, or other temporary
or permanent infrastructure) installed or located; or (ii) to otherwise enter
into a lease or any other agreement with the project owner for use of all or
part of the property in connection with a CSE system project.
      (3)   NONPARTICIPATING PROPERTY does not include a lot or parcel of real
property otherwise described in division (a) if the owner of the lot or parcel
consents to participate in a CSE system project through a neighbor agreement, a
participation agreement, or another similar arrangement or agreement with a
project owner.
   PERMIT AUTHORITY.
      (1)   Means:
         (a)   A unit;
         (b)   The Board of Commissioners; or
         (c)   A board, a commission, or any other governing body of a unit;
that makes legislative or administrative decisions concerning the permitting,
construction, installation, siting, modification, operation, or decommissioning
of CSE systems in the unit.
      (2)   PERMIT AUTHORITY does not include:
         (a)   The state or any of its agencies, departments, boards,
commissions, authorities, or instrumentalities; or
         (b)   A court or other judicial body that reviews decisions or rulings
made by a permit authority.
   PROJECT OWNER.
      (1)   A person that:
         (a)   Will own one or more CSE systems proposed to be located in a
unit; or
         (b)   Owns one or more CSE systems located in a unit.
      (2)   PROJECT OWNER includes an agent or a representative of a person
described herein.
      (3)   PROJECT OWNER does not include an electricity supplier as defined
in I.C. 8-1-2.3-2.
   UNIT. Refers to:
      (1)   The county, if a project owner, as part of a single CSE system
project or development, seeks to locate one or more CSE systems (A) entirely
within unincorporated areas of the county; or (B) within both unincorporated
areas of the county and one or more municipalities within the county;
      (2)   Each county described herein in which a project owner seeks to
locate one or more CSE systems, if the project owner seeks to locate CSE
systems in more than one county as part of a single CSE system project or
development.
(Ord. 2022-12, passed 7-5-2022)
§ 150.36 CSE SYSTEM SITING LIMITS.
   The default standards for CSE system siting limits established by I.C. 8-1-
42-10 are adopted.
(Ord. 2022-12, passed 7-5-2022; Ord. 2024-18, 12-2-2024)
§ 150.37 CSE SYSTEM SITE VEGETATION PLANS.
   The default standards for CSE system site vegetation plan established by
I.C. 8-1-42-11 are adopted.
(Ord. 2022-12, passed 7-5-2022; Ord. 2024-18, 12-2-2024)
§ 150.38 ENCLOSURE OF CSE SYSTEM.
   The default standards for enclosures of CSE system established by I.C. 8-1-
42-12 are adopted.
(Ord. 2022-12, passed 7-5-2022; Ord. 2024-18, 12-2-2024)
§ 150.39 LOCATION OF CSE SYSTEM INFRASTRUCTURE.
   The default standards for locations of CSE system infrastructure established
by I.C. 8-1-42-13 are adopted.
(Ord. 2022-12, passed 7-5-2022; Ord. 2024-18, 12-2-2024)
§ 150.40 MINIMIZING GLARE AND VEHICULAR TRAFFIC DISRUPTION BY CSE SYSTEMS.
   The default standards for minimizing glare and vehicular traffic disruption
by CSE systems established by I.C. 8-1-42-14 are adopted.
(Ord. 2022-12, passed 7-5-2022; Ord. 2024-18, 12-2-2024)
§ 150.41 CSE SYSTEM MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The default standards for CSE system mitigation requirements established by
I.C. 8-1-42-15 are adopted.
(Ord. 2022-12, passed 7-5-2022; Ord. 2024-18, 12-2-2024)
§ 150.42 CSE SYSTEM SOUND LIMITS.
   The default standards for CSE system sound limits established by I.C. 8-1-
42-16 are adopted.
(Ord. 2022-12, passed 7-5-2022; Ord. 2024-18, 12-2-2024)
§ 150.43 REPAIR OF DAMAGE RELATED TO CSE SYSTEMS.
   The default standards for repair of damage related to CSE systems
established by I.C. 8-1-42-17 are adopted.
(Ord. 2022-12, passed 7-5-2022; Ord. 2024-18, 12-2-2024)
§ 150.44 CSE SYSTEM DECOMMISSION PLANS AND SITE RESTORATION PLANS.
   The default standards for CSE system decommission plans and site restoration
plans established by I.C. 8-1-42-18 are adopted.
(Ord. 2022-12, passed 7-5-2022; Ord. 2024-18, 12-2-2024)
§ 150.45 CSE SYSTEM ABANDONMENT.
   The default standards for CSE system abandonment established by I.C. 8-1-42-
19 are adopted.
(Ord. 2022-12, passed 7-5-2022; Ord. 2024-18, 12-2-2024)
§ 150.46 RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROJECT OWNER.
   The default standards for the responsibilities of project owner due to a
force majeure event established by I.C. 8-1-42-20 are adopted.
(Ord. 2022-12, passed 7-5-2022)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §
150.03 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not to exceed $500.
Each separate violation thereof, and each day’s violation thereof, shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   The owner, or occupant, of any structure shall each have the
obligation of placing said structure in compliance with the provisions of §§
150.20 through
150.28. If such compliance is not attained within ten days following the
written notice of such violation, any owner, or occupant, of any structure not
in compliance with §§
150.20 through
150.28 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 and costs, plus all
expenses, including court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in the
enforcement of compliance with the provisions of §§
150.20 through
150.28, but in no event to exceed the limit set forth in I.C. 36-1-3-8.
(Ord. 2000-1, passed 4-17-2000; Ord. 02-04, passed 5-20-2002)
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISION STANDARDS; PLATTING
Section
Platting of Subdivisions
   
151.01   Purpose
   
151.02   Applicable areas
   
151.03   Definitions
   
151.04   Transferred tract of real estate; adding building, structure
   
151.05   Residential, commercial, industrial use
   
151.06   Plat approval
   
151.07   Plat filing, recordation
   
151.08   Plat requirements
   
151.09   Standards
   
151.10   Non-conforming conditions
   
151.11   Parcelization
   
151.12   Exemptions
Improvement Standards for Subdivisions; Frontage on County Highways
   
151.25   Purpose
   
151.26   Right-of-way dedications
   
151.27   Width of roadway
   
151.28   Pavement, base
   
151.29   Shoulder
   
151.30   Approval of plans
 
   
151.99   Penalty
PLATTING OF SUBDIVISIONS
§ 151.01 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To assist the orderly and efficient development of the county;
   (B)   To provide for the coordination of current and proposed county roads;
   (C)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the county;
   (D)   To ensure the coordination and availability of the extension of public
facilities and services; and
   (E)   To ensure uniform handling of all real estate subdivisions within the
county.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 151.02 APPLICABLE AREAS.
   This subchapter shall apply to all real estate in the county, except those
areas within the incorporated and jurisdictional planning areas of
municipalities to the extent, from time to time, defined by maps or
descriptions recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 151.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL PURPOSE. The use of a tract of land for AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES
only, including farming, dairying, pasturing, agriculture, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture, tree farms, and animal and poultry husbandry.
   BLOCK. Property abutting on one side of a street, and lying between the two
nearest intersecting, or intercepting, roads, or between the nearest
intersecting, or intercepting, road and a railroad right-of-way, waterway, or
other definite area.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line on a plat between which line and the road, or
the property line of a lot, buildings may not be erected.
   COUNTY. The County of Dubois, State of Indiana.
   COUNTY COMMISSIONERS. The Board of Commissioners of the county.
   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land by the
public, a corporation, or persons, for specified uses.
   ENGINEER. The County Highway Engineer, County Surveyor, or a qualified
engineer designated by the County Board of Commissioners.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision of a larger tract, or other parcel of land
intended as a unit for present, or future, transfer of ownership, or for
development.
   PLAT. A map, or drawing, on which the subdivider’s plan of a subdivision is
presented, and which is presented for approval. The FINAL PLAT is the map, or
drawing, which is intended for recordation, and which meets the requirements of
this subchapter.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A dedicated and accepted strip of land designated for public
use as a road, street, highway, driveway, alley, or walkway, or for any
drainage or public utility purpose, or other similar use.
   ROAD. The dedicated, and accepted, space or area between the lot lines, or
around the perimeter of the subdivision, abutting upon a right-of-way, and
designed as a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an alley,
street, highway, cul-de-sac, throughway, road, lane, place, or however
otherwise designated.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a single lot, tract, or parcel of land, or a
part thereof, into two or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land, any one of
which is less than ten acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership for use for residential, commercial, or industrial
purposes; or the division of a single lot, tract, or parcel of land, or a part
thereof, into two or more lots, tracts, or parcels by means of buildings,
building groups, roads, alleys, parking areas, or leaseholds, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of development for residential, commercial, or
industrial purposes. This definition shall not include divisions of land for
agricultural purposes only, or the sale of lots, or exchange of parcels,
between adjoining lot owners that are not intended to create additional
building sites.
      (1)   MAJOR SUBDIVISION means all subdivisions not classified as a MINOR
SUBDIVISION or parcelization, including, but not limited to, any size
subdivision requiring a new right-of-way dedication or upgrade, or extension of
the existing local government infrastructure, or the creation of any
improvements.
      (2)   MINOR SUBDIVISIONS means any subdivision fronting on, and having
direct access to, an existing improved roadway in a government roadway
infrastructure inventory. It shall not include the creation of any new streets
or roadways, any improvements, or the extension of municipal facilities
(private laterals are not considered an extension of municipal facilities).
Easements, setbacks, or restrictions shall be created per this subchapter.
   SUBDIVISION REVIEW COMMITTEE (S.R.C.). A technical review committee
established under §
151.06.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 151.04 TRANSFERRED TRACT OF REAL ESTATE; ADDING BUILDING, STRUCTURE.
   No building, or other structure, shall hereafter be constructed, erected, or
moved upon any transferred tract of real estate described in §
151.03 unless, and until, a plat of the subdivision of said conveyed real
estate shall be approved by the County Board of Commissioners, or the
Subdivision Review Committee, and recorded in the office of the County
Recorder, or unless granted exception by the County Board of Commissioners
based upon special, or exceptional, circumstances.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 151.05 RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL USE.
   No real estate shall be subdivided for residential, commercial, or
industrial use unless direct access exists to the land over improved public
streets or roads, and unless adequate provisions have been made for water,
sewage disposal, and utility service, or if such land is unsuitable for
development by reason of flooding or improper drainage, objectionable
topography, or other features harmful to the health and safety of the occupant,
or the county as a whole.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 151.06 PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   All plats of a subdivision shall be submitted in proper number, size,
and form. A Subdivision Review Committee (S.R.C.) is hereby established to
assist with the technical evaluation of subdivisions, and to make
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners. The S.R.C. shall consist of
three members, being the County Surveyor, or the County Surveyor’s designee,
the County Auditor, or the County Auditor’s designee, and one member selected,
and appointed, by the Board of Commissioners. The S.R.C. is hereby given the
authority to grant approval for minor subdivisions and parcelizations.
      (1)   All major subdivision plats will be submitted to the County Board
of Commissioners for review as to compliance with this subchapter. Before
taking any action to approve, or disapprove, a proposed plat, the County Board
of Commissioners may require payment of a fee established by said Commissioners
to cover the administrative costs related to said plat, and shall hold not less
than one public hearing thereon, after publication of public notice of a
hearing in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1, to be arranged, and paid for, by the
applicant. If after the public hearing the County Board of Commissioners
disapproves a proposed plat, the County Board of Commissioners shall make
written findings that set forth its reasons and decision denying approval, and
shall provide the applicant with a copy thereof.
      (2)   All minor subdivision plats will be submitted to the County
Auditor’s office in the County Courthouse, where the S.R.C. will review for
compliance with this subchapter. Before taking any action to approve, or
disapprove, a proposed plat, the S.R.C. may require payment of a fee
established by the County Board of Commissioners to cover the administrative
costs related to said plat. Proposed plats will be given ten business days for
review by the S.R.C. If, after the review, the S.R.C. disapproves the proposed
plat, the S.R.C. shall make written findings that set forth its reasons and
decision denying approval, and shall provide the applicant with a copy thereof.
   (B)   Any person feeling himself or herself aggrieved at any action of the
County Board of Commissioners, or the S.R.C., or the Board’s staff, or the lack
of action of the County Board of Commissioners, or the S.R.C., or the Board’s
staff, upon a proposed plat or replat, may apply, in writing, to the County
Board of Commissioners, prior to the next regular meeting, for modification of
the action complained of, or lack of action, on the proposed plat or replat.
Such application shall be considered by the County Board of Commissioners at
such time, in such manner as it may determine, but within 60 days following the
regular meeting.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 151.07 PLAT FILING, RECORDATION.
   No plat or replat of a subdivision of real estate, within the jurisdiction
of the County Board of Commissioners, shall be accepted for recording by the
office of the County Recorder unless it has been first approved by the County
Board of Commissioners, and filed with the County Auditor. The owner of real
estate described in an approved plat shall present said plat for recordation
prior to the transfer of any lot, or parcel, described in said plat, but in no
event more than 30 days after approval of said plat. Said owner shall pay the
recording and entry fees related to said recording and entry, and shall
simultaneously submit to the County Auditor the number plat prints required by
this subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 151.08 PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   A person desiring to submit a proposed plat or subdivision to the County
Board of Commissioners, or the Subdivision Review Committee, for consideration
shall cause said plat to contain, or be accompanied by, the following
information, and be in the following form:
   (A)   The original drawing of the plat of the subdivision shall, if
possible, be drawn to a scale of 40 feet to one inch; provided that, if the
resulting drawing would be 20 inches in greatest dimension, a scale of 100 feet
to one inch may be used. Two black or blue line prints, and four Mylar copies,
each being 17 inches by 20 inches, shall be submitted of the original final
plat, on which lettering may be applied in a manner which will permit the plat
to be reproduced by film, litholoid, or other photographic process at the
designated scale. The following basic information shall be shown on said plat:
      (1)   All plat boundary lines with lengths of courses to hundredths of a
foot, and bearings to half minutes, these boundaries to be determined by an
accurate survey in the field, which shall be balanced and closed;
      (2)   The exact location and dedication of roads and rights-of-way, on or
adjoining the site, including dedicated widths, roadway widths, and widths of
pavements, name, and other pertinent data:
         (a)   All new proposed roads intersecting with existing public
roadways shall be reviewed, and approved, by the County Engineer, for sight
distance and proper drainage structures. The review may be established with an
application for drainage structures in the county right-of-way; and
         (b)   All lots directly accessing an existing public road will have an
approved driveway access, which may be obtained with an application for
drainage structures in the county right-of-way.
      (3)   Easements showing locations, widths, and purposes, including
utility easements, and the dedication thereof;
      (4)   Layout of lots, showing dimensions and numbers;
      (5)   True bearings and distances to the nearest established street
bounds, or official monuments, which monuments shall be located, or accurately
described, on the plat;
      (6)   Building setback or front yard lines;
      (7)   Key plan, legend, and notes;
      (8)   Scale, north arrow, and date; and
      (9)   Drainage plan to the extent necessary to indicate, or illustrate,
proper street right-of-way drainage.
   (B)   Name of the subdivision;
   (C)   Names and addresses of the owner and/or subdivider, and the engineer,
or qualified surveyor, who prepared the plan;
   (D)   A description of any protective covenants, or private restrictions, to
be incorporated into the plat of the subdivision;
   (E)   A certificate by the owner of the land, executed before a notary
public, that the owner certifies that the information contained on the plat is
true and correct, that all requirements of this subchapter, including standards
for development, have been, and will be, complied with, that all roads and
easements shown on said plat are thereby dedicated to the public, and that lots
or parcels transferred will have the size and area shown on the plat;
   (F)   A certificate by the engineer, or qualified surveyor, that the
information contained on the plat is true and correct; and
   (G)   A certificate for approval by the County Board of Commissioners for a
major subdivision, or a certificate for approval by the Subdivision Review
Committee for a minor subdivision. Approval of the plat shall not be deemed to
be an acceptance of the dedication, nor as an acceptance of any road or
easement into the county highway system.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 4-17-2018)
§ 151.09 STANDARDS.
   In addition to other standards set forth in this subchapter, in establishing
and laying out a subdivision, the owner shall comply with those standards of
development, principles, and requirements set forth in divisions (A) through
(I) below.
   (A)   Plat conformance. In determining whether an application for approval
shall be granted, the County Board of Commissioners, or the S.R.C., shall
determine if the plat conforms to the principles and standards required in this
subchapter.
   (B)   Streets.
      (1)   Each lot or parcel shall abut a dedicated public street or road.
      (2)   Each lot or parcel in a subdivision shall use a dedicated public
right-of-way as its primary means of ingress and egress.
      (3)   Except as provided in division (B)(8) below, each street or road
shall be constructed to the minimum design and width standards adopted for the
county out of the INDOT standard specifications:
         (a)   All roads shall be 20 feet wide with two-foot gravel shoulders
on each side, and with four feet of additional earth shoulder adjacent to each
gravel shoulder, all to be centered within a 60-foot public right-of-way;
         (b)   The road shall have a minimum eight inches of compacted rock
base, composed of not less than four inches of INDOT approved #2 rock and not
less than four inches of INDOT approved #53 rock over the top; and
         (c)   The road surface shall be a minimum of double chip and seal,
unless as otherwise directed by the County Board of Commissioners.
      (4)   Where appropriate to the design, proposed streets shall be
continuous and in alignment with existing, planned, or platted roads, with
which they are to connect.
      (5)   The owner may be required to extend a proposed road to the boundary
line of the tract to be subdivided when, in the opinion of the County Board of
Commissioners, such extension is desirable and in the best interest of the
county highway system.
      (6)   Proposed roads shall intersect one another as nearly at right
angles as topography, and other limiting factors of good design, permit, but
not less than 70 degrees in any case.
      (7)   Wherever there exists, adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, a
dedicated, or platted and recorded, half-width road, the other half-width of
such road shall be included in the subject plat; otherwise, half-roads shall be
prohibited.
      (8)   (a)   Roads shall be completed as shown on the plat, as approved by
the County Board of Commissioners, and shall be graded, surfaced with rock, and
improved to the dimensions, and the work shall be performed in the manner
prescribed by the then current county standards for the road constructions.
Prior to the placement of road surfaces, adequate subsurface drainage for the
road shall be provided by the subdivider. The person creating the subdivision
shall be obligated to place a minimum of double chip and seal surface, or a
surface as directed by the County Board of Commissioners, on any new road
established on the plat when three, or more, of the lots bordering newly
established road(s) have been conveyed. The covenants contained in the plat of
said subdivision shall clearly indicate this obligation.
         (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this division (B)(8), in the
event of a single lot platted subdivision, or in the event of any subdivision
having no lot containing less than three acres, access to such single lot (and
solely to said lot), or to each such lot of three acres or greater, may be an
unimproved road that satisfies dedication and easement requirements of this
subchapter, but is not required to be improved to county standards. This
unimproved road shall have its own original name approved by the County
Surveyor, shall be able to handle all emergency vehicles, and shall have a
maintenance agreement between the property owners in the platted subdivision,
and with adjoining property owners, if the access to the property is by the
platted roadway, stating how the road is to be maintained, and whose
responsibility it is to maintain.
      (9)   Fences, hedges, retaining walls, lattice-work screens, trees,
flowers, plants, permanent mail boxes, nameplates, lamp posts, bird baths, bird
houses, benches, and landscaping of a like nature are permitted in any required
front, side, or rear yard, provided they are not located on a public right-of-
way. However, on any corner tract, nothing shall be erected, placed, or planted
in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and a
half and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets, in
the area bounded by the street right-of-way lines of the corner tract, and a
line joining two points on the street right-of-way lines 35 feet from the point
of their intersection. Except for mail boxes constructed on breakaway posts and
government road signs, no signs, or other structure, shall be placed on, or
project over, a public right-of-way.
      (10)   If sidewalks are desired to be located within the public right-of-
way by the developer, then they are to be constructed by the developer, and
maintained by the property owner per §
150.01.
   (C)   Lots or parcels.
      (1)   The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for
the location of the proposed subdivision, and for the type of development
contemplated.
      (2)   Each lot or parcel shall abut on a dedicated public street or road.
      (3)   The minimum lot size shall be able to fit all of the minimum
standards set forth in this subchapter, with a minimum road frontage of 60 feet
at the road right-of-way, and a front yard minimum width of 115 feet at the
building setback line; provided, however, that should a lot be served by a
public sanitary sewer system, the minimum size shall be 10,000 square feet with
a minimum front width of 80 feet. A lot not served by a public sanitary sewer
system, while complying with this subchapter, may not comply with the minimum
requirements of state and/or county statutes, ordinances, or regulations for
private sanitary system requirements, and therefore may not be acceptable for
certain buildings or use purposes.
   (D)   Easements.
      (1)   Where alleys are not provided, easements for utilities shall be
provided. Such easements, when not located adjacent to a public road, shall
have minimum widths of 20 feet; and when located adjacent to a public road,
shall have a minimum combined width of 20 feet along said road. Where located
between adjacent lots, half the 20-foot width may be taken from each lot.
      (2)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel, or stream, adequate areas for storm water, or drainage easements,
shall be allocated for the purpose of widening, deepening, sloping, improving,
or protecting said watercourses, in accordance with the requirements of the
County Drainage Board.
      (3)   Where a new public road is being proposed as part of a subdivision,
a utility easement having a minimum width of ten feet shall be located adjacent
to each side of that public road, but if said new road is on the perimeter of a
subdivision, and no easement is possible on both sides thereof, then the
minimum easement width shall be 20 feet on the subdivision side of said road.
   (E)   Building setback lines. 
      (1)   Building setback lines, as to any lot or parcel, shall be set forth
on the plat, and shall have the following minimum distance from the lot line:
         (a)   Front yard: 35 feet from the right-of-way line;
         (b)   Side yard: ten feet on each side; and
         (c)   Rear yard: 20 feet from rear line.
      (2)   Corner lots shall have the front yard setback lines specified on
all sides fronting a dedicated right-of-way.
   (F)   Air, stream pollution. Due consideration shall be given to the
prevention of air and stream pollution, proper treatment, and disposal of
refuse and other waste, and the elimination of other blighting characteristics,
including the following elements:
      (1)   No use shall produce erosion, or other pollutants, in such quantity
as to be detrimental to adjacent properties, and conflict with water pollution
standards established by the public agencies;
      (2)   No use shall accumulate within the property, or discharge beyond
the property lines, any waste matter, whether liquid or solid, in violation of
applicable public health, safety, and welfare standards and regulations;
      (3)   All tracts not connected to, or served by, a public or private
water system already approved by a state, county, or city health authority
shall have written approval from the County Health Department, or the State
Board of Health, before construction thereon of any structure requiring water;
and
      (4)   All tracts not connected to, or served by, a public or private
sanitary sewer system already approved by a state, county, or city health
authority shall have written approval from the County Health Department, or the
State Board of Health, before construction thereon of any structure requiring
sewage disposal.
   (G)   Subdivision layout. The subdivision layout shall be of such a
character that it protects the health, safety, and general welfare of the
county and its citizens.
   (H)   Exceptions, modification. In any particular case where the subdivider
can show that, by reason of exceptional topographic or other physical
conditions, or because of an unusually large or small subdivision, or when made
for industrial or commercial purposes, strict compliance with any requirement
of these regulations would cause practical difficulty, or exceptional or undue
hardship, the County Board of Commissioners may relax such requirement to the
extent deemed just and proper, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship,
provided such relief may be granted without detriment to the public good, and
without impairing the intent, and purpose, of these regulations, or the
desirable general development of the neighborhood and the community. Any
modification thus granted shall be entered in the minutes of the County Board
of Commissioners, setting forth the reasons which, in the opinion of the Board,
justified the modification.
   (I)   Mobile home park. Any mobile home park which holds a license issued by
the State Board of Health under I.C. 16-41-27-18 shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 7-2-2018) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.10 NON-CONFORMING CONDITIONS.
   If a lawful structure, or structure and land in combination, or division of
land exists at the effective date of the adoption, or amendment, of this
subchapter, that would not be permitted under the terms of this subchapter,
that non-conforming condition may be continued, provided, however, any
extension, reduction, or further division, shall not be subsequently permitted
unless in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 151.11 PARCELIZATION.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §§
151.01 through
151.10 set forth in this subchapter, where the owner wishes to convey a parcel
of land, either with or without consideration, to a potential resident from the
general public for the purpose of locating a residence, said owner may be
authorized by the County Board of Commissioners, or the S.R.C., to convey said
parcel as an exception from the plat provisions of this subchapter. Any
exception thus authorized is required to be entered in the minutes of the
County Board of Commissioners, or on a document executed by the S.R.C., and
recorded with the deed of transfer, and the reasoning on which the exception
was authorized shall be set forth.
   (B)   Any parcelization thus granted shall comply with the following
provisions:
      (1)   Residents owning contiguous land containing 25 acres or more, and
not separated by a public right-of-way, and/or a legal drain; and
      (2)   The number of parcels conveyed off the parent parcel shall follow
the schedule below:
         (a)   Only one parcel from a lot of contiguous land containing at
least 25 acres, but less than 40 acres;
         (b)   No more than two parcels from a lot of contiguous land
containing at least 40 acres, but less than 80 acres; and
         (c)   No more than three parcels from a lot of contiguous land
containing 80 acres or more.
   (C)   In a case where the new parcel is located other than on an existing
public right-of-way, access to the parcel shall be provided by a private way.
This private access shall not be considered by the County Board of
Commissioners for a public thoroughfare, or for use to serve more than four
residences until such time that the access shall be improved, in accordance
with the applicable county improvement requirements for a county road.
   (D)   The new parcel, while not subject to the platting provisions of this
subchapter, shall be subject to all non-plat provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 151.12 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners are hereby authorized, and
empowered, to grant exemptions to the terms of this subchapter, as will not be
contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions fully
demonstrated on the basis of the facts presented, strict compliance with
specific provisions of this subchapter will result in extreme practical
difficulties, or undue misuse of property.
   (B)   The following are exemptions that the County Board of Commissioners
have agreed to authorize, provided the exceptions are not for new residential
construction:
      (1)   Utility exemption. In the case of the division of property under
200 square feet for the sole purpose of a public utility company’s equipment
placement;
      (2)   Agricultural exemption. In the case of the division of property for
the sole purpose of agriculture under the ten acre threshold. The deed of
transfer needs to reflect that the property herein described will only be used
for agricultural use, and no residential construction;
      (3)   Existing home exemption. Existing houses with a permanent
foundation constructed prior to previous subdivision ordinances, and currently
in a livable state, may be divided off from the parent parcel with a minimum of
one acre going with the home; and/or
      (4)   Adjoining property owner exemption. In the case of the division of
property for the sole purpose of selling to an adjoining property owner with no
intention of building a residence under the ten acre threshold. The deed of
transfer needs to reflect that the property herein described, when added to the
adjacent property, will only be used for a single residential structure.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 7-2-2018)
IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS;
FRONTAGE ON COUNTY HIGHWAYS
§ 151.25 PURPOSE.
   All new additions and subdivisions hereafter platted, with frontage along
existing county highways, shall be improved by the owner or developer to the
following standards set forth in §§
151.26 through
151.30.
(Ord. 1989-7, passed 5-1-1989)
§ 151.26 RIGHT-OF-WAY DEDICATIONS.
   A right-of-way is to be dedicated along the county highway 30 feet from the
centerline of the county highway along the entire frontage of the plat.
(Ord. 1989-7, passed 5-1-1989)
§ 151.27 WIDTH OF ROADWAY.
   The existing county roadway is to be widened to a width of 12 feet of
driving lane, plus six feet of aggregate shoulder, measured from the centerline
along the frontage of the plat.
(Ord. 1989-7, passed 5-1-1989)
§ 151.28 PAVEMENT, BASE.
   The existing highway is to be widened with a pavement and base of similar
type and depth to match the existing roadway along its centerline.
(Ord. 1989-7, passed 5-1-1989)
§ 151.29 SHOULDER.
   (A)   The six-foot shoulder shall be six inches of compacted aggregate.
   (B)   The widened roadway and shoulders are to be tapered at the limits of
the addition, or subdivision, frontage to match the existing roadway and
shoulders.
(Ord. 1989-7, passed 5-1-1989)
§ 151.30 APPROVAL OF PLANS.
   All owners or developers, prior to starting any of the work covered by this
subchapter, shall make arrangements with the County Highway Department for
approval of their plans and specifications, and for inspection and approval of
the roadway as constructed.
(Ord. 1989-7, passed 5-1-1989)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
151.01 through
151.12 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine in any sum not to
exceed $1,000. Each separate violation thereof, and each day continued, or
renewed, violation thereof, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 7-2-2018)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
      
II.   ANNEXATIONS AND DISANNEXATIONS
      
III.   VACATIONS
TABLE I: FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
1988-7        6-6-1988    TCI of Indiana Inc.; expired 2003 (15 years).
R. -          10-3-1988   From Welbac Cable TV to Tele-Media Company of Mid-
                          South; community antenna television (CATV) system.
1989-2        3-6-1989    Country Cable Systems, Inc.; expired 2014 (25 years).
96-3          2-16-1996   Tele-Media Company of Mid- South; expired 2006 (ten
                          years).
                          Transfer of franchise from TCI of Indiana to Insight
R. 98-3       9-1-1998    Communications Company, L.P., and Insight
                          Communications of Indiana, LLC.
R. 99-04      8-23-1999   Transfer of CATV franchise from TWFanch-on Co. to
                          Fanch Cablevision of Indiana, L.P.
                          Franchise renewal, extension to Insight
2004-21       10-18-2004  Communications Midwest, LLC; expired 3-6-2014 (five
                          years).
                         
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS AND DISANNEXATIONS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Certain jurisdictions from the Dubois County Airport
R.87-11       7-30-1987   Authority to be removed from corporate limits of
                          Huntingburg.
                         
 
TABLE III: VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
89-5  5-1-   Portion of County Highway 875W in Boone Township.
      1989
R. -  6-5-   Lots 16 and 17 in Teipel’s Addition, Town of St. Anthony.
      1989
90-3A 3-5-   County highway in Columbia Township, starting from Jackson Access Road.
      1990
      3-5-   County highway, part of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter, and
90-4  1990   part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter in section 20, township
             2 south, range 4 west in Jackson Township.
90-5  3-27-  Plat of Central Park South Subdivision, located in the corporate boundaries in
      1990   Jasper.
90-3  8-2-   Portion of Chestnut Street north of 10th Street in Schnell Addition in
      1990   Birdseye.
1992- 7-6-   An alley starting west on Main Street, Portersville Road in Portersville.
7     1992
1992- 9-8-   Portion of Common Street and four alleys in Portersville.
8     1992
94-7  2-28-  Portion of Co. Rd. 800 S commencing at its intersection with Co. Rd. 850 W,
      1994   proceeding easterly to meet with Co. Rd. 750 W.
94-8  5-2-   Portion of Sycamore Street, south of Main Street in Schnellville, Jefferson
      1994   Township.
      6-20-  Portion of Second Street, south of Lot 74 and north of Lot 49; Monroe Street
94-9A 1994   east of Lot 48 and Lot 49, west of Lot 47 and Lot 50; alley between Lot 48 and
             Lot 49 in Portersville.
95-7  6-5-   Portion of County Highway 1100 in Cass Township, between S.R. 161 and Co. Rd.
      1995   720.
96-4  2-16-  Portion of platted utility and drainage easement; commercial tract “A” in
      1996   Northwood Village Subdivision, Part I, in Jasper.
96-7  7-8-   Utility and drainage easement, east line of Lot 36 in Green Meadow Estates,
      1996   Third Addition, in Madison Township.
97-1  1-27-  A county highway starting on 2nd Street in St. Marks, Jackson Township.
      1997
98-7  7-10-  Portion of Old County Road 880 east, from Dubois- Perry county lines north.
      1998
99-2  2-16-  Portion of County Highway 900S, Cass Township.
      1999
      7-19-  Portion of alley between St. James Street and Grant Street, part of St. James
99-05 1999   Street and Clay Street, and part of Clay Street between St. James Street and
             Grant Street, in Ireland, Madison Township.
2001- 8-6-   Portion of utility and drainage easement running between Lots 11, 12, and 13
05    2001   in Sunrise Acres, section 2, a subdivision in Bainbridge Township.
2001- 10-15- Public alley between Charles Street and Seity Street in Harbison Township.
07    2001
01-9  1-7-   Portion of Maple Street, south of Norfolk Southern Railway, north of Ohio
      2002   Street, in Kyana, Jackson Township.
2002- 2-19-  Portion of Hill Park Estates and Hill Park Drive in Marion Township.
1     2002
02-2  4-1-   Portion of 3rd Street between Lot 107 and Lot 112 together with the alleyways
      2002   bordering Lot 107 and Lot 112 in Portersville.
2002- 12-20- Abandoned portion of Jasper-Dubois Road, starting at the northeast quarter of
9     2002   the southeast corner of section 29, township 1 south, range 4 west in Marion
             Township.
2003- 9-8-   Portion of St. Mary’s Street, starting at the southwest corner of Lot 85 in
04    2003   Celestine.
03-09 12-22- Portion of Boniface Lane, starting at the southeast quarter of section 31,
      2003   township 1 south, range 3 in Celestine.
2004- 7-19-  Public alley starting at the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
6     2004   section 25, township 1 north in Haysville.
2004- 10-18- Portion of Common Street and two public alleys, both starting at the southwest
22    2004   quarter of section 21, township 1 north, range 5 west, Lots 117 and 119.
2005- 1-24-  Portion of a street on a county highway starting at the southwest corner of
1     2005   Lot 11 in Bretzville.
             Portion of an abandoned road, part of the south half of the southeast quarter
2005- 4-4-   of section 1, township 2 south, range 5 west, and the north half of the
5     2005   northeast quarter of section 12, township 2, range 5 west in Bainbridge
             Township.
2005- 7-22-  7th Street in the Landis Addition in Mentor.
06    2005
             Portion of 3rd Street between Lots 100- 101 and 118-119, portion of Common
05-09 11-7-  Street between Lots 92-101 and 91-102, and all of the intersection of 3rd and
      2005   Common, except for northeast quarter, together with the alleyways bordering
             Lots 92, 93, 100, and 101 in Portersville.
2006- 7-14-  All of C Street, located westerly of Lot 28 of Rolling Hills Subdivision,
5     2006   southerly of the projected south right- of-way line of Hillbrook Road in
             Bainbridge Township.
2007- 5-16-  Portion of a public utility and drainage easement on Lot 44 in Green Meadows,
05    2007   Fourth Addition, in Madison Township.
             Lots 1-14 in Block 5, a dedicated alley adjacent to, and south of, Lots 1-12,
2007- 6-11-  and a portion of Oak Street east of the east line extended to Walnut Street,
06    2007   immediately north of, and adjacent to, Lots 1-7, and part of Lot 8 of Block 5
             in Kyana, Jackson Township.
2007- 7-30-  Vacating portions of Ohio Street and an alley three feet north, and three feet
9     2007   south, of the northwest corner of Lot 1 in St. Anthony, Jackson Township.
2008- 4-21-  Portion of the Old County Road 175 east of the west right- of-way of the New
1     2008   County Road 175 east in Harbison Township.
2008- 8-18-  Portion of a public utility and drainage easement between Lot 1 and Lot 2 in
3     2008   Killarney Estate, a subdivision in Madison Township.
2008- 11-17- Public alley located between Lots 13-20 in Cuzco in Columbia Township.
07    2008
09-04 10-5-  Portion of Walnut Street located west of Lot 78, together with the alleyways
      2009   bordering Lot 78, in Portersville.
09-09 12-7-  Portion of County Road 450 south located in the west half of section 26,
      2009   township 2, range 3 west, in Jefferson Township.
2010- 7-19-  Portion of a easement adjacent to Zoar Church Road in Cass Township.
01    2010
2011- 12-19- Portions of Main Street and 5th Street, and Lots 34-42 in Bainbridge Township,
5     2011   Maltersville.
2012- 6-18-  Portion of 2nd Street south, Lots 68 and 69 north of Lots 54 and 55 in Boone
02    2012   Township, Portersville.
2016- 11-7-  Portion of a easement adjacent to St. Paul’s Evangelical Lutheran Church, on a
06    2016   portion of Cemetery Road in Haysville.
2019- 4-1-   Portion of a dedicated right-of- way on Celestine Road south, as set forth by
02    2019   the plat of Valley View Estates in Celestine.
2020- 8-3-   Portions of St. Bernard’s Lane, Bishop Street, and St. Charles Street.
7     2020
2020- 11-2-  Portion of dedicated Sixth Street in Landiss Addition.
09    2020
2021- 11-1-  Portions of New Orleans Street.
35    2021
2023- 6-5-   Portion of the dedicated public utility and drainage easement on Lot 8 of Twin
05    2023   Lake Estates.
2023- 6-19-  Portion of public alley in Jesse C. Corn’s South and West addition to the
09    2023   town.
2025- 7-7-   Portion of dedicated 10-foot alley lying north of Lots 6, 7 and 8 in the Town
06    2025   of Cuzco, containing 0.034 acres.
2025- 8-18-  Portion of dedicated public utility and drainage easement in Plat 23 of the
08    2025   Town of Ferdinand, containing 450 square feet.
            
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Cites Code Section
I.C. Cites              Code Section
1-1-1-5                 10.04
1-1-1-7                 10.11
1-1-1-8                 10.06
1-1-4-5                 10.05
1-1-5-1                 10.11
1-1-6-1                 10.08
1-1-7-1                 92.06
4-21.5-1-9              50.01
4-21.5-3                50.01
5-3-1                   36.01;
                        151.06
5-11-1-27               36.02
5-13-8                  34.30
5-14-1.5                110.02
5-14-1.5-1              30.04
5-14-1.5-5(d)           33.17
5-14-3                  110.05
5-14-3-2                34.07;
                        34.99
5-14-3-3                34.07
5-14-3-3(e)             34.07
5-14-3-3.6              34.07
5-14-3-3.6(e)           34.07
5-14-3-4                34.07
5-14-3-4(a)             36.27
5-14-3-6                34.07
5-14-3-8                34.01
5-14-3-8(j)             34.07
5-14-3-8(k)             34.07
5-14-3-8.5              34.07
5-14-3-8.5(b)           34.07
5-22-2-30               34.48
5-26.5-2-3              36.21
6-1.1-12.1              35.20;
                        35.21
6-1.1-12.1-1            35.20
6-1.1-12.1-2            35.20
6-1.1-12.1-3(e)         35.23
6-1.1-12.1-17           35.21
6-1.1-23-9              35.05
6-1.1-24-5(f)           35.03
6-2.5                   35.04
6-2.5-1-3               35.04
6-3.6-5                 35.01
6-3.6-6                 35.01
6-3.6-6-2.7             35.01
6-8.1-8-2(b)            35.02
6-8.1-8-3               35.02
6-9-18                  35.04
6-9-18-3                35.04
7.1                     35.23
7.1-3-3                 35.23
7.1-3-8                 35.23
7.1-3-10                35.23
7.1-3-13                35.23
7.1-5-7-11              35.23
8-1-2.3-2               150.35
8-1-42-10               150.36
8-1-42-11               150.37
8-1-42-12               150.38
8-1-42-13               150.39
8-1-42-14               150.40
8-1-42-15               150.41
8-1-42-16               150.42
8-1-42-17               150.43
8-1-42-18               150.44
8-1-42-19               150.45
8-1-42-20               150.46
9-19-1-2                70.01
9-19-1-3                70.01
9-20                    70.04
9-20-13                 70.99
9-20-13-22              70.99
9-20-14                 70.99
9-20-15                 70.99
9-20-17                 70.99
9-20-18                 70.99
9-24-6 (Repealed)       34.31
9-26-9-3                34.05
9-30-5-1                34.31
9-30-5-5                34.31
                        33.01;
                        33.03;
                        33.06;
10-14-3                 33.08;
                        33.18;
                        33.21;
                        33.99
                        33.04;
10-14-3-12              33.14;
                        33.16
10-14-3-13              33.14;
                        33.16
10-14-3-16              33.01
10-14-3-17              33.04
10-14-3-22              33.03;
                        33.18
                        33.04;
10-14-3-29              33.14;
                        33.16
10-14-3-29.5            33.19
10-14-3-31              33.18
10-14-3-34              33.99
10-16-7-9               33.03
10-16-7-10              33.03
11-8-8-21               34.08
11-12-5-5               34.45
11-12-11                34.29
12-13-5                 111.02
14-16-1                 71.01;
                        71.05
14-16-1-20(c)           71.01
14-16-1-23              71.04
15-16-7-3               32.05
16-18-2-137(b)          111.02
16-18-4                 36.21
16-20-1                 50.01
16-20-1-2               32.02
16-20-1-14              50.01
16-20-1-25              111.99
16-20-2                 50.01
16-20-2-5               32.02
16-20-2-16              50.01;
                        113.02
16-20-8-5               111.08
16-20-8-6               111.08;
                        111.09
16-21-2                 111.02
16-25-1.1               111.02
16-27-2-1               113.30
16-41-25-9              50.01
16-41-27-18             151.09
16-41-31-1              111.02
16-42-1                 111.01
16-42-1 through 16-42-4 111.02
16-42-1 through 16-42-5 111.02
16-42-2                 111.01
16-42-2-1               111.02
16-42-2-4               111.02
16-42-5                 111.01;
                        111.02
22-9-1-4                94.02
22-9-5-6                94.02
22-9.5-1                94.01
22-9.5-2-2              94.02
22-9.5-2-3              94.02
22-9.5-2-4              94.02
22-9.5-2-8              94.02
22-9.5-2-9              94.02
22-9.5-2-11             94.02
22-9.5-2-13             94.02
22-9.5-3                94.03
22-9.5-3 et seq.        94.07
22-9.5-4-8              94.08
22-9.5-5                94.02
22-9.5-5-1              94.03
22-9.5-6                94.02;
                        94.08
22-14-3-1               112.01
Title 25                113.30
27-1-15.6-6(d)          34.02
27-7-3-2                34.02
27-7-3-6                34.02
31-25-1-1               36.21
32-24                   33.18
33-37-4-1(c)            34.31
33-37-4-2(e)            34.31
33-37-5                 34.31
33-37-5-17              34.31
33-37-8-6               34.31
33-39-1-8               34.31
33-39-l-8(c)(4)         34.31
33-39-8-5(c)            34.31
34-6-2-85 (Repealed)    70.01
34-28-5                 130.03
34-28-5-1               34.31;
                        111.99
34-28-5-1(h)(6)         34.31
                        70.01;
34-28-5-4               71.07;
                        130.03
35-37-8(5)              34.31
35-37-8(6)              34.31
35-37-8(7)              34.31
35-45-4-1               112.01
35-45-21-4              113.05
35-45-21-4(b)           113.02
35-47-1-5               130.01
35-47-8-1               130.01
35-47-8-2               130.01
35-47-8-3               130.01
35-47-11.1-4(5)         130.01
35-49-1-9               112.01
35-49-2-1               112.01
35-49-3-2               112.01
35-50-3-4               70.02
36-1-3-8                150.99
36-1-3-8(a)(10)         10.99
36-1-5-3                Adopting Ordinance
36-1-6                  92.10
36-1-8.5                36.20—
                        36.23
36-1-8.5-2.5            36.21
36-1-8.5-3              36.21
36-1-8.5-4              36.21
36-1-8.5-4.5            36.21
36-1-8.5-5              36.21
36-1-8.5-7              36.28
36-1-8.5-11             36.27
36-1-8.5-12             36.25
36-1-8-5.1              34.25
36-2-2-8(a)             33.17
36-2-2.9-15             34.48
36-2-5-3(a)             33.05
36-2-7-10(f)            34.02
36-2-7-10.1             34.02
36-2-7-10.1(d)          34.02
36-2-7-10.1(h)          34.02
36-2-13-2.5             35.02
36-2-13-17              35.02
36-5-2-2                10.15
36-7-9-2                92.01;
                        150.02
36-7-9-3                150.02
36-7-9-4                150.02
36-7-9-4.5              150.02
36-7-9-5                150.02
36-7-9-6                150.02
36-7-9-7                150.02
36-7-9-7.5              150.02
36-7-9-8                92.07;
                        150.02
36-7-9-9                150.02
36-7-9-10               150.02
36-7-9-11               150.02
36-7-9-12               150.02
36-7-9-13               150.02
36-7-9-13.5             150.02
36-7-9-14               150.02
36-7-9-15               150.02
36-7-9-16               150.02
36-7-9-17               150.02
36-7-9-18               150.02
36-7-9-18.1             150.02
36-7-9-19               150.02
36-7-9-20               150.02
36-7-9-20.5             150.02
36-7-9-21               150.02
36-7-9-22               150.02
36-7-9-23               150.02
36-7-9-24               150.02
36-7-9-25               150.02
36-7-9-26               150.02
36-7-9-27               150.02
36-7-9-28               150.02
36-7-9-29               150.02
36-8-12-2               36.21
36-10-3-10              32.25
36-10-3-11              32.25
36-10-3-17              32.26
                        
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No.        Date Passed Code Section
84-4            - -         31.05
87-11           7-30-1987   TSO Table II
-               1-16-1989   70.01
90-1            1-23-1990   31.03
1991-3          2-14-1991   51.02
91-6            9-3-1991    32.04
94-5            7-5-1994    34.45
98-1            11-16-1998  90.01
98-3            9-1-1998    TSO Table I
99-04           8-23-1999   TSO Table I
99-6            9-7-1999    36.04
-               10-15-2001  36.03
2011-01         5-9-2011    31.08
-               12-21-2015  36.20—
                            36.28
2017-01         3-20-2017   34.26
Council 18-01   1-29-2018   34.01
2018-03         8-6-2018    91.02
2019-03         10-7-2019   90.02
Council 2019-04 11-18-2019  34.01
2020-05         - -2020     36.20—
                            36.28
2021-04         2-18-2021   30.02
Council 2021-07 2-22-2021   30.03
2021-21         6-7-2021    36.20—
                            36.28
2021-23         6-7-2021    30.04
2021-27         6-28-2021   30.04
2023-11         7-3-2023    36.20—
                            36.28
                           
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.        Date Passed Code Section
Council 91-12A  - -         35.04
1982-1          - -         34.46
1986-7          - -         150.04
Council 2005-01 - -         35.04
1980-1          8-11-1980   70.01;
                            70.99
1981            9-8-1981    32.05
1983-1          2-15-1983   Ch. 72 Schd. III
1986-5          7-7-1986    Ch. 72 Schd. III
1986.7          11-3-1986   50.02
14              12-1-1986   Ch. 72 Schd. II
15              9-8-1987    Ch. 72 Schd. II
2 1988          5-2-1988    150.05
1988-6          6-6-1988    70.03
1988-7          6-6-1988    TSO Table I
1988-25         11-7-1988   71.20—
                            71.99
1988-25-A       12-5-1988   71.23
1989-2          3-6-1989    TSO Table I
1989-7          5-1-1989    151.25—
                            151.30
89-5            5-1-1989    TSO Table III
Council 1989-8  7-10-1989   34.09
90-3A           3-5-1990    TSO Table III
90-4            3-5-1990    TSO Table III
90-5            3-27-1990   TSO Table III
90-8            5-7-1990    Ch. 72 Schd. II
90-3            8-2-1990    TSO Table III
1991-4          3-18-1991   51.02;
                            51.99
91-6            8-5-1991    32.02
1991-7          8-5-1991    70.02
91-13           12-2-1991   90.03
91-12           1-1-1992    32.03
92-5            5-18-1992   Ch. 72 Schd. II
1992-7          7-6-1992    TSO Table III
1992-8          9-8-1992    TSO Table III
92-7            10-19-1992  Ch. 72 Schd. III
92-8            10-19-1992  Ch. 72 Schd. II
93-2            1-4-1993    Ch. 72 Schd. III
93-4            6-7-1993    Ch. 72 Schd. II
93-5            6-21-1993   Ch. 72 Schd. III
93-6            11-15-1993  110.01—
                            110.07
93-7            11-15-1993  31.04
                            93.01—
                            93.03;
93-8            12-6-1993   93.05—
                            93.07;
                            93.99
94-1            1-3-1994    Ch. 72 Schd. II
                            94.01—
                            94.05;
94-4            2-7-1994    94.07;
                            94.08;
                            94.99
94-6            2-7-1994    Ch. 72 Schd. II
94-7            2-28-1994   TSO Table III
94-8            5-2-1994    TSO Table III
94-9A           6-20-1994   TSO Table III
94-10           8-1-1994    Ch. 72 Schd. II
94-11           9-6-1994    35.05
95-2            1-16-1995   Ch. 72 Schd. II
95-4            3-20-1995   Ch. 72 Schd. II
Council 95-1    4-3-1995    35.04
95-6            5-22-1995   Ch. 72 Schd. II
95-7            6-5-1995    TSO Table III
95-8            6-19-1995   Ch. 72 Schd. II
95-10           8-1-1995    Ch. 72 Schd. II
11-95           11-6-1995   Ch. 72 Schd. II
96-3            2-16-1996   TSO Table I
96-4            2-16-1996   TSO Table III
1996-5          3-18-1996   Ch. 72 Schd. II
96-06           5-20-1996   Ch. 72 Schd. II
96-7            7-8-1996    TSO Table III
96-8            8-26-1996   Ch. 72 Schd. II
96-9            10-7-1996   Ch. 72 Schd. II
96-12           12-16-1996  Ch. 72 Schd. II
97-1            1-27-1997   TSO Table III
97-4            5-5-1997    Ch. 72 Schd. II
97-5            8-1-1997    Ch. 72 Schd. II
97-6            10-6-1997   Ch. 72 Schd. II
97-7            1-1-1998    32.03
1998-1          2-2-1998    34.29
98-3            5-4-1998    Ch. 72 Schd. II
98-4            6-15-1998   31.02
98-5            6-15-1998   Ch. 72 Schd. II
98-6            6-16-1998   36.01
98-7            7-10-1998   TSO Table III
98-9            9-21-1998   Ch. 72 Schd. II
98-10           10-5-1998   Ch. 72 Schd. III
98-11           12-7-1998   34.06;
                            34.99
99-2            2-16-1999   TSO Table III
99-3            2-16-1999   91.01
99-4            7-6-1999    Ch. 72 Schd. II
99-05           7-19-1999   TSO Table III
99-6            8-2-1999    34.01
99-8            10-11-1999  Ch. 72 Schd. III
99-10           11-1-1999   Ch. 72 Schd. II
99-11           11-1-1999   Ch. 72 Schd. III
99-14           12-22-1999  Ch. 72 Schd. III
                            150.20—
2000-1          4-17-2000   150.28;
                            150.99
2000-2          6-19-2000   Ch. 72 Schd. II
2000-3          8-7-2000    Ch. 72 Schd. II
00-4            11-6-2000   Ch. 72 Schd. II
2000-5          11-20-2000  50.03;
                            50.99
2001-01         5-7-2001    Ch. 72 Schd. III
2001-2          7-9-2001    Ch. 72 Schd. II
2001-05         8-6-2001    TSO Table III
2001-6          9-10-2001   Ch. 72 Schd. III
2001-07         10-15-2001  TSO Table III
2001-10         12-20-2001  Ch. 72 Schd. II
01-9            1-7-2002    TSO Table III
2002-1          2-19-2002   TSO Table III
02-2            4-1-2002    TSO Table III
02-3            5-6-2002    Ch. 72 Schd. I
02-04           5-20-2002   150.03
Council 2002-01 5-21-2002   34.05
2002-05         6-17-2002   Ch. 72 Schd. II
2002-06         7-15-2002   Ch. 72 Schd. I
2002-7          10-7-2002   Ch. 72 Schd. III
2002-9          12-20-2002  TSO Table III
Council 2003-03 8-11-2003   34.09
2003-03         9-8-2003    Ch. 72 Schd. II
2003-04         9-8-2003    TSO Table III
03-05           10-27-2003  31.02
2003-6          11-17-2003  32.01
03-09           12-22-2003  TSO Table III
Council 2004-01 1-26-2004   34.25
Council 2004-02 5-17-2004   34.28
2004-6          7-19-2004   TSO Table III
2004-7          7-19-2004   Ch. 72 Schd. II
2004-08         8-2-2004    Ch. 72 Schd. III
2004-09         8-2-2004    Ch. 72 Schd. III
2004-10         8-2-2004    Ch. 72 Schd. III
2004-11         8-2-2004    Ch. 72 Schd. III
2004-12         8-16-2004   Ch. 72 Schd. III
2004-13         8-16-2004   Ch. 72 Schd. III
2004-14         8-16-2004   Ch. 72 Schd. III
2004-15         8-16-2004   Ch. 72 Schd. III
2004-16         9-7-2004    Ch. 72 Schd. III
2004-17         9-7-2004    Ch. 72 Schd. III
2004-18         9-20-2004   Ch. 72 Schd. II
2004-20         10-1-2004   Ch. 72 Schd. III
2004-21         10-18-2004  TSO Table I
2004-22         10-18-2004  TSO Table III
2004-23         11-1-2004   Ch. 72 Schd. III;
                            Ch. 72 Schd. IV
2004-24         12-6-2004   Ch. 72 Schd. III;
                            Ch. 72 Schd. IV
2005-1          1-24-2005   TSO Table III
2005-4          3-7-2005    31.07
2005-5          4-4-2005    TSO Table III
2005-06         7-22-2005   TSO Table III
2005-07         8-22-2005   Ch. 72 Schd. II
05-09           11-7-2005   TSO Table III
2005-10         11-21-2005  Ch. 72 Schd. II
2005-12         12-5-2005   Ch. 72 Schd. III
2006-1          4-3-2006    Ch. 72 Schd. II
                            112.01—
2006-02         6-19-2006   112.07;
                            112.21—
                            112.33
2006-03         6-19-2006   Ch. 72 Schd. III
2006-5          7-14-2006   TSO Table III
2006-6          9-25-2006   Ch. 72 Schd. III
2006-7          9-25-2006   Ch. 72 Schd. II
2006-08         11-20-2006  Ch. 72 Schd. III
2006-9          12-4-2006   Ch. 72 Schd. I
Council 2006-01 12-27-2006  34.32
2007-1          4-23-2007   Ch. 72 Schd. I
2007-2          4-23-2007   Ch. 72 Schd. III
2007-04         5-11-2007   Ch. 72 Schd. I
2007-05         5-16-2007   TSO Table III
2007-06         6-11-2007   TSO Table III
2007-07         6-11-2007   Ch. 72 Schd. I
2007-09         7-30-2007   TSO Table III
2007-10         8-13-2007   Ch. 72 Schd. III
2007-11         8-27-2007   Ch. 72 Schd. II
2007-13         9-10-2007   Ch. 72 Schd. III
Council 2007-12 9-17-2007   34.08
2007-14         10-22-2007  Ch. 72 Schd. III
2008-1          4-21-2008   TSO Table III
2008-02         6-23-2008   Ch. 72 Schd. III
2008-3          8-18-2008   TSO Table III
2008-4          8-18-2008   36.05
2008-07         11-17-2008  TSO Table III
2008-05         12-1-2008   Ch. 72 Schd. II
2009-3          2-23-2009   93.04
09-04           10-5-2009   TSO Table III
2009-6          11-2-2009   Ch. 72 Schd. II
2009-7          11-2-2009   Ch. 72 Schd. III
09-09           12-7-2009   TSO Table III
2010-01         7-19-2010   TSO Table III
2010-2          8-9-2010    Ch. 72 Schd. III
2010-03         10-4-2010   Ch. 72 Schd. II
2010-05         10-18-2010  71.01—
                            71.07
2010-04         11-1-2010   130.03
2011-5          12-19-2011  TSO Table III
                            113.01—
                            113.15;
2012-1          6-18-2012   113.30—
                            113.36;
                            113.99
2012-02         6-18-2012   TSO Table III
Council 2012-02 8-6-2012    35.03
2012-3          9-4-2012    Ch. 73 Schd. I
2013-01         5-6-2013    34.07;
                            34.99
2014-01         8-4-2014    Ch. 73 Schd. I
2014-02         8-4-2014    Ch. 72 Schd. III
2015-01         8-3-2015    Ch. 72 Schd. II
2015-02         8-3-2015    150.01
2016-02         5-16-2016   36.02
2016-03         9-6-2016    33.01—
                            33.99
2016-04         10-17-2016  31.06
2016-06         11-7-2016   TSO Table III
2016-07         12-5-2016   Ch. 72 Schd. II
2017-01         3-6-2017    31.09
2017-02         5-1-2017    Ch. 73 Schd. I
2017-03         5-1-2017    Ch. 72 Schd. II
2018-2          4-16-2018   150.02
                            151.01—
2018-03         7-2-2018    151.12;
                            151.99
Council 2017-02 10-22-2018  35.20—
                            35.26
2018-4          12-17-2018  130.02;
                            130.99
                            92.01—
2019-01         3-18-2019   92.10;
                            92.99
2019-02         4-1-2019    TSO Table III
2019-03         4-15-2019   34.02
2019-04         4-15-2019   34.02
2019-05         6-17-2019   34.04
Council 2019-01 6-24-2019   35.01
2019-06         10-7-2019   34.30
2019-07         10-21-2019  130.01;
                            130.99
2019-8          11-4-2019   Ch. 72 Schd. II
                            111.01—
2019-09         11-4-2019   111.12;
                            111.99
2019-10         11-18-2019  34.27
Council 2019-11 11-18-2019  35.02
Council 2019-02 12-30-2019  32.20—
                            32.27
2020-7          8-3-2020    TSO Table III
2020-09         11-2-2020   TSO Table III
Council 2021-10 3-29-2021   35.23
2021-15         4-19-2021   70.04;
                            70.99
2021-19         5-17-2021   34.33
2021-22         6-7-2021    Adopting Ordinance
2021-33         10-4-2021   34.47
2021-34         10-12-2021  30.01
2021-35         11-1-2021   TSO Table III
2021-41         12-20-2021  70.01
2022-12         7-5-2022    150.35—
                            150.46
2022-13         8-29-2022   34.01
2023-02         4-24-2023   35.04
2023-05         6-5-2023    TSO Table III
2023-09         6-19-2023   TSO Table III
2023-14         10-2-2023   94.06—
                            94.08
2023-17         11-6-2023   50.01;
                            50.99
2023-19         12-18-2023  70.01
2024-01         1-16-2024   Ch. 72 Sch. III
2024-03         2-20-2024   130.01;
                            130.99
                            92.01;
2024-06         5-6-2024    92.07;
                            92.09
2024-12         7-1-2024    34.48
2024-16         10-28-2024  Ch. 150
2024-17         12-2-2024   34.48
2024-18         12-2-2024   150.36—
                            150.45
2024-19         12-16-2024  70.01
2025-04         6-2-2025    30.01
2025-06         7-7-2025    TSO Table III
2025-07         8-4-2025    34.48
2025-08         8-18-2025   TSO Table III
2025-09         8-18-2025   34.48
2025-11         9-15-2025   Ch. 72 Sch. II
2025-12         9-15-2025   Ch. 72 Sch. III
                           
 
