TOWN OF FRANKTON, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local legislation current through Ord. 106-25, passed 10-13-2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   TOWN STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION;
GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Frankton Town Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances”, or “code” may be substituted.
   (B)   Code title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part
of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto, and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters, or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning,
application, or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary, and
usual sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town Council.
      COUNCIL. The Town Council.
      COUNTY. Madison County.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads, and streets unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firms, corporations,
copartnerships, trustees, lessees, receivers, and bodies politic. Whenever used
in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER
as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur unless some other section is designated.
      STATE. The State of Indiana.
      TOWN. The Town of Frankton, Indiana.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Includes printing, lithographing, or other modes
of representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person or the person’s
mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year unless otherwise expressly provided.
(I.C. 1-1-4-5)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable.
If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
   (D)   The repeal of a section or amendment stating that the provisions of a
chapter, subchapter, or section are severable as provided in division (B) above
does not affect the operation of division (B) above with respect to that
chapter, subchapter, or section.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority, or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; on the effective date of that ordinance or following the
effective date, the rights, powers, duties, or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority, or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers, and rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday, or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall
not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under
the section unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture, or
liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings, and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(I.C. 36-5-2-2)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published and subsequently amended, the previous code
section number shall be indicated in the history by “(Prior Code, §      ).”
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-
way; contracts entered into or franchises granted; the acceptance,
establishment, or vacation of any highway; and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent violations,
except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and parking.
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
CHAPTER 11: TOWN STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Incorporation of town by reference
   
11.02   Town wards
§ 11.01 INCORPORATION OF TOWN BY REFERENCE.
   The town was incorporated in 1871, following an election by the residents of
the proposed town and a vote by the County Board of Commissioners. The
incorporating material is found in Volume 9, pages 319-321 of the
Commissioners’ Records, dated 12-4-1871.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 11.02 TOWN WARDS.
   The town shall remain districted into three districts as follows.
   (A)   District One shall include all of the part of town west of a line
starting at the intersection of Bond Street and the north corporation line,
said line going south on Bond Street to East Sigler Street, thence west on East
Sigler Street to South Fourth Street, thence south on South Fourth Street to
Lafayette Avenue, thence southeast on Lafayette Avenue to Clyde Street, thence
west on Clyde Street to South John Street, thence south on South John Street to
the south corporation line.
   (B)   District Two shall include all of the town lying between District One
described above and District Three described below.
   (C)   District Three shall include all of the part of town east of a line
starting at Bond Street at its intersection with the north corporation line,
going south to East Sigler Street, thence east on East Sigler Street to South
Delaware Street, thence south on South Delaware Street to Factory Street,
thence east on Factory Street to Fletcher Street, thence south on Fletcher
Street to Clyde Street, then east on Clyde Street to Eleventh Street, thence
south on Eleventh Street to Madison Street, thence east on Madison Street to
the east corporation line.
(Ord. 118-22, passed 12-12-2022)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES, AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
31.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SAFETY; POLICE DEPARTMENT RULES AND
REGULATIONS
      
32.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
      
33.   PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS
      
34.   ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
      
35.   TOWN POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES, AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Officials and Employees
   
30.01   Town Marshal
   
30.02   Clerk-Treasurer
   
30.03   Electrician
   
30.04   Street Superintendent
Department of Parks and Recreation
   
30.15   Establishment; composition
   
30.16   Powers; responsibilities
Fire Department
   
30.30   Volunteer Fire Department; membership
   
30.31   Compensation and allowances
   
30.32   Liability insurance required
   
30.33   Schedule of fees
OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 30.01 TOWN MARSHAL.
   (A)   The office of Town Marshal is established.
(Prior Code, § 31.20)
   (B)   The Town Marshal is authorized to appoint Deputy Marshals, subject to
approval by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.21)
   (C)   (1)   The Town Marshal will receive the Town House at $175 per month
and the electricity usage free as part of his or her salary.
      (2)   The Town Marshal will receive his or her water and sewage utilities
free as part of his or her salary.
(Prior Code, § 31.22)
(Ord. 219-94, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 227-1-95, passed - -1995; Ord. 236-1-96,
passed 8-19-1996)
Statutory reference:
   Town Marshal, see I.C. 36-5-7-1
§ 30.02 CLERK-TREASURER.
   (A)   (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-8-14 and I.C. 36-5-4-12, the town’s fiscal
officer, under the job title “Clerk-Treasurer”, is given the authority to make
claim payments in advance of this legislative body’s allowance for such claims
for the following expenses:
         (a)   Property or services purchased or leased from the U.S.
Government, its agencies, or its political subdivisions;
         (b)   License or permit fees;
         (c)   Insurance premiums;
         (d)   Utility payments or utility connection charges;
         (e)   General grant programs where advance funding is not prohibited
and the contracting party posts sufficient security to cover the amount
advanced;
         (f)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute;
         (g)   Maintenance or service agreements;
         (h)   Leases of rental agreements;
         (i)   Bond or coupon payments;
         (j)   Payroll; and
         (k)   State, federal, or county taxes.
      (2)   Further, each such payment made by the fiscal officer, Clerk-
Treasurer shall be supported by a fully itemized claim, and the Council shall
have full rights to review such claim at any special or regular meeting
following such pre-approved payment.
(Prior Code, § 31.40)
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer and the Deputy Clerk-Treasurer are authorized as
the individuals to respond to any creditable service for town employees with
the Public Employees’ Retirement Fund (PERF), account number 1405.
(Prior Code, § 31.41)
(Res. 84-48, passed 7-9-1984; Ord. 212-1992, passed 12-14-1992)
§ 30.03 ELECTRICIAN.
   (A)   The Council will designate the need for a licensed electrician and the
terms of schooling, such as requiring a letter by the employee to remain in the
town employment for at least two years after receiving the license. In return,
the town will pay an additional $1 per hour during the actual days the employee
is attending or active in schooling.
   (B)   This $1 per hour will increase each year by $1 so as to prove an
incentive for the employee to continue toward completion.
   (C)   All class fees and books will be paid by the town as long as they are
not repeated because of failure to pass. Repeated classes will be at the
expense of the employee.
(Prior Code, § 31.60) (Ord. 227-1-95, passed - -1995; Ord. 236-1-96, passed 8-
19-1996)
§ 30.04 STREET SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Council will pay an additional $0.50 per hour for the Street
Superintendent who is responsible for monthly reports on all street conditions
and repairs.
(Prior Code, § 31.70) (Ord. 236-1-96, passed 8-19-1996)
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 30.15 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Under the provisions of I.C. 36-10-3, there is hereby created a
municipal Department of Parks and Recreation with jurisdiction within the
municipal boundaries of the town (the “District”).
   (B)   The Parks and Recreation Board shall be composed of four members
appointed by the Council on the basis of their interest in and knowledge of
parks and recreation who are residents of the District. Unless waived by the
Council in accordance with I.C. 36-1-10-3-4.1, no more than two members shall
be affiliated with the same political party.
   (C)   Upon establishment of the Board, the terms initially appointed shall
be:
      (1)   One member for a term of one year;
      (2)   One member for a term of two years;
      (3)   One member for a term of three years; and
      (4)   One member for a term of four years.
   (D)   As a term expires, each new appointment shall be made by the Council
for a term of four years. All terms expire on the first Monday in January, but
a member shall continue in office until his or her successor is appointed.
      (1)   If an appointment for a new term is not made by the Council by the
first Monday in April, the incumbent shall serve another term.
      (2)   If a vacancy occurs, the Council shall appoint a new member for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
   (E)   At the first regular meeting in each year, the Board shall elect a
President and Vice- President. The Vice-President shall have authority to act
as the President of the Board during the absence or disability of the
President. The Board may select a secretary from within or a volunteer outside
of its own membership.
(Ord. 100-20, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 30.16 POWERS; RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The Board shall have the power to perform all acts necessary to
acquire and develop sites and facilities and to conduct such programs as are
generally understood to be park and recreation functions. In addition, the
Board shall have all the powers listed in I.C. 36-10-3-1 et seq.
   (B)   The Board shall prepare and submit an annual budget in the same manner
as other departments of town government as prescribed by the State Board of
Accounts. The Board may accept donations and subsidies for park and recreation
purposes.
(Ord. 100-20, passed 4-13-2020)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 30.30 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   No more than 24 persons shall be members of the town’s Volunteer Fire
Department at any one time.
(Prior Code, § 32.10) (Ord. 100-81, passed 2-9-1981)
Statutory reference:
   Volunteer firefighters, see I.C. 36-8-12
§ 30.31 COMPENSATION AND ALLOWANCES.
   (A)   Every firefighter shall receive $5 for each fire run he or she
attends.
   (B)   Every firefighter shall receive a clothing allowance of $75 annually.
   (C)   Every firefighter shall receive $20 annually for automobile expenses.
   (D)   Each firefighter shall receive the compensation and allowances set
forth in divisions (A) through (C) above in December of each year.
(Prior Code, § 32.11) (Ord. 100-81, passed 2-9-1981)
§ 30.32 LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   The town shall carry liability insurance on each firefighter in the amount
required by state law.
(Prior Code, § 32.12) (Ord. 100-81, passed 2-9-1981)
§ 30.33 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   (A)   The fees established for the Fire Department in division (C) below
shall be amended as necessary so as to comply with the schedule of charges
published by the State Fire Marshal each year.
   (B)   The fees established for the Fire Department pursuant to this section
shall be limited to a maximum of $500 per response or incident.
   (C)   This code shall include the following fees:
Activity/License/Materials Fee
Activity/License/Materials               Fee
For initial response with a fire engine,
fire truck, or fire apparatus; including $250 per response vehicle and $100 per
a hazardous material response unit or    command/control vehicle
fire rescue unit dispatched on a fire or
hazardous material incident
For each hour or fraction thereof as on- $150 per response vehicle and $50 per
scene assistance                         command/control vehicle
For expendable materials such as         Actual replacement cost of those
absorption materials, emulsifiers, or    materials
other agents used in cleanup operations
For collection of debris, chemicals,     Actual cost of removal and disposal at
fuel, or contaminated materials          an authorized location
resulting from a spill
Responding to a false alarm caused by:
(1) Improper installation
(2) Improper maintenance                 $250 per response vehicle and $100 per
(3) A drill or test if the Fire          command/control vehicle
Department was not previously notified
that the alarm is a drill or test
 
(Ord. 103-13, passed - -)
CHAPTER 31: LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SAFETY; POLICE DEPARTMENT RULES AND
REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Title/naming; instructions
   
31.002   Definitions
   
31.003   Executive power
   
31.004   Amendments
Standards of Conduct
   
31.015   Obedience to laws, regulations, and orders
   
31.016   Unbecoming conduct
   
31.017   Accountability; responsibility; discipline
   
31.018   Internal conduct
   
31.019   Conduct toward the public
   
31.020   Sexual harassment
   
31.021   Alcohol and drug policy; smoking
   
31.022   Abuse of powers
   
31.023   Off-duty conduct
   
31.024   Prohibited associations and establishments
   
31.025   Public statements; appearances; endorsements
   
31.026   Political activity
   
31.027   Privacy; personal belongings; access to files
   
31.028   Use of force
Employment Requirements; Operations
   
31.040   Police officer requirements
   
31.041   Selection procedures; application
   
31.042   Personnel records
   
31.043   Uniforms; personal appearance
   
31.044   News releases
   
31.045   Hold-up alarms; response procedures
   
31.046   Emergency operation of police vehicles
   
31.047   Arrest procedures; crime scene investigations
Duty, Efficiency, and Safety
   
31.060   Requirements and duties of officers
   
31.061   Absence without leave
   
31.062   Duty-related sick leave
   
31.063   Conduct relating to department and superiors
   
31.064   Records, reports, and communications
   
31.065   Handling town purchases and property
   
31.066   Use and operation of town vehicles
   
31.067   Court attendance
   
31.068   Impounded cars
   
31.069   Enforcement authority; procedures
Firearms Policies
   
31.080   Firearms restrictions; regulations
   
31.081   Discharge of firearms; prohibitions
   
31.082   Discharge of firearms in line of duty; procedures
   
31.083   Firearms Review Board
   
31.084   Justification for discharging weapon
   
31.085   Type of firearms; qualified weapons
   
31.086   Qualifications procedures; classifications; minimum requirements
   
31.087   Safety rules
Officer Status; Appointment; Disciplinary Procedures
   
31.100   Town Marshal
   
31.101   Deputy Marshal(s)
   
31.102   Reserve officers
   
31.103   Disciplinary removal; appeals; demotion
Administration
   
31.115   Organization, unity, and chain of command
   
31.116   Town Marshal as Chief Administrator
   
31.117   Authority of Deputy Marshal(s)
   
31.118   Position, grade, and line of command
   
31.119   Exercising authority; rank
   
31.120   Suggestions in writing
   
31.121   Public relations
   
31.122   Part-time employment policies
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 TITLE/NAMING; INSTRUCTIONS.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Town of Frankton Police Department Rules
and Regulations”.
   (A)   Each officer must read this manual carefully and may be tested on the
contents at the discretion of the Town Marshal.
   (B)   The Town Marshal shall be contacted immediately to clarify any parts
or passages of this manual which an officer does not fully understand.
   (C)   Special orders issued by the Town Marshal supplement these rules,
regulations, and policies of the Town Police Department. It is each officer’s
responsibility to remain informed of changes to such rules, regulations, and
policies.
   (D)   This manual documents Town Police Department rules, regulations, and
policies and should serve as a behavioral guide for all officers. A thorough
understanding of the policies outlined in this manual will assist each officer
in performing his or her duties in an efficient, honest, and professional
manner, which will enhance the image of the Department in the community which
it serves.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCOUNTABILITY. The duty of all police officers to truthfully acknowledge
and explain their actions and decisions when requested to do so by an
authorized member of the Department without deception or subterfuge.
   DEPARTMENT. The Town Police Department.
   DEPUTY MARSHAL. A paid member of the Police Department appointed by the
Marshal pursuant to I.C. 36-5-7-6 and these rules and regulations.
   HEADQUARTERS. The central offices of the Department.
   POLICE OFFICER. Any sworn member of the Department, whether or not a regular
member of the Department, with police power and authority pursuant to state law
and these rules and regulations including, but not limited to: the Town
Marshal, Deputy Marshals, and reserve officers.
   PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEE. Any Marshal or Deputy Marshal with less than six
months of service who has not been accorded all the benefits and protection
provided by law.
   RESERVE OFFICERS. Appointed by the Town Marshal pursuant to I.C. 36-8-3-20
and these rules and regulations, and shall not be a member of the regular
Police Department but shall have all of the same powers as regular members
except those as limited by these rules and regulations.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory, and MAY is permissive.
   SPECIAL ORDERS. The written orders of the Department approved by the Town
Marshal and issued to supplement and clarify the rules and regulations with
specific details of procedure and compliance. The Town Marshal may prescribe a
SPECIAL ORDER based upon this subchapter.
   TOWN MARSHAL. The chief police officer of the town appointed by the Council.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.003 EXECUTIVE POWER.
   (A)   The Town Marshal shall have the power to supervise, control, regulate,
and manage the Department and to make and enforce all necessary and desirable
rules and regulations which he or she finds essential to guide the actions of
the Department.
   (B)   The Town Marshal may prescribe any special orders based upon this
subchapter. These special orders shall be obeyed by the Town Marshal, Deputy
Marshals, and reserve officers of the Town Police Department.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.004 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Amendments to this manual, except for special orders approved by the
Town Marshal, shall be approved by the Town Marshal and the Council, and once
so approved, revised manual pages shall be distributed periodically
incorporating such amendments.
   (B)   The Town Marshal, Deputy Marshals, and reserve officers shall be
responsible for updating their Department manuals as amendments are published.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
§ 31.015 OBEDIENCE TO LAWS, REGULATIONS, AND ORDERS.
   (A)   It is the rule of the Department that police officers conduct
themselves at all times in a manner that reflects the ethical standards
consistent with the rules contained in this manual and otherwise disseminated
by the Department.
   (B)   Police officers shall not violate any law or any Department policy,
rule, or procedure.
   (C)   Police officers shall obey all lawful orders.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.016 UNBECOMING CONDUCT.
   Police officers shall not engage in any conduct or activities, on or off
duty, that reflect discredit on the police officers, tend to bring the
Department into disrepute, or impair the Department’s efficient and effective
operation.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.017 ACCOUNTABILITY; RESPONSIBILITY; DISCIPLINE.
   (A)   Police officers are directly accountable for their actions through the
chain of command to the Town Marshal.
   (B)   The Town Marshal is directly accountable for his or her actions to the
Council.
   (C)   Police officers shall cooperate fully in any internal administrative
investigation conducted by the Department or any other authorized agency and
shall provide complete and accurate information in regard to any issue under
investigation.
   (D)   Police officers shall be accurate, complete, and truthful in all
matters.
   (E)   Police officers shall accept responsibility for their actions without
attempting to conceal, divert, or mitigate their true culpability, nor shall
they engage in efforts to thwart, influence, or interfere with an internal or
criminal investigation.
   (F)   Police officers who are arrested, cited, or come under investigation
for any criminal offense in this or another jurisdiction shall report this fact
to the Town Marshal immediately.
   (G)   A police officer shall immediately report any incident which involves
liability to the town to the Town Marshal.
   (H)   A police officer shall not sleep while on duty.
   (I)   When on duty, in uniform or otherwise, a police officer shall maintain
an appearance commanding respect.
   (J)   Police officers, while on duty, shall not loiter in cafés, drive-ins,
service stations, or other public places.
   (K)   No police officer shall at any time or for any reason willfully
subject any person or animal to cruel treatment or willfully neglect the
necessary human action which the circumstances may require.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.018 INTERNAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   Police officers shall conduct themselves in a manner that will foster
cooperation among members of the Department, showing respect, courtesy, and
professionalism in their dealings with one another.
   (B)   Police officers shall not use language or engage in acts that demean,
harass, or intimidate another person.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.019 CONDUCT TOWARD THE PUBLIC.
   (A)   Police officers shall conduct themselves toward the public in a civil
and professional manner that suggests a service orientation and that will
foster public respect and cooperation.
   (B)   Police officers shall treat violators with respect and courtesy, guard
against employing an officious or overbearing attitude or language that may
belittle, ridicule, or intimidate the individual, or act in a manner that
unnecessarily delays the performance of their duty.
   (C)   While recognizing the need to demonstrate authority and control over
criminal suspects and prisoners, police officers shall adhere to the
Department’s Use of Force Policy and the police officer’s training. Police
officers shall observe the civil rights and protect the well-being of those in
their charge.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.020 SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   (A)   All persons, regardless of sex, shall be provided a work environment
free from any form of sexual harassment including, but not limited to,
unwelcome sexual conduct or advances or requests for sexual favors of any
nature as a condition of employment or continued employment.
   (B)   Any police officer who believes that he or she has been sexually
harassed shall report the same to the Town Marshal. If the police officer is
uncomfortable reporting to the Town Marshal, he or she may report to the
President of the Council.
   (C)   Allegations of unwelcome sexual harassment shall be reported
immediately.
   (D)   The Town Marshal or, if the Town Marshal is alleged to have been
involved, the President of the Council shall investigate the complaint and
shall adhere to any applicable Department discipline policy and/or procedure as
may be applicable.
   (E)   If, during the course of an investigation, it is found that a
supervisor knew of the harassment and failed to take corrective action, the
supervisor may be found to be an offender of this policy and may be subject to
the same disciplinary procedure and actions as the offender.
   (F)   The Department recognizes that all persons, whether male or female,
have the right to work in a non-hostile environment without ridicule. No police
officer shall be subjected to unsolicited and unwanted or unwelcome sexual
overtures or conduct, whether verbal or physical. A police officer making an
accurate report of any alleged sexual harassment may do so without fear of
reprisal. All supervisors shall make every effort to ensure that sexual
harassment does not occur or, if it occurs and the supervisor is aware of it,
that it is reported and eliminated.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.021 ALCOHOL AND DRUG POLICY; SMOKING.
   (A)   Police officers shall not consume any intoxicating beverage while on
duty.
   (B)   No alcoholic beverage shall be served or consumed by a police officer
on the Department’s premises or in vehicles owned by the town.
   (C)   A police officer shall not be under the influence of alcohol in a
public place, whether on or off duty.
   (D)   No police officer shall report for duty with the odor of alcoholic
beverage on his or her breath.
   (E)   No police officer shall report to work or be on duty as a law
enforcement officer when his or her judgment or physical condition has been
impaired by alcohol, medication, or other substances.
   (F)   Police officers must report the use of any substance, prior to
reporting for duty, that may impair the police officer’s ability to perform his
or her duty as a law enforcement officer.
   (G)   Supervisors shall order a drug or alcohol screening test when they
have a reasonable suspicion that an employee is using and/or is under the
influence of drugs or alcohol. Such screenings shall conform to any special
orders on such drug screening and testing as may be established by the Town
Marshal from time to time.
   (H) While on duty, a police officer shall not smoke unless in a designated
area and while not conducting police business. In no event shall a police
officer smoke inside or within eight feet of a public entrance to a public
place or place of employment. Additionally, police officers are not permitted
to smoke in a vehicle owned or maintained by the Department. For the purpose of
this section, SMOKE shall mean the:
      (1)   Carrying or holding of a lighted cigarette, cigar, or pipe or any
other lighted tobacco smoking equipment; or
      (2)   Inhalation or exhalation of smoke from lighted tobacco smoking
equipment.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.022 ABUSE OF POWERS.
   (A)   Police officers shall report any unsolicited gifts, gratuities, or
other items of value that they receive and shall provide a full report of the
circumstances of their receipt if directed.
   (B)   Police officers shall not use their authority or position for:
      (1)   Financial gain;
      (2)   For obtaining or granting privileges or favors not otherwise
available to them or others except as a private citizen;
      (3)   To avoid the consequences of illegal acts for themselves or for
others; or
      (4)   To barter, solicit, or accept any goods or services (to include
gratuities, gifts, discounts, rewards, loans, or fees) whether for the police
officer or for another.
   (C)   Police officers shall not purchase, convert to their own use, or have
any claim to any found, impounded, abandoned, or recovered property or any
property held or released as evidence.
   (D)   Police officers shall not use their authority or position to solicit
or accept contributions for the Department or for any other agency,
organization, event, or cause without the express consent of the Town Marshal.
   (E)   Police officers are prohibited from using information gained through
their position as a law enforcement officer to advance financial or other
private interests of themselves or others.
   (F)   Police officers who institute or reasonably expect to benefit from any
civil action that arises from acts performed under color of authority shall
inform the Town Marshal.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.023 OFF-DUTY CONDUCT.
   (A)   Police officers shall not use their police powers to resolve personal
grievances (e.g., those involving the police officer, family members,
relatives, or friends) except under circumstances that would justify the use of
self-defense, actions to prevent injury to another person, or when a serious
offense has been committed that would justify an arrest. In all other cases,
police officers shall summon on-duty police personnel of the applicable
jurisdiction where there is personal involvement that would reasonably require
law enforcement intervention.
   (B)   Unless operating a marked police vehicle, off-duty police officers
shall not arrest or issue citations or warnings for traffic violators on sight,
except when the violation is of such a dangerous nature that police officers
would reasonably be expected to take appropriate action.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.024 PROHIBITED ASSOCIATIONS AND ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Arresting, investigation, or custodial police officers shall not
commence social relations with the spouse, immediate family member, or romantic
companion of persons in the custody of the Department.
   (B)   Police officers shall not knowingly commence or maintain a
relationship with any person who is under criminal investigation, indictment,
arrest, or incarceration by this Department or another police or criminal
justice agency, and/or who has an open and notorious criminal reputation in the
community (e.g., persons whom they know, should know, or have reason to believe
are involved in felonious activity), except as necessary to the performance of
official duties or where unavoidable because of familial relationships.
   (C)   Except in the performance of official duties, police officers shall
not knowingly enter any establishment in which the law of that jurisdiction is
regularly violated.
   (D)   Except in the performance of official duties, police officers shall
not enter any establishment within the town’s municipal boundaries that sells
alcoholic beverages to patrons for consumption on-premises.
   (E)   Police officers shall not knowingly join or participate in any
organization that advocates, incites, or supports criminal acts or criminal
conspiracies.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.025 PUBLIC STATEMENTS; APPEARANCES; ENDORSEMENTS.
   (A)   Police officers shall not, under color of authority:
      (1)   Make any public statement that could be reasonably interpreted as
having an adverse effect upon the Department’s morale, discipline, operation,
or perception of the public;
      (2)   Divulge, or willfully permit to have divulged, any information
gained by reason of their position for anything other than official duties or
authorized purpose; and/or
      (3)   Unless expressly authorized, and except for the Town Marshal, make
any statements, speeches, or appearances that could reasonably be considered to
represent the views of the Department.
   (B)   Police officers may not, under color of authority, endorse, recommend,
or facilitate the sale of commercial products or services. This includes but is
not limited to: the use of tow services, repair firms, attorneys, bail
bondsmen, or other technical or professional services. This does not include
the endorsement of appropriate governmental services where there is a duty to
make such endorsements.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.026 POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
   Police officers shall be guided by state law regarding their participation
and involvement in political activities. Unless otherwise provided by state
law, police officers shall not, while on-duty, in uniform, or otherwise serving
as a representative of the Department:
   (A)   Engage or participate in any political activity;
   (B)   Place or affix any campaign literature on property owned by the town;
   (C)   Solicit political funds from any member of the Department or another
governmental agency of the town;
   (D)   Solicit contributions, signatures, or other forms of support for
political candidates, parties, or ballot measures on property owned by the
town;
   (E)   Use official authority to interfere with any election or interfere
with the political actions of other police officers or employees of the town or
the public; and/or
   (F)   Favor or discriminate against any person seeking employment because of
political affiliations or opinions.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.027 PRIVACY; PERSONAL BELONGINGS; ACCESS TO FILES.
   (A)   Police officers shall not store personal information or belongings
with an expectation of personal privacy in such places as lockers, desks, town-
owned vehicles, file cabinets, computers, or similar areas that are under the
control and management of the Department. While the Department recognizes the
need for police officers to occasionally store personal items in such areas,
police officers should be aware that these and similar places may be inspected
or otherwise entered at the discretion of the Town Marshal or his or her
designee.
   (B)   No police officer shall maintain files or duplicate copies of official
Department files in either manual or electronic forms at his or her place of
residence or business or in other locations outside the confines of the
Department without the express permission of the Town Marshal.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.028 USE OF FORCE.
   (A)   A police officer shall avoid using more force in any situation than is
reasonably necessary under the circumstances and shall only use force in
accordance with the law and Department procedure after other reasonable
alternatives have been exhausted or would be clearly ineffective.
   (B)   The use of deadly force, other than the use of a firearm as described
in the Firearms Policy subchapter, against persons by police officers shall be
restricted to the following circumstances:
      (1)   In defense of the police officer or others when the same are
assaulted and are in reasonable danger of serious bodily harm and when there is
no other apparent means of subduing the person committing the assault; or
      (2)   As a last resort when effecting an arrest of a fleeing felon when
the felony is of the type which normally causes or threatens death or serious
bodily harm and when the arresting police officer reasonably believes the
arrest cannot otherwise be effected.
   (C)   The Town Marshal may approve other such uses of force including, but
not limited to, the use of stop sticks as reasonably necessary under the
circumstances.
   (D)   A police officer shall search all prisoners for weapons and evidence
and shall not take chances with prisoners.
   (E)   A police officer shall, at all times, lawfully cooperate with other
police agencies in upholding the law.
   (F)   When it is necessary for a police officer to use force, the facts
regarding such use of force shall be fully set forth in an appropriate written
report to the Town Marshal before the police officer goes off duty.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
EMPLOYMENT REQUIREMENTS; OPERATIONS
§ 31.040 POLICE OFFICER REQUIREMENTS.
   Each police officer shall meet the following requirements:
   (A)   Be legally eligible to work in the United States (and provide proper
verification documentation of same);
   (B)   Live in Madison County or an adjoining county;
   (C)   Be at least 21 years old;
   (D)   Meet minimum standards established by the Town Marshal for muscular
strength, muscular endurance, cardiovascular endurance, musculoskeletal
flexibility, eyesight, and general health in order to perform the essential
functions of the job;
   (E)   Be a high school graduate or equivalent;
   (F)   Pass a Council interview;
   (G)   Have a valid state motor vehicle operator’s license;
   (H)   Have a driving record satisfactory to the Town Marshal;
   (I)   Be neat in appearance;
   (J)   Pass intensive background investigation;
   (K)   Have character above reproach;
   (L)   Be willing to work any schedule, including a revolving shift schedule;
and
   (M)   Ex-service personnel must provide honorable discharge and military
service record if requested by the Town Marshal or Council.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013; Res. 16-100, passed 5-9-2016)
§ 31.041 SELECTION PROCEDURES; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applications for police officer positions will be accepted during
regular business hours at the Department, Town Hall, and online.
   (B)   Applications shall remain in the Department’s file for one year before
being discarded. Applicants must resubmit any application submitted more than
one year previously in order to be considered for any open position.
   (C)   Applicants must agree to a thorough background investigation and will
be subject to pre-selection interviews by the Council.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.042 PERSONNEL RECORDS.
   (A)   The Department shall maintain, at a minimum, a record of each police
officer that includes the police officer’s name, address, telephone number,
emergency contacts, and such other information as is required by law. Each
police officer shall be responsible to notify the Department and the Town
Marshal within any change in the aforementioned information within 24 hours of
a change in the information.
   (B)   All personnel records for reserve officers and Deputy Marshal(s) shall
be maintained by the Town Marshal for a minimum of six years after termination,
except that benefits records shall be maintained permanently.
   (C)   All personnel records for the Town Marshal shall be maintained by the
Clerk-Treasurer for a minimum of six years after termination, except that
benefits records shall be maintained permanently.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.043 UNIFORMS; PERSONAL APPEARANCE.
   (A)   The Department uniform shall consist of the following:
      (1)   A black campaign hat or black or blue police style ball cap will be
worn when and as follows:
         (a)   Police officers may, at their option, wear the campaign hat or a
black or blue police style ball cap when on duty as he or she may choose; and
         (b)   When worn, the campaign hat shall be worn in a military manner
(not set back on head) and kept in a hat press when not being worn.
      (2)   A black and/or navy blue winter shirt with Department patches on
the right and left sleeves;
      (3)   A black and/or navy blue short-sleeve shirt with Department patches
on right and left sleeves;
      (4)   A light blue necktie, or black or navy blue dickie or turtleneck,
to be worn with winter shirt;
      (5)   A white, navy blue, or black t-shirt, to be worn with short-sleeve
shirt;
      (6)   Black and/or navy blue trousers;
      (7)   Black shoes or boots;
      (8)   A black or dark blue jacket bearing no insignia except the
Department patches and badge and, at the police officer’s discretion, other
police insignia; and
      (9)   A black duty belt, handcuff case, weapon holster, bullet holder,
walkie-talkie/radio holder, taser holder, disposable glove case, and/or
portable flashlight, as applicable.
   (B)   All police officers will be well groomed, clean, and neat in their
personal appearance and hygiene while on duty. The following requirements shall
apply to all on-duty police officers.
      (1)   Facial hair, with the exception of neatly-trimmed mustaches and/or
goatees, will not be permitted.
      (2)   Hair shall be neat, clean, evenly trimmed, and groomed.
      (3)   Hands and nails shall be clean, and nails shall be neatly trimmed.
      (4)   Uniforms shall be neat, clean, and pressed.
         (a)   Uniforms that have a badly worn appearance (e.g., frayed
pockets, worn areas, cigarette burns, stains, fading, and the like) shall not
be worn.
         (b)   Uniforms shall be of the proper fit.
         (c)   Shoe and leather gear shall be well-polished to a high luster.
         (d)   Uniform hats shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition.
         (e)   Badges, cap shields, and brass- or chrome-plated uniform items
shall be kept clean and polished.
         (f)   Buttons on pockets, sleeves, and shirt fronts of all approved
uniform items will be worn buttoned with the exception of the collar button on
the summer shirt. The collar button on the winter shirt may be worn unbuttoned
if the shirt is worn with a black and/or navy blue dickie or turtleneck.
      (5)   Jewelry shall not be worn, except police officers may wear a wrist
watch, identification(s) bracelet, and one ring on each hand. A wedding ring
set shall be considered to be one ring.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.044 NEWS RELEASES.
   (A)   News releases and Department photos. No police officer, with the
exception of the Town Marshal or his or her designee, shall provide any news
release regarding any item of Department business including, but not limited
to: vice activity, internal operations, or criminal charges or discipline
against any officer, nor any Department photos.
   (B)   Media. The supervising police officer at the scene of a disaster,
crime scene, or traffic accident shall have discretion of allowing news
mediation representatives into the designated area after evidence is gathered.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, members of the media:
         (a)   Shall be escorted at all times while in a designated area to
prevent unintentional contamination or disturbance of the area; and
         (b)   Shall be advised that potential dangers exist, that they assume
the responsibility for their own safety, and that they will be removed if their
presence interferes with police or rescue operations.
      (2)   Media will be allowed to photograph arrested persons when those
persons are in public view.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.045 HOLD-UP ALARMS; RESPONSE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Upon receiving the call of a hold-up alarm, the police officer shall
proceed to the area. The police officer shall advise the dispatcher when he or
she arrives on the scene.
   (B)   When the police officer is in position, he or she will advise dispatch
to call the business. The employee answering the phone shall be instructed to
have an employee leave the building and contact the uniformed police officer.
The police officer shall attempt to cover the exits from the building, and he
or she should maintain a reasonable distance from the building. The employee
answering the telephone should be kept on the line until contact is made with
the police officer.
   (C)   The police officer shall secure the building. Until the alarm is found
to be erroneous, no one shall be allowed to enter the building. Anyone leaving
the building should be contacted by the police officer.
   (D)   If the business employee hangs up the phone, a second call shall be
made to the business. If there is no answer, a robbery or hostage situation
will be assumed. The Town Marshal shall be immediately notified by the
dispatcher.
   (E)   After the employee contacts the responding police officer, the police
officer will advise the dispatcher if the alarm is accidental. In such an
instance, the police officer shall see that the alarm is reset. If the
situation is a confirmed hold up, the responding police officer will control
the scene until the arrival of the Town Marshal.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.046 EMERGENCY OPERATION OF POLICE VEHICLES.
   (A)   Emergency driving.
      (1)   The following shall be considered emergency cases in the operation
of a police vehicle:
         (a)   Police officer needs immediate assistance;
         (b)   Response to personal injury accident;
         (c)   Response to robbery/burglary in progress;
         (d)   Response to shooting or cutting;
         (e)   Response to any situation in which injury is probable; and
         (f)   Any other situation when advised by the dispatcher or the Town
Marshal that the same is an emergency.
      (2)   When operating a Department vehicle, the police officer shall
always keep the safety of himself or herself and the public in mind.
      (3)   When driving under emergency conditions, the following procedures
shall be followed:
         (a)   Emergency lights and/or siren will be used while on route to the
scene except under the following situations, “silent runs” (the use of
emergency lights but no siren) shall be observed: robberies or burglaries in
progress and other situations where police officer discretion may determine the
need for a silent run. During a silent run, police officers shall:
            1.   Slow for all stop signs and red lights and proceed only when
safe; and
            2.   Proceed with extreme caution and at a reasonable speed so as
not to endanger the life and property of others.
         (b)   Police vehicles approaching a red traffic signal or stop sign
shall slow down, stop if necessary, and only proceed when other traffic and/or
pedestrians do not pose a hazard.
         (c)   Police vehicles approaching a green signal or intersecting
street shall be prepared to take evasive action if necessary.
      (4)   The police officer on scene shall determine the situation and
advise the dispatcher if other units are needed and if they are needed on an
emergency basis. Once the emergency situation has ended, the police officer
shall resume driving in a normal manner.
   (B)   Pursuit driving.
      (1)   Misdemeanor offenses; engaging in direct pursuit.
         (a)   A police officer shall not endanger the public or himself or
herself as a result of poor driving techniques.
         (b)   Emergency lights and siren will be used while directly behind
the fleeing suspect.
         (c)   No more than two vehicles shall be directly behind a fleeing
suspect.
         (d)   Other responding units shall attempt to run parallel to the
fleeing suspect or stay at a safe distance behind the first two cars.
         (e)   Other responding units should yield right-of-way to the police
officers in direct pursuit.
         (f)   A safe distance shall be maintained between both cars allowing
pursuing police officers time to duplicate any sudden turn or stop made by the
suspect.
         (g)   As soon as practical, the vehicle description, license number,
direction of travel, and reason for pursuit should be broadcast to the
dispatcher and other units.
         (h)   Deliberate physical contact between vehicles should be avoided.
      (2)   Felony offenses; engaging in direct pursuit.
         (a)   The above standards related to direct pursuit for misdemeanor
offenses shall apply to the direct pursuit of felony offenses too.
         (b)   All reasonable means will be used to apprehend a known fleeing
felon. The use of a road block, however, is a last resort and should only be
used at the direction of the Town Marshal.
      (3)   Use of firearm in direct pursuit.
         (a)   When a suspect is fleeing from the scene of a felony crime in a
moving vehicle or the police officer is in a moving vehicle, the police officer
shall attempt to apprehend the suspect through the use of police communications
and cooperative work and, except in the most extreme circumstances, shall avoid
firing shots at or from a moving vehicle.
         (b)   Safety of innocent bystanders shall be the primary factor of
consideration by a police officer in the determination to discharge a firearm
at or from a moving vehicle, and the following factors shall be weighed:
potential for ricochets, danger of vehicle out of control, safety of possible
hostage in vehicle.
         (c)   When a suspect is fleeing from the scene of a misdemeanor crime
or traffic offense in a moving vehicle, a police officer shall not use a
firearm to stop the vehicle.
   (C)   General operation regulations.
      (1)   Police officers shall drive, while on emergency runs, in such a
manner as not to endanger the life and property of others.
      (2)   Police officers disregarding the cancellation of emergency
situations shall be subject to disciplinary actions.
      (3)   Police officers involved in an accident while on a silent run shall
be subject to disciplinary action if the accident is the result of a violation
of this manual or state law.
      (4)   On silent runs, police officers shall proceed past a red or stop
signal after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
      (5)   Supervisory personnel shall monitor all pursuits and make the
determination as to the practicability of the pursuit.
      (6)   Police officers shall be responsible for keeping other police
officers advised of locations during a pursuit.
      (7)   Police officers shall have latitude to continue the pursuit if the
pursuit has been called off by the Town Marshal; however, once the direction of
the Town Marshal to terminate the pursuit has been reaffirmed, the pursuit
shall be stopped.
      (8)   In any situation not covered regarding pursuits, police officers
shall consult the Town Marshal for direction.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.047 ARREST PROCEDURES; CRIME SCENE INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   Arrest procedures. All persons arrested and taken prisoner shall:
      (1)   Be carefully searched immediately upon arrest and relieved of any
object that might be used as a weapon or keys, or other articles of attack or
escape. All items should be listed and put in safekeeping;
      (2)   Be kept in continuous custody of the arresting police officer and
kept away from any weapons, avenue of escape, or valuable equipment pending
their being lodged in jail;
      (3)   Have appropriate charges filed against them.
         (a)   Once a suspect is under arrest, the arresting police officer
shall notify the arrestee of his or her rights with the following statement:
“You have the right to remain silent. Anything you say can and will be used
against you in a court of law. You have the right to an attorney. If you cannot
afford an attorney, one will be appointed to you.”
         (b)   If the arresting police officer has reason to believe that the
arrestee cannot understand the notification, either because the arrestee does
not speak fluent English or due to a hearing impairment, the arresting police
officer shall locate a translator to relay the above notification to the
arrestee.
   (B)   Crime scene investigations. A police officer at the scene of a crime
or investigation shall:
      (1)   Exercise every precaution to preserve all fingerprints and other
physical evidence;
      (2)   Make use of photographs and other available methods to record and
preserve physical evidence;
      (3)   Confiscate property only for purposes of evidence and properly
package, bottle, or otherwise protect and preserve such evidence in its
original state; and
      (4)   Label property he or she has confiscated for evidence piece-by-
piece with the date, case number, location where found, description of the
object, and his or her initials and shall cause such evidence to be delivered
to the proper laboratory section and preserve for the record the complete chain
of custody.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
DUTY, EFFICIENCY, AND SAFETY
§ 31.060 REQUIREMENTS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   Specific duties. All police officers shall perform all lawful duties
as may be required of them by a supervising police officer.
   (B)   Conformity to rules and regulations. It shall be the duty of every
police officer to thoroughly familiarize himself or herself with the provisions
of the Department’s rules and regulations, including this manual codified
herein. He or she shall conform to and abide by such rules, regulations, and
special orders issued by the Town Marshal; observe all laws and ordinances; and
render his or her services to the town with enthusiasm, courage, discretion,
and loyalty.
   (C)   Efficiency. In carrying out the functions of the Department, police
officers shall direct and coordinate their efforts in such a manner as will
tend to establish and maintain the highest standards of efficiency.
   (D)   General discharge of duties. Police officers are required to discharge
their duties in a positive and firm manner, and they shall act together,
assist, and protect each other in the maintenance of law and order.
   (E)   Performance of Duty. Police officers who, in the performance of their
official duties display reluctance to properly perform assigned duties, act in
a manner tending to bring discredit upon himself or herself or the Department,
or fail to assume responsibility or exercise diligence and intelligence and
interest in the pursuit of his or her duties, shall be deemed incompetent.
   (F)   Punctuality. Police officers shall be punctual in reporting for duty,
meetings, schools, and other duty-related functions. Habitual failure to report
promptly at the time directed may be deemed neglect of duty.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.061 ABSENCE WITHOUT LEAVE.
   (A)   No police officer shall absent himself or herself from duty without
proper leave or permission. When unable to report for duty at the prescribed
time because of sickness, injury to himself or herself or immediate family, or
other reason, he or she shall notify the Town Marshal as soon as possible.
   (B)   When a police officer has been off work when scheduled to work, with
the exception of vacation time, for four or more consecutive days, he or she
may be considered habitually absent. Notwithstanding the foregoing, excused
medical absences shall not be considered habitual absence.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.062 DUTY-RELATED SICK LEAVE.
   The following shall apply to a full-time Town Marshal and Deputy Marshal(s).
   (A)   Duty-related sick leave shall be defined as any time missed from work
due to a duty-related illness or injury. In such cases, the Town Marshal or
Deputy Marshal(s) shall submit or cause to be submitted to the Town Marshal, or
in the case of the Town Marshal to the Council President, a physician’s
statement with regard to the nature of the injury every month unless the
Council declares this unnecessary due to the obvious seriousness of the illness
or injury.
   (B)   In cases of duty-related sick leave, the Town Marshal or Deputy
Marshal(s) pay shall continue for the lesser of the following: six months,
until such time as the Town Marshal or Deputy Marshal returns to service, until
he or she expires, or until the doctor either releases the employee for service
or states that the employee will never return to service.
   (C)   The Council may, in instances where the Town Marshal or Deputy Marshal
(s) will never return to service, make such severance arrangements as may be
allowed by law.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.063 CONDUCT RELATING TO DEPARTMENT AND SUPERIORS.
   (A)   Obedience.
      (1)   All police officers shall strictly obey and promptly execute any
lawful order issued by a supervising police officer.
      (2)   The term LAWFUL ORDER shall be construed as an order in keeping
with the performance of any duty prescribed by law, rule of the Department, or
the preservation of order, efficiency, and proper discipline.
   (B)   Duty to give a statement during an official investigation. During the
course of an official investigation by the Department, police officers shall
give a full, complete, and truthful statement. This does not supersede
constitutional rights.
   (C)   Criticisms of the Department or its police officers. Police officers
shall not communicate information of a critical nature concerning the
Department or its police officers to any person or agency unless a complete
written report of the same has been submitted to and approved by the Town
Marshal, except as otherwise required by law or subpoena.
   (D)   Special orders. Any special order posted by the Town Marshal shall
have the same consideration as part of the rules and regulations of the
Department as prescribed in this manual. The Town Marshal shall post any
special order in a location such that the same shall be seen by police officers
or shall distribute the same to each police officer.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.064 RECORDS, REPORTS, AND COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   Handling of money and property. Any money or property coming into the
possession of any police officer that is not his or her own shall be delivered
to the Town Marshal and a report and inventory made of the transaction.
   (B)   False information in records. No police officer shall knowingly make
false reports or willfully enter or cause to be entered in any Department
books, records, or reports any inaccurate, false, or improper police
information or material matter.
   (C)   Duty to report information. It shall be the duty of every police
officer to properly report any information regarding matters which indicate the
need for action by the Department. This shall be reduced to written form and
submitted to the Town Marshal as soon as possible after the information is
reported to the police officer.
   (D)   Information to citizens. Police officers shall not give information to
citizens about Department business when that information may be used in an
unlawful manner or is against Department policy.
   (E)   Press relations. Accredited members of the press, as well as the
general public, are entitled to information involving public records. Police
officers shall facilitate the access to such information by referring such
individuals to the Town Marshal or his or her designee, who shall appropriately
respond to the request for information.
   (F)   Official correspondence and communications. A police officer shall not
engage in official departmental correspondence over a signature other than that
of the Town Marshal or his or her designee, and a police officer shall be bound
by any special order in conveying official Department communications by
telephone or otherwise.
   (G)   Departmental records. Police officers shall treat as confidential the
business of the Department and shall not discuss or impart the same to anyone
except those for whom it is intended, or as directed by their superior police
officers, or as otherwise required by law. Police officers shall not make known
to any person the contents of any confidential directive that they may receive
except as otherwise required by law. Contents of criminal record files
maintained in the Department shall only be exhibited or divulged to those
persons as prescribed by special order except as otherwise required by law.
   (H)   Removal of official records prohibited. Police officers shall not
remove or provide copies of any official record(s) of the Department except as
directed by the Town Marshal or as otherwise required by law.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.065 HANDLING TOWN PURCHASES AND PROPERTY.
   (A)   Responsibility for items of identification.
      (1)   Each police officer shall be personally responsible for the items
of identification issued to him or her by the Department, such as a badge and
any I.D. card(s).
         (a)   A police officer shall not permit another person to borrow or
use the items of identification issued to him or her by the Department.
         (b)   Loss of such items of identification shall be reported by a
written report of the circumstances immediately upon discovery to the Town
Marshal.
      (2)   The cost of replacing lost items shall be born by the individual
police officer.
      (3)   All items issued by the Department shall be returned to the
Department upon termination of active participation by the police officer in
the Department. This shall include but shall not be limited to: resignation,
suspension, retirement, termination, and revocation.
   (B)   Misappropriation of property. Police officers shall not appropriate or
convert for their own use any evidence found, stolen, or recovered, or town
property except as provided by law.
   (C)   Departmental purchases. All Department purchases shall be approved in
advance by the Town Marshal.
   (D)   Damage to real or personal property. Any damage to real or personal
property committed by a police officer while on duty or in the execution of
official duties and responsibilities shall be promptly reported in writing to
the Town Marshal.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.066 USE AND OPERATION OF TOWN VEHICLES.
   (A)   Use of town vehicles outside town limits. When authorized to drive
town vehicles, police officers, while on duty, shall not use town vehicles
outside the town limits except in hot pursuit of suspects, or unless in the
pursuit of official duties, or when specifically authorized by the Town
Marshal. When off duty, vehicle use outside the limits of the town must be
authorized by the Town Marshal.
   (B)   Operation of motor vehicles.
      (1)   Police officers driving vehicles of any description, private or of
the town, shall not violate traffic laws except in cases of absolute emergency,
and then only in conformity with state and local laws, Department rules and
regulations, and any special orders regarding the same. Police officers shall
set a good example for other persons in the operation of such vehicles.
      (2)   No police officer shall allow, at any time, an unauthorized person
to operate a town-owned vehicle or allow such unauthorized persons to possess
or have access to the keys to such vehicles.
      (3)   No police officer shall operate or cause to be operated, a town-
owned vehicle, whether on or off duty, while under the influence of any
intoxicating beverage or substance. The odor of alcoholic beverage on the
breath of a police officer will be considered presumptive evidence, and the
police officer shall be required to submit to a breathalyzer examination and/or
a blood test for alcohol content.
      (4)   A police officer operating any town vehicle shall not permit
persons other than authorized employees of the Department to ride in such
vehicles except as required in the performance of the police officer’s duties
or as authorized by the Town Marshal.
   (C)   Accidents involving town police vehicles. In cases of an accident
involving a town-owned vehicle, the Town Marshal shall be immediately notified.
      (1)   The County Sheriff’s Department shall be requested to investigate
the accident and take or cause to be taken photographs of the scene and prepare
and submit the accident form to the Council.
      (2)   The police officer shall, as soon as practical, prepare and submit
a copy of the report explaining in detail the circumstances surrounding the
accident. This report shall become part of the police officer’s personnel
record.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.067 COURT ATTENDANCE.
   (A)   All police officers concerned in cases before the court arising from
an incident in which the police officer became involved as a result of her or
her status as a police officer are to be punctual in attendance. A police
officer shall be dressed in full uniform or in professional looking attire so
as not to bring discredit to himself or herself or the Department.
   (B)   Police officers shall observe the utmost attention and respect toward
magistrates and judges at all times.
   (C)   When giving testimony, police officers shall speak calmly and
explicitly in clear, distinct, and audible tone so as to be easily heard by the
court and any jury.
   (D)   Police officers shall testify with the strictest accuracy confining
themselves to the case before the court and neither suppress or overstate the
slightest circumstances with a view of favoring or discrediting any person.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.068 IMPOUNDED CARS.
   A police officer shall inventory any vehicle that will be towed or impounded
by the Department. The police officer shall inventory all items in the vehicle
that are not regular parts or accessories to the car. Inventory sheets shall be
forwarded to the Town Marshal and maintained in a file set up for such a
purpose. Such action is necessary for the protection of the owner of the
vehicle and his or her property and the protection of the Department from any
claims that may be made.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.069 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY; PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Enforcement. Every police officer vested with unrestricted enforcement
authority shall enforce the laws of the county, the town, and such federal
statutes as the law may prescribe in a just, impartial, and reasonable manner,
having due regard for the powers and duties of other police agencies and public
officials and being ever mindful of the rights of every citizen.
   (B)   Required action. Whenever knowledge of any crime or incident requiring
police action comes to the attention of any police officer, he or she shall
immediately take appropriate action to ensure that such crimes are investigated
or such incident property handled by the most expeditious means.
   (C)   Reports. To ensure that the Department may function efficiently,
police officers shall submit true, accurate, and appropriate reports for the
records of the Department.
   (D)   Legal actions.
      (1)   Police officers who, as a result of acts performed within the
proper scope of their duties and authority, are sued for civil damages or
charged with crimes shall report such facts to the Town Marshal within 24 hours
of such notification and before any type of action is taken.
      (2)   Police officers shall not apply for or adjust claims for personal
damages resulting from duty-related incidents without consulting the Town
Marshal.
      (3)   Police officers shall not appear as witnesses in civil actions
except in response to valid process issued pursuant to law.
   (E)   Use of deadly force.
      (1)   The use of deadly force against persons by police officers shall be
restricted to the laws of the state.
      (2)   It is the general policy of the Department that deadly force be
used only in defense of self or others when assaulted and in reasonable danger
of serious bodily harm, and when there is no other apparent means of subduing
the person committing the assault, or as otherwise provided by this Manual.
   (F)   Wearing of sidearms.
      (1)   Sidearms shall be carried by all police officers at times when in
uniform or when out of uniform but on duty, except when the nature of the
assignment or investigation dictates otherwise.
      (2)   It is recommended that a police officer carry a weapon 24 hours a
day except as otherwise prohibited by law. However, a police officer’s weapon
shall not be worn indiscriminately, and good judgment shall be used in
concealing the same.
      (3)   Discretion should be exercised in putting on, carrying, and
removing sidearms to ensure proper safety.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
FIREARMS POLICIES
§ 31.080 FIREARMS RESTRICTIONS; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A police officer shall not discharge firearms in the performance of
his or her police duties except under the following circumstances and after all
other means fail:
      (1)   In the necessary defense of the police officer or another person
from death or serious injury when attached;
      (2)   To effect an arrest of an adult felon, to prevent the escape of an
adult felon, or to recapture an adult felon escapee when other means have
failed and only provided:
         (a)   The crime for which the arrestee is sought involved conduct
including the use or threatened use of deadly force; and
         (b)   There is a substantial risk that the person whose arrest is
sought will cause death or serious bodily harm if his or her apprehension is
delayed.
      (3)   To kill a dangerous animal or one that is so badly injured that
humanity requires its removal from further suffering, and other disposition is
impractical; and
      (4)   For target practice at an approved range.
   (B)   No police officer shall discharge a firearm in connection with his or
her duties unless he or she is on an approved range or as otherwise provided in
this manual.
      (1)   All police officers shall register with the Department any and all
weapons which might be carried on or off duty.
         (a)   Sidearms shall be provided by each police officer and must be
approved in writing by the Town Marshal prior to being carried or used while on
duty. Police officers shall carry on duty only sidearms approved in writing by
the Town Marshal.
         (b)   No alterations, modifications, or adjustments may be made to any
Department-approved sidearm in any manner unless such alteration, modification,
or adjustment has been approved in writing by the Town Marshal.
      (2)   The Department may issue rifles and shotguns, which shall remain in
town-owned vehicles and shall not be issued to any individual police officer.
Rifles and shotguns possessed or used while on duty shall be Department-issued
only.
      (3)   Police offers are strictly prohibited from altering, modifying, or
adjusting any Department-issued rifle or shotgun in any manner unless such
alteration, modification, or adjustment has been approved in writing by the
Town Marshal. If, for any reason, a Department-issued rifle or shotgun is not
working properly or requires adjustment, a police officer shall report to the
Town Marshal, who may authorize in writing necessary alterations,
modifications, or adjustments that are appropriately justified.
      (4)   Police officers shall not possess or use a Department-issued rifle
or shotgun or carry or use a police officer-provided sidearm until qualified to
possess, carry, or use such firearm by the Department.
      (5)   In no event shall a police officer operate a radio-equipped, town-
owned vehicle without a firearm that is operable and loaded with live
ammunition unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Town Marshal.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013; Res. 17-100, passed 2-13-2017)
§ 31.081 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   A police officer shall not fire at persons known to be or suspected of
being juveniles (persons less than 18 years of age) except under the
circumstances provided in §
31.080(A)(1).
   (B)   Firearms shall not be discharged:
      (1)   As a warning;
      (2)   At or from a moving vehicle except as otherwise provided in this
manual or when the circumstances come within the provision of §
31.080(A)(1); or
      (3)   When a bystander may be endangered.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.082 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS IN LINE OF DUTY; PROCEDURES.
   Except at an approved range, a police officer shall file a written report
through the Town Marshal immediately following the discharge of a firearm in
the line of duty. Thereafter, the Firearms Review Board, as described in §
31.083, shall investigate the incident.
   (A)   Whenever a police officer discharges his or her firearm in the
performance of police duty, he or she shall verbally and in writing notify the
Town Marshal as soon as time and circumstances permit, but in no event later
than the conclusion of his or her current tour of duty.
   (B)   If the police officer who discharged his or her firearm is
hospitalized or fatally injured during the tour of duty and is incapable of
filing the report required by division (A) above, the Firearms Officer, as
defined in this chapter, is responsible for filing as complete a report as
possible pending further Department investigation.
   (C)   After conducting a thorough investigation of the circumstances
attending the discharge of a firearm, the Firearms Review Board shall submit a
detailed written report of the results of the investigation to the Council. The
report shall contain the observations and conclusions of the Firearms Review
Board as to whether the discharge was justified and in accordance with the
Department’s rules and regulations.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.083 FIREARMS REVIEW BOARD.
   The Firearms Review Board shall consist of:
   (A)   The Town Marshal, who shall preside over any hearing and has the
authority to abstain from voting;
   (B)   The Firearms Officer, who shall be appointed by the Town Marshal and
who shall have one vote; and
   (C)   One reserve officer, who shall be appointed by the Town Marshal and
who shall have one vote.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.084 JUSTIFICATION FOR DISCHARGING WEAPON.
   Quick action may be necessary with no time for deliberation and a police
officer must be right. A police officer should consider, “Am I justified in
killing?” before firing. If a police officer is in doubt, the police officer
should not fire.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.085 TYPE OF FIREARMS; QUALIFIED WEAPONS.
   (A)   Police officers shall only carry on-duty weapon(s) that are approved
by the Town Marshal. No other firearm shall be acceptable.
   (B)   All police officers shall be qualified with any weapon he or she may
carry on or off duty.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.086 QUALIFICATIONS PROCEDURES; CLASSIFICATIONS; MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   Qualifications procedures and classifications shall be as established by the
Law Enforcement Training Board pursuant to I.C. 5-2-1-9. Minimum requirements
shall be as established by the Law Enforcement Training Board pursuant to I.C.
5-2.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.087 SAFETY RULES.
   (A)   Police officers shall treat all firearms as if they are loaded and
shall never point a firearm at anyone unless the police officer is justified in
killing that person.
   (B)   All firearms training must be properly and adequately supervised by
someone in authority. All safety precautions must be adhered to and enforced.
   (C)   Strictest discipline must be maintained. Carelessness cannot and must
not be tolerated during firearms training.
   (D)   Immediately upon picking up a firearm, a police officer shall open the
cylinder or action and check to see if it is unloaded and check it a second
time to confirm.
   (E)   Never give a firearm to, or take a firearm from, anyone unless the
cylinder or action is open.
   (F)   Never anticipate a command.
   (G)   Be sure there is no obstruction in the barrel of a firearm before
loading.
   (H)   When on a range, a police officer shall load a firearm only after
position is taken at the firing point and the command to load is given.
   (I)   Unload when instructed.
   (J)   Keep the firearm pointed down range at all times.
   (K)   Never draw a pistol from the holster or reholster with the finger in
the trigger guard.
   (L)   No smoking on the firing line while engaged in shooting.
   (M)   No talking on the firing line or to shooters on the firing line,
except by instructors.
   (N)   Never permit the muzzle of a firearm to touch the ground.
   (O)   Never let the hammer down on a live cartridge without placing the
thumb in front of the hammer and releasing the trigger, then letting the hammer
down easily.
   (P)   In case of misfire, keep the firearm pointed down range at least ten
seconds before opening the cylinder.
   (Q)   Never fire a succeeding shot after a malfunction without first
unloading and checking the barrel for obstructions.
   (R)   Never leave the firing point without first unloading your firearm.
   (S)   Never go in front of the line of fire until the firing line has been
cleared and the command is given to go forward.
   (T)   Never carry a loaded firearm on the range except when on the firing
line.
   (U)   Never dry fire on the range except under the supervision of an
instructor.
   (V)   Pay strict attention to the range officer. He or she will instruct
exactly as one is to do.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
OFFICER STATUS; APPOINTMENT; DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES
§ 31.100 TOWN MARSHAL.
   The Town Marshal shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. However, before
terminating or suspending a Town Marshal who has been employed by the town for
more than six months after completing the minimum basic training requirements
adopted by the Law Enforcement Training Board pursuant to I.C. 5-2-1-9, the
disciplinary removal and appeals procedure prescribed by I.C. 36-8 must be
conducted, as further described in §
31.103.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.101 DEPUTY MARSHAL(S).
   (A)   The Council may establish, by ordinance, the number of Deputy Marshal
(s) and may, by ordinance, authorize the Town Marshal to appoint such Deputy
Marshal(s).
   (B)   The Council hereby authorizes the appointment of one Deputy Marshal,
as defined by I.C. 36-5-7-6.
   (C)   The Town Marshal may dismiss the Deputy Marshal(s) at any time.
However, before terminating or suspending a Deputy Marshal who has been
employed by the town for more than six months after completing the minimum
basic training requirements adopted by the Law Enforcement Training Board
pursuant to I.C. 5-2-1-9, the disciplinary removal and appeals procedure
prescribed by I.C. 36-8 must be conducted, as further described in §
31.103.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013; Ord. 101-13, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.102 RESERVE OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Council may establish, by ordinance, the number of reserve
officers, which shall be appointed by the same authority authorized to appoint
Deputy Marshal(s).
      (1)   The Council hereby authorizes the appointment of no more than 16
reserve officers as defined by I.C. 36-8-3-20.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a reserve officer shall not be
appointed until the potential reserve officer completes a pre-basic course
under I.C. 5-2-1-9(f) and any additional training specified by the Town
Marshal. Regardless of the training completed by a reserve officer, any reserve
officer may be dismissed by the Council or the Town Marshal for any lawful
reason or for no reason at all at any time, and the reserve officer shall not
be entitled to the disciplinary removal and appeals procedure prescribed by
I.C. 36-8 or as described in §
31.103.
   (B)   Reserve officers shall not be considered regular members of the
Department but shall have the same police powers as regular members of the
Department, except as otherwise limited by this manual. No reserve officer
shall be appointed to the Department until he or she has completed the pre-
basic course under I.C. 5-2-1-9(f).
   (C)   Reserve officers are volunteers and shall not be paid by the town and
shall not receive any pension benefit from the town. However, reserve officers,
to the extent money is appropriated by the town, may receive a uniform or
uniform allowance and compensation for time lost from other employment due to
court appearances. Reserve officers shall be provided such equipment as may be
required by the laws of the state.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013; Ord. 101-13, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.103 DISCIPLINARY REMOVAL; APPEALS; DEMOTION.
   (A)   The Council shall constitute the Safety Board of the town.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the right of the Council and Town Marshal, as
applicable, to dismiss the Town Marshal and Deputy Marshal as provided in §§
31.101 and
31.102, the Town Marshal and Deputy Marshal may be dismissed, demoted,
reprimanded, disciplined, or suspended by the Safety Board pursuant to this
section if either:
      (1)   The individual is convicted in any court of any crime; or
      (2)   The Safety Board makes a finding and decision that the individual
is guilty of any one or more of the following: neglect of duty, a violation of
rules, neglect or disobedience of orders, incapacity, absence without leave,
immoral conduct, conduct injurious to the public peace or welfare, conduct
unbecoming an officer, or another breach of discipline.
   (C)   In making any decision under this section, the Safety Board shall not
consider the political affiliation of the Town Marshal or Deputy Marshal. If
the Town Marshal or Deputy Marshal is suspended or placed on administrative
leave pursuant to this section, he or she shall receive his or her allowances
for insurance benefits to which he or she was entitled before being suspended
or placed on administrative leave. In addition, the Safety Board may, in its
sole discretion, provide the Town Marshal or the Deputy Marshal his or her
allowances for any other fringe benefits to which he or she was entitled before
being suspended or placed on administrative leave.
   (D)   Before the Town Marshal or the Deputy Marshal may be suspended in
excess of five days without pay, demoted, or dismissed, the Safety Board shall
offer the individual an opportunity for a hearing.
      (1)   If the individual desires a hearing, the individual must request
the hearing not more than five days after the notice of suspension, demotion,
or dismissal. Written notice shall be given either by service upon the
individual in person or by a copy left at the individual’s last and usual place
of residence at least 14 days before the date set for the hearing.
      (2)   A hearing conducted under this division (D) shall be held not more
than 30 days after the hearing is requested by the individual, unless a later
date is mutually agreed upon by the parties.
      (3)   The notice must state: the time and place of the hearing, the
charges against the individual, the specific conduct that comprises the
charges, that the individual is entitled to be represented by counsel, that the
individual is entitled to call and cross-examine witnesses, that the individual
is entitled to require the production of evidence, and that the individual is
entitled to have subpoenas issued, served, and executed in the county.
      (4)   The Safety Board shall determine if a member of the Department
subpoenaed in excess of five days shall continue to receive his or her salary
during the suspension.
   (E)   Upon an investigation of/into the conduct of the Town Marshal or
Deputy Marshal, or upon the trial of a charge preferred against either, the
Safety Board may compel the attendance of witnesses, examine them under oath,
and require the production of books, papers, and other evidence at a meeting of
the Board. For this purpose, the Board may issue subpoenas and have them served
and executed in any part of Madison County. If a witness refuses to testify or
to produce books or papers in the witness’s possession or under the witness’s
control, I.C. 36-4-6-21 controls to the extent applicable. The proper court may
compel compliance with the order by attachment, commitment, or other
punishment.
   (F)   The reasons for the suspension, demotion, or dismissal of the Town
Marshal or Deputy Marshal shall be entered as specific findings of fact upon
the records of the Safety Board. If the Town Marshal or the Deputy Marshal is
suspended for a period exceeding five days, demoted, or dismissed, he or she
may appeal the decision to the Madison County, state circuit, or superior
court. However, an individual may not appeal any other decision.
   (G)   An appeal under division (F) above must be taken by filing in court,
within 30 days after the date the decision is rendered, a verified complaint
stating in concise manner the general nature of the charges against the
individual, the decision of the Safety Board, and a demand for the relief
asserted by the individual in accordance with I.C. 36-8-3-4.
   (H)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the Council
President, with the approval of a majority of the Council, may reduce in grade
any member of the Department who holds an upper level policy making position
without adhering to the requirements of this section. However, the member may
not be reduced in grade to a rank below that which the member held before the
member’s appointment to the upper level policy making position. For the
purposes of this division (H), the Town Marshal is the only member of the
Department considered to hold an upper level policy making position.
   (I)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, if the Town
Marshal or Deputy Marshal is subject to criminal charges, the Safety Board may
place such individual on administrative leave until the disposition of the
criminal charges in the trial court. Any other action by the Safety Board is
stayed until the disposition of the criminal charges in the trial court. An
administrative leave under this division (I) may be with or without pay as
determined by the Safety Board. If the member is placed on leave without pay,
the Safety Board, in its discretion, may award back pay if the member is
exonerated in the criminal matter.
   (J)   In addition to the disciplinary powers of the Safety Board described
in this section, the Town Marshal may, without a hearing, reprimand or suspend
without pay a Deputy Marshal for a maximum of five working days. For the
purpose of this division (J), eight hours of paid time constitutes one working
day.
      (1)   If the Town Marshal reprimands a Deputy Marshal in writing or
suspends a Deputy Marshal, the Town Marshal shall, within 48 hours, notify the
Safety Board in writing of the action and the reasons for the action.
      (2)   A Deputy Marshal who is reprimanded in writing or suspended under
this division (J) may, within 48 hours after receiving notice of the reprimand
or suspension, request in writing that the Safety Board review the reprimand or
suspension and either uphold or reverse the Town Marshal’s decision. At its
discretion, the Safety Board may hold a hearing during this review.
      (3)   If the Safety Board holds a hearing, written notice must be given
either by service upon the Deputy Marshal in person or by a copy left at the
Deputy Marshal’s last and usual palce of residence at least 14 days before the
date set for the hearing. The notice must contain the information listed under
division (D) above. If the decision is reversed, the Deputy Marshal who was
suspended is entitled to any wages withheld as a result of the suspension.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 31.115 ORGANIZATION, UNITY, AND CHAIN OF COMMAND.
   (A)   Organization of command. Lines of control are established which permit
delegation of authority and placement of responsibility, thereby ensuring
efficient supervision of operations and coordination of effort.
   (B)   Unity of command. Each individual, unit, and situation is under the
immediate control of one person with every administrative and supervising
officer being responsible for the act(s) of his or her subordinates.
   (C)   Chain of command. All official communications of the Department,
whether moving downward or upward, shall be confined to the chain of command
where applicable. The chain of command is as follows (and in this order):
      (1)   Town Marshal;
      (2)   Chief Deputy Marshal (if applicable);
      (3)   Captains, lieutenants, and sergeants (if applicable); and
      (4)   All remaining police officers.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.116 TOWN MARSHAL AS CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Town Marshal is the Chief Administrator of the Department. The
Town Marshal shall be responsible for issuing any special orders and shall be
responsible for the duties set forth in I.C. 36-5-7-4 and as otherwise provided
by law.
   (B)   The Town Marshal shall be responsible for assisting in the
interviewing and hiring of full-time Deputy Marshal(s) and for the appointment
of reserve officers, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or law.
   (C)   The purchasing, maintenance, and repair of all Department equipment
and property belonging to the Town Police Department shall be the
responsibility of the Town Marshal.
   (D)   The Town Marshal is responsible for supervising all subordinates in
the performance of their duties.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.117 AUTHORITY OF DEPUTY MARSHAL(S).
   The Chief Deputy Marshal is second in command of the Department. He or she
is appointed by, and serves in such position at the pleasure of, the Town
Marshal. During the Town Marshal’s absence, the Chief Deputy assumes all duties
and responsibilities of the Town Marshal.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.118 POSITION, GRADE, AND LINE OF COMMAND.
   (A)   The Town Marshal shall have direct control over all police officers.
   (B)   The Chief Deputy Marshal shall act on behalf of the Town Marshal in
exercising command over all police officers in absence of the Town Marshal and
shall be second in command in presence of the Town Marshal.
   (C)   Captains, lieutenants, and sergeants (if applicable) shall have
primary command over the reserve officers.
   (D)   In situations where two or more police officers work together, the
duty officer shall be in command of the detail unless another police officer is
specifically designated by the proper authority.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.119 EXERCISING AUTHORITY; RANK.
   (A)   Manner in exercising authority. Authority in the Department shall be
exercised with firmness and impartiality, and under no circumstances should
personal attitudes be permitted to impair effectiveness of such authority in
the Department.
   (B)   Delegation of commensurate authority. Police officers who are directed
to act in capacities other than their ordinary or usual rank will, for the
necessary time, possess the authority of that rank.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.120 SUGGESTIONS IN WRITING.
   Police officers desiring to make a suggestion for the good of the Department
shall submit a detailed statement of the same in writing to the Town Marshal.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.121 PUBLIC RELATIONS.
   The Department and its police officers shall strive to gain public support
and win friendly citizen cooperation in the Department programs and procedures
in order to facilitate and accomplish the Department’s objectives. The attitude
of each police officer shall be one of service and courtesy. In nonrestrictive
situations, police officers should be pleasant and personable; on occasions
calling for regulation and control, police officers shall be firm and
impersonable.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 31.122 PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT POLICIES.
   (A)   All police officers wishing to work a job outside of the Department
must first submit a work request for approval by the Town Marshal. Attached to
the request must be a letter from the employer that the employer will cover the
police officer with workers’ compensation insurance.
      (1)   If the potential employer will not be covering the police officer
with workers’ compensation insurance, the police officer must attach a letter
to the request stating that he or she acknowledges and understands that he or
she will not be covered by workers’ compensation insurance by the town for the
outside employment.
      (2)   At the Town Marshal’s discretion, the Town Marshal may require the
police officer and any potential employer to sign an officer release,
indemnification, and waiver on a form prescribed by the Town Marshal before
approving such employment.
   (B)   All outside jobs for the Town Marshal or Deputy Marshal(s) shall be
secondary. All police officers shall be ready to report for duty immediately
after being requested to do so by the Town Marshal.
   (C)   Paid officers shall be limited, with respect to outside employment, to
part-time employment of 20 hours per week or less. Paid officers, with the
exception of the Town Marshal, may request permission from the Town Marshal to
work more than 20 hours, and such requests will be handled on an individual
basis. Reserve officers shall be subject to the limitations of this division
(C) when the employment involves the wearing of the town police uniform or in
the case where an arrest may be involved.
(Res. 13-107, passed 8-12-2013)
CHAPTER 32: FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Returned checks
   
32.02   Sales tax required on employee purchases
   
32.03   County option income tax
   
32.04   Procurement policy
Cumulative Capital Development Fund
   
32.15   Fund re-established
   
32.16   Levy imposed
   
32.17   Term of fund
   
32.18   Use of fund
   
32.19   Effective upon Tax Commissioner’s approval
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 RETURNED CHECKS.
   There shall be a $30 charge made for any check returned for insufficient
funds or for any check returned for insufficient funds or for any other reason.
(Prior Code, § 34.01) (Ord. 187-89, passed 10- -1989; Res. 02-106, passed 12-9-
2002)
§ 32.02 SALES TAX REQUIRED ON EMPLOYEE PURCHASES.
   (A)   An employee purchasing an item at any store on town accounts for
personal use will have to pay sales tax on that item.
   (B)   (1)   All departments must fill out purchase orders for an item(s)
purchased for the town.
      (2)   These purchase orders must have at least two Council members’
signatures before picking up the item(s) unless the item(s) is needed for an
emergency and Council members cannot be reached in this matter.
(Prior Code, § 34.02) (Res. 88-100, passed - -)
§ 32.03 COUNTY OPTION INCOME TAX.
   (A)   The Council agrees to raise the county option income tax to $0.07 to
help the county government with increased costs due to the new juvenile center.
   (B)   This increase became effective as of July 1, 1993.
(Prior Code, § 34.03) (Res. 93-139, passed 3-8-1993)
§ 32.04 PROCUREMENT POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. To establish procedures for purchasing goods and services in
accordance with I.C. Title 5, Article 22, ensuring transparency, efficiency,
and legal compliance.
   (B)   Scope. This policy applies to all purchases made by the town,
including supplies, services, and public works projects, unless specifically
exempted by statute.
   (C)   Definitions. Terms used herein shall have the meanings defined in I.C.
5-22-2, including the following.
      PURCHASING AGENT. The Clerk-Treasurer or designee authorized to make
purchases.
      SERVICES. Includes professional, technical, and consulting services.
      SUPPLIES. Includes goods, equipment, and materials.
   (D)   Purchasing authority.
      (1)   The Town Council designates the Clerk-Treasurer as the Purchasing
Agent under I.C. 5-22-4.
      (2)   The Purchasing Agent may delegate authority for purchases under
$5,000.
   (E)   Procurement thresholds and methods.
 
Purchase Type       Dollar Threshold  Method Required       Statutory Reference
Competitive bidding > $50,000         Formal sealed bids;   I.C. 5-22-7
                                      public opening
Request for         Any amount        Used for services     I.C. 5-22-9
proposals (RFP)                       requiring evaluation
                                      Informal quotes;
Small purchases     $25,000 - $50,000 documentation         I.C. 5-22-8
                                      required
                                      Includes sole source,
Special methods     Varies            emergency, and the    I.C. 5-22-10
                                      like
 
   (F)   Purchasing preferences. In accordance with I.C. 5-22-15, preference
shall be given to:
      (1)   Indiana businesses;
      (2)   Recycled products;
      (3)   Products manufactured in the United States; and
      (4)   Veterans.
   (G)   Contract requirements. All contracts entered into by the town shall
comply with I.C. 5-22-17 and must include the following.
      (1)   Written agreement. All contracts must be in writing and include:
         (a)   Scope of work or services;
         (b)   Term and renewal provisions;
         (c)   Payment terms and schedule; and
         (d)   Termination clauses and remedies.
      (2)   Council approval. Contracts exceeding $25,000 or involving
liability must be approved by the Town Council and reviewed by legal counsel.
      (3)   Eligibility for public funds.
         (a)   Contractors must certify they are eligible to receive state and
federal funds.
         (b)   Proof of eligibility shall include verification of active
registration in SAM.gov and absence from any state or federal debarment lists.
         (c)   Documentation must be submitted to the Council prior to contract
execution.
      (4)   Build America, Buy America (BABA) compliance.
         (a)   For contracts involving infrastructure projects funded by
federal financial assistance, contractors must comply with the Build America,
Buy America Act (Pub. Law No. 117-58, §§ 70901 through 70927).
         (b)   This includes ensuring that all iron, steel, manufactured
products, and construction materials used in the project are produced in the
United States.
         (c)   Contractors shall provide documentation demonstrating BABA
compliance, including material origin certifications and procurement records,
as required by 2 C.F.R. part 184 and relevant agency guidance.
      (5)   Federal compliance clauses. Contracts involving federal funds shall
include applicable clauses required under 2 C.F.R. part 200 (Uniform Guidance),
including:
         (a)   Equal Employment Opportunity;
         (b)   Davis-Bacon Act (if applicable);
         (c)   Byrd Anti-Lobbying Amendment; and
         (d)   Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act.
   (H)   Recordkeeping.
      (1)   All purchasing records shall be retained for at least five years
per I.C. 5-22-18.
      (2)   Records include quotes, bids, contracts, and Council minutes.
   (I)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Emergency purchases under I.C. 5-22-10-4 must be documented and
reported to the Council within five business days.
      (2)   Purchases from other governmental units or cooperative purchasing
agreements are permitted under I.C. 5-22-10-5.
   (J)   Ethics and conflicts of interest.
      (1)   Town officials and employees shall comply with I.C. 5-22-16
regarding conflicts of interest and disclosure requirements.
      (2)   No employee or official shall participate in a procurement decision
in which they have a financial interest.
(Ord. 102-25, passed 8-11-2025)
CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND
§ 32.15 FUND RE-ESTABLISHED.
   There is re-established the Town Cumulative Capital Development Fund.
(Prior Code, § 34.30) (Ord. 221-94, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 221-95, passed 5-8-
1995; Ord. 234-96, passed 5-13-1996)
§ 32.16 LEVY IMPOSED.
   (A)   (1)   An ad valorem property tax levy will be imposed, and the
revenues from the levy will be retained in the Town Cumulative Capital
Development Fund.
      (2)   The maximum rate of levy under division (A)(1) above will not
exceed $0.15 per $100 assessed valuation.
(Prior Code, § 34.31)
   (B)   The current Cumulative Capital Development Fund tax rate passed by the
town is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as
if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 221-94, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 221-95, passed 5-8-1995; Ord. 234-96,
passed 5-13-1996; Ord. 105-15, passed 7-13-2015)
§ 32.17 TERM OF FUND.
   The Town Cumulative Capital Development Fund is re-established for the year
1997 and will continue as long as they are advertised and adopted in the budget
unless the municipality decides to rescind or reduce the fund.
(Prior Code, § 34.32) (Ord. 221-94, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 221-95, passed 5-8-
1995; Ord. 234-96, passed 5-13-1996)
§ 32.18 USE OF FUND.
   (A)   The funds accumulated in the Town Cumulative Capital Development Fund
will be used for additional street repairs, as stated in I.C. 36-9-16.5;
sidewalk repairs as stated in I.C. 36-9-27-100; or other Cumulative Capital
Improvement Fund projects as stated in I.C. 36-9-16-2 and I.C. 36-9-16-3.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, funds accumulated in the Town
Cumulative Capital Development Fund may be spent for purposes other than the
purposes stated in §
32.17 if the purpose is to protect the public health, welfare, or safety, which
is in immediate danger that requires the expenditure of money in the fund.
(Prior Code, § 34.33) (Ord. 221-94, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 221-95, passed 5-8-
1995; Ord. 234-96, passed 5-13-1996)
§ 32.19 EFFECTIVE UPON TAX COMMISSIONER’S APPROVAL.
   This fund takes effect upon approval of the State Board of Tax
Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 34.34) (Ord. 221-94, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 221-95, passed 5-8-
1995; Ord. 234-96, passed 5-13-1996)
CHAPTER 33: PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
33.001   Intent and scope
   
33.002   Definitions
Recruitment and Selection
   
33.015   Application forms
   
33.016   Rejection of applications
   
33.017   Announcement of openings
   
33.018   Employment process in general
   
33.019   Distribution of personnel policy manual
Conditions of Employment
   
33.030   Probationary period
   
33.031   Hours of work
   
33.032   Performance review
   
33.033   Personnel record
   
33.034   Weekly time sheets
   
33.035   Authority and responsibility
   
33.036   Validity of an order
   
33.037   Employee appearance; clothing allowance
   
33.038   Employee tardiness
   
33.039   Unauthorized absence
   
33.040   Employee intoxication
   
33.041   Municipal vehicles and distracted driving
   
33.042   Commission of a felony or unlawful act
   
33.043   Conflict of interest
   
33.044   Outside employment
   
33.045   Occupational health and safety
   
33.046   Reporting accidents; treatment of injuries
   
33.047   Seniority
   
33.048   Take-home vehicles
   
33.049   Drugs and alcohol policy
   
33.050   Layoff policy
Employment Benefits
   
33.065   Paid holidays
   
33.066   Vacation leave
   
33.067   Personal days; sick leave
   
33.068   Compensatory time; standby
   
33.069   Professional leave
   
33.070   Training leave
   
33.071   Bereavement leave
   
33.072   Military leave
   
33.073   Jury leave
   
33.074   Maternity leave
   
33.075   Unpaid leave of absence
   
33.076   Insurance
   
33.077   Public Employees Retirement Fund
   
33.078   Unemployment compensation
   
33.079   Workers’ compensation insurance
   
33.080   Expenses for travel, conventions, and education
   
30.081   Meals and expenses; mileage
   
30.082   Special meetings compensation
   
33.083   Salaries; wages
Disciplinary Actions; Grievance Procedures
   
33.095   Employees subject to disciplinary actions
   
33.096   Categories of infractions
   
33.097   Grievance policy
   
33.098   Grievance procedure
   
33.099   Sexual/unlawful harassment
   
33.100   Termination
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.001 INTENT AND SCOPE.
   (A)   It shall be the policy of the town to recruit and select qualified
persons for positions in the town’s service. The town is committed to
recruitment practices that appeal to all geographic areas and types of people
within the town.
   (B)   This recruitment and selection shall be conducted in an affirmative
manner to insure open and fair competition, provide equal employment
opportunity, and to prohibit discrimination because of race, religion, sex,
national origin, age, or mental or physical handicap.
(Prior Code, § 35.001) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE. An employee who fills a regular town position and who
works in the office seven hours per day and 35 hours per week, or in a position
not associated with the office and works eight hours per day and 40 hours per
week, including a 30-minute lunch (clocked out and in) and two 15-minute breaks
(on the clock), and who is employed on a year-round basis.
   PART-TIME EMPLOYEE. An employee who fills a temporary need and who may or
may not be employed on a year-round basis.
   SEASONAL EMPLOYEE. An employee who works only during certain portions of the
year.
(Prior Code, § 35.002) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION
§ 33.015 APPLICATION FORMS.
   Applications for employment will be available from the Clerk-Treasurer at
the Town Hall. Such forms shall require background information including
training, experience, and other pertinent data. All applications must be signed
by the applicant, and the Council may require proof of statements on the form.
Applications shall not elicit any information concerning age, race, religion,
national origin, or any information deemed illegal according to EEO
regulations. Such data may be obtained separately for reporting purposes but
not used to discriminate. All applications shall be kept on file for a period
of six months.
(Prior Code, § 35.010) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.016 REJECTION OF APPLICATIONS.
   Any application which indicates the applicant does not meet the minimum
qualifications established for the position that is being applied for may be
rejected. Applications may also be rejected if the applicant:
   (A)   Has deliberately falsified the application;
   (B)   Has established an unsatisfactory employment record of such nature
that it demonstrates unsuitability for the position applied for; and/or
   (C)   Is found by the Council to be clearly unable to perform the job
applied for.
(Prior Code, § 35.011) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.017 ANNOUNCEMENT OF OPENINGS.
   In order to attract an adequate number of candidates, the Council may issue
job announcements and otherwise publicize vacancies through such media as is
deemed appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 35.012) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.018 EMPLOYMENT PROCESS IN GENERAL.
   Interviews and screenings for openings will be made by the Council and
department head of the appropriate department. All personnel except deputies of
the Clerk-Treasurer shall be hired with review of the Council and approval of
the Council. The Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the Council before any applicant
can be placed on the payroll.
(Prior Code, § 35.013) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.019 DISTRIBUTION OF PERSONNEL POLICY MANUAL.
   At the time of adoption, a copy of these personnel rules and regulations
will be given to all current employees, and an employee meeting will be held
explaining it. Thereafter, all new employees shall receive a copy of this
policy and it will be explained to them by their supervisors. Changes and
additions to the policy shall be presented to employees and added to the
existing policy.
(Prior Code, § 35.014) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
§ 33.030 PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
   (A)   All new employees except Deputy Marshals and reserves shall undergo a
probationary period of 90 days.
      (1)   Deputy Marshals and reserves shall have a probationary period of
one year.
      (2)   Probationary employees shall be eligible for benefits as permanent
town employees after 90 days with regard to holidays, sick leave, vacation, and
the like.
   (B)   During the probationary period, job training shall be provided for the
employee, and a review of progress is recommended at the end of each month.
These review periods shall be used to assess the employee in relation to the
job or position and allow the employee to better evaluate his or her attitude
toward the town and the job.
   (C)   If a review of progress is not satisfactory during the probationary
period, an employee is subject to dismissal without recourse. At the end of the
probationary period, the department head and the Council shall evaluate the
employee.
(Prior Code, § 35.030) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.031 HOURS OF WORK.
   (A)   The designated work hours for each department will be recommended by
the department head with approval of the Council. All employees should be aware
that conditions arise which make it necessary for them to work outside of usual
hours as needed and directed by their supervisor.
   (B)   Overtime pay will be compensated at the rate of one-and-a-half hours
for every hour worked beyond the normal 40-hour work week.
   (C)   Employees of the Police Department will work a 28-day work cycle with
possible accumulation of 171 hours worked before overtime pay is granted.
Department heads and the Council shall follow guidelines set forth by the Fair
Labor Standards Act, being 29 U.S.C. §§ 201 through 219.
(Prior Code, § 35.031) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.032 PERFORMANCE REVIEW.
   (A)   All employees shall be subject to performance evaluations. Such
employee evaluations shall be performed by the department head. Evaluations
will be made twice per year and be included as a permanent part of the
employee’s personnel record. Review of evaluations will be used when issues of
promotion, salary increases, or layoffs are considered.
   (B)   In the event that an area reviewed reveals an employees performance is
below average, such performance should be brought to his or her attention by a
written memo or interview. Such memo or notification of below average
performance will be included in the personnel record.
(Prior Code, § 35.032) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.033 PERSONNEL RECORD.
   A personnel record shall be maintained for each employee by the Clerk-
Treasurer. Documents to be included but not limited to are: application forms,
leaves of absence, vacation and sick leave, charges against vacation/sick
leave, disciplinary actions, and evaluations. Disciplinary actions will be
retained in the personnel record until that point in time at which no new
disciplinary actions have been entered for two years. Dismissal notices shall
become a permanent part of the personnel file.
(Prior Code, § 35.033) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.034 WEEKLY TIME SHEETS.
   (A)   All employees must complete a weekly time sheet to account for work
done, specified by department. No checks will be issued without time sheets.
   (B)   Weekly time sheets are the responsibility of the department head and
shall be submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer by 9:00 a.m. on Monday. All time
sheets shall be verified by the department head and reviewed by the Clerk-
Treasurer. The Clerk-Treasurer is responsible for record keeping, computation,
and payment. In order to comply with federal/state regulations, the following
procedures shall apply to hourly employees.
      (1)   No change in work hours will be allowed without authorization from
the supervisor.
      (2)   Unless specifically authorized by the supervisor, employees who
remain at their work station during lunch hour will not be able to consider
that as extra hours worked.
      (3)   Pay periods are bi-weekly.
(Prior Code, § 35.034) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.035 AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   Employees of the town (except employees of the Clerk-Treasurer’s office who
are responsible to the Clerk-Treasurer) are responsible to the appropriate
department head and the Council. Questions, inquires, or complaints concerning
work-related activities should be directed first to the department head. If the
employee does not receive a satisfactory answer, a meeting with the Council may
be requested. Failure to follow this chain-of-command will result in
disciplinary action.
(Prior Code, § 35.035) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.036 VALIDITY OF AN ORDER.
   If an employee questions the validity of an order, he or she shall be
expected to complete the task assigned provided the order is not in violation
of the law or safety regulations. If an employee shall have any grievances, he
or she shall follow the grievances procedure.
(Prior Code, § 35.036) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
Cross-reference:
   Grievances procedure, see §§
33.097 and
33.098
   Layoff policy, see §
33.050
   Seniority, see §
33.047
§ 33.037 EMPLOYEE APPEARANCE; CLOTHING ALLOWANCE.
   (A)   All employees will attire themselves in a manner that is conducive to
their work and which does not jeopardize the safety of themselves or other
employees. No employee will report to work if the employee’s health and/or
hygiene jeopardizes the health of other employees.
(Prior Code, § 35.037)
   (B)   The town has allotted up to $700 per year to be paid quarterly in the
amount of up to $175 per quarter per employee as reimbursements pursuant to
this section.
   (C)   The employee will be responsible for the following:
      (1)   Uniform shirts, must have employee name;
      (2)   Uniform pants, may be denim jeans;
      (3)   Uniform shorts, must be neat and tasteful in appearance.
         (a)   No cut-off shorts, short shorts, spandex, or bike shorts.
         (b)   Electrical employees are not authorized to wear shorts.
      (4)   Outerwear;
      (5)   Safety footwear, must be approved for the particular utility;
      (6)   Employee must wear at least one article of clothing that identifies
them as a utility employee.
   (D)   If IOSHA requires certain types of clothing in the above list, IOSHA
rules will be followed. Department supervisors will be responsible to ensure
that IOSHA rules pertaining to clothing and equipment will be adhered to.
   (E)   The town will provide special related safety items that are used to
perform certain job related tasks (e.g., specific gloves to perform a specific
task). The Council will decide if an item would be considered a special safety
item.
   (F)   The Internal Revenue Service provides that clothing and uniforms are
excluded from wages if the following two conditions are met:
      (1)   The clothing is specifically required as a condition of employment;
and
      (2)   The clothing is not worn or adaptable to general usage as ordinary
clothing.
   (G)   The town finds that the above list of clothing is specifically
required as a condition of employment for the town’s utility employees and
instructs employees not to wear or adapt the same to general usage as ordinary
clothing.
   (H)   In addition, the employee shall substantiate his or her use of the
clothing allowance by providing the Clerk-Treasurer with receipts for his or
her purchases pursuant to this policy and pursuant to a voucher form created by
the Clerk-Treasurer no later than December 15 of each year. Any amounts for
which a receipt is not submitted prior to December 15 of the year of the
purchase shall not be reimbursable. An employee shall be required to present
such receipts to the Clerk-Treasurer prior to receiving or becoming eligible
for any reimbursement pursuant to this policy. Items purchased that are
required by IOSHA will be so marked.
   (I)   Where IOSHA requires an item of safety clothing for employees and the
allowance provided in this section is not sufficient to meet the requirement,
the employee shall notify the town that he or she was unable to purchase the
IOSHA-required safety equipment due to insufficient clothing allowance funds,
and the town shall provide the IOSHA-required safety equipment.
   (J)   A copy of this policy will be given to each utility employee, and the
employee will sign and date an affirmation stating that he or she has received
this policy.
(Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992; Res. 14-100, passed 3-10-2014)
§ 33.038 EMPLOYEE TARDINESS.
   (A)   Employees who are tardy two days within a three-month period shall
receive a warning letter from their supervisors. Further tardiness will be met
with suspension or dismissal.
   (B)   Any employee finding that he or she will have to be absent or tardy on
a regular working day shall notify the supervisor at least one hour before the
beginning of the work period. Failure to do so will be an unauthorized absence
and will result in loss of pay.
(Prior Code, § 35.038) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.039 UNAUTHORIZED ABSENCE.
   Employees absent without authorized leave shall not be paid for such
absence. Unauthorized absence for any length of time shall be cause for
disciplinary action, including suspension or termination, to be determined by
the supervisor or Council.
(Prior Code, § 35.039) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.040 EMPLOYEE INTOXICATION.
   Intoxication of an employee on the job due to alcohol, narcotics, or other
substances causing impairment to the employee’s judgement, mental process, and/
or physical ability will not be tolerated. Any employee considered by his or
her supervisor to be intoxicated will be subject to immediate disciplinary
action including automatic suspension and possible termination. Alcoholic
beverages or narcotic substances are strictly forbidden on town property.
(Prior Code, § 35.040) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.041 MUNICIPAL VEHICLES AND DISTRACTED DRIVING.
   (A)   The town sets forth the requirements and expectations that those who
operate a municipal vehicle for any purpose will not engage in activities that
constitute distracted driving. Violations of this policy will be subject to
discipline up to and including termination.
   (B)   While operating a municipal vehicle for any purpose, the driver shall
maintain a proper lookout to see or hear what should be seen or heard and
refrain from engaging in any non-driving activity that has the potential to
district the driver from the primary task of driving. Use of a
telecommunications device to type, transmit, or read text messages or
electronic mail messages is expressly prohibited.
   (C)   This policy shall be implemented in the following manner.
      (1)   A copy of the resolution codified herein in its entirety and the
attachments thereto, including this policy, shall be provided to all fiscal
officers of the town.
      (2)   A copy of the resolution codified herein in its entirety and the
attachments thereto, including this policy, shall be made available at the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection.
      (3)   Any other such action that would communicate the policies
established herein to the employees and elected or appointed officials of the
town may be taken to implement this policy.
      (4)   This policy is deemed implemented by the town upon the taking of
any of the above actions.
(Res. 17-103, passed 6-12-2017)
§ 33.042 COMMISSION OF A FELONY OR UNLAWFUL ACT.
   Any employee convicted of a felony in relation to his or her job is subject
to immediate disciplinary action.
(Prior Code, § 35.041) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.043 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Employees having financial interest in a company which might benefit from
their dealings with the town must file a conflict of interest statement with
the appropriate authorities. Failure to do so may result in dismissal from
municipal employment.
(Prior Code, § 35.042) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.044 OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
   Employees of the town may have part-time jobs as long as the “second job”
does not interfere or conflict with the work schedule as a town employee.
Employees of the town who work in positions where operations are on a
continuous basis (shift operations) should realize they may be required to work
any shift deemed necessary as directed by their department head or supervisor.
(Prior Code, § 35.043) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.045 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY.
   It is the town’s policy to provide safe working conditions for all
employees. It is the obligation of each employee to observe safety regulations
at all times. Failure to observe safety regulation may result in disciplinary
action.
(Prior Code, § 35.044) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.046 REPORTING ACCIDENTS; TREATMENT OF INJURIES.
   (A)   All accidents and injuries shall be reported immediately to the
department head and the Council. Personnel injured in the performance of duties
for the town shall be paid for time spent enroute to receive medical attention.
Eligibility for pay shall cease when the employee is released by the attending
physician unless the employee returns immediately to work and is able to
accomplish normal tasks of that work day.
   (B)   Employees who receive medical attention by a qualified physician and
are not physically able to return to work shall be considered on workers’
compensation. The employee must furnish a statement from the physician which
includes the nature of the injury and estimated date for return to work. The
employee may go to the physician of his or her choosing; in an emergency
situation, the employee will be taken to the emergency room of the hospital or
to the Town Clinic.
(Prior Code, § 35.045) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.047 SENIORITY.
   An employee of the town will accrue seniority through continuous
departmental employment with the town. Seniority will be considered for
promotions, layoffs, hiring, and pay raises.
(Prior Code, § 35.046) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.048 TAKE-HOME VEHICLES.
   (A)   The town sets forth the following restrictions on employee use of
municipal vehicles. Violations of this section will be subject to discipline up
to and including termination.
   (B)   With the exception of the Town Marshal’s vehicle and approved
municipal utility vehicles of on-call employees, no employee shall be permitted
to take home any vehicle owned or leased by the town.
      (1)   Vehicles owned or leased by the town may be utilized by employees
during work hours only.
      (2)   No employee shall utilize a vehicle owned or leased by the town to
travel home on their lunch hour. All vehicles owned or leased by the town
should be parked, and employees should use their personal vehicles to travel
home at lunch time.
   (C)   The resolution codified herein shall be implemented in the following
manner.
      (1)   A copy of the resolution codified herein in its entirety and the
attachments thereto, including this policy, shall be provided to all fiscal
officers of the town.
      (2)   A copy of the resolution codified herein in its entirety and the
attachments thereto, including this policy, shall be made available at the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection.
      (3)   Any other such action that would communicate the policies
established in the resolution codified herein to the employees and elected or
appointed officials of the town may be taken to implement this policy.
      (4)   This policy is deemed implemented by the town upon the taking of
any of the above actions.
   (D)   The utility vehicle will be provided only for weekends and holidays
for the employee on call.
      (1)   The vehicle will be used only for the coming and going of utility
business. The vehicle will not be used for personal use.
      (2)   No unauthorized person will be in a Utility Department vehicle.
      (3)   The Council will rescind this division (D) in its entirety or to
the individual that may violate any guidelines set forth by the Council.
(Res. 15-103, passed 12-14-2015; Res. 17-104, passed 6-12-2017)
§ 33.049 DRUGS AND ALCOHOL POLICY.
   (A)   It is a violation of the policy of the town for any employee,
regardless of the department, office, or classification of employment, to:
      (1)   Manufacture, distribute, dispense, possess, use, or be present
under the influence of any alcoholic beverage, malt beverage, wine, or
intoxicating liquor; or
      (2)   Unlawfully manufacture, distribute, dispense, possess, use, or be
under the influence of any controlled substance as defined under state law
(other than a drug taken as prescribed specifically for the employee by a
physician under a valid and current written prescription), before, during, or
after working hours while on town-owned property, in any town-owned vehicle, or
off town- owned premises while engaged in any activity in the course of the
employee’s employment by the town.
(Prior Code, § 35.105)
   (B)   Any employee of the town engaged directly or indirectly in work for
which the town is a recipient of a grant, including any participatory
agreement, from or with any federal agency, is further notified that he or she
must comply with the following conditions.
      (1)   Adherence to the town’s drug and alcohol policy is a condition of
continued employment under such grant or agreement.
      (2)   Each employee under any federal grant or agreement is required to
notify the Council in writing within five days of the employee’s conviction of
any criminal drug offense for any activity which occurs in violation of the
town’s drug and alcohol policy.
(Prior Code, § 35.106)
   (C)   Any employee of the town who violates the terms of the town’s drug and
alcohol policy shall be subject to immediate disciplinary action ranging from a
written warning to termination from employment, as the Council in its
discretion may order. In addition, upon receipt of notification of a violation
by any employee, the Council may require the employee to participate
satisfactorily in a drug abuse assistance or rehabilitation program approved
for such purposes by federal, state, local health, law enforcement, or other
appropriate agency.
(Prior Code, § 35.107)
(Ord. 232-96, passed 2-12-1996)
§ 33.050 LAYOFF POLICY.
   (A)   The method for determining which employees will be laid off first
shall be based on the following conditions in a particular job category:
      (1)   Length of service in department; and
      (2)   The relative efficiency of the work of the employee.
   (B)   Ten calendar days’ notice will be given before layoffs whenever
possible. The responsibility for administering layoff procedures shall rest
with the Council.
(Prior Code, § 35.047) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS
§ 33.065 PAID HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   All full-time employees will receive the following paid holidays per
year with the exception of the Police Department:
      (1)   New Year’s Day;
      (2)   Martin Luther King Jr. Day;
      (3)   President’s Day;
      (4)   Good Friday;
      (5)   Memorial Day;
      (6)   Independence Day;
      (7)   Labor Day;
      (8)   Veteran’s Day;
      (9)   Thanksgiving Day; and
      (10)   Christmas Day.
   (B)   In addition to days listed, other days or part of a day may be
designated by the Council as a holiday. The additions will be documented by a
resolution or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 35.060)
   (C)   When any enumerated holiday listed in division (A) above falls on
Sunday and is observed by the state and/or federal government the following
day, the holiday will be observed and paid on Monday. When a holiday falls on
Saturday, the holiday will be observed and paid as holiday on Friday. To be
eligible, an employee must have physically worked the scheduled work day prior
to and following the holiday or be on approved vacation or personal days.
(Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992; Ord. 219-94, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 227-2-95,
passed 7-18-1995; Ord. 234-96, passed 5-13-1996; Ord. 100-04, passed 1-12-2004;
Ord. 106-24; passed 11-12-2024)
§ 33.066 VACATION LEAVE.
   (A)   The amount of vacation to which an eligible employee shall be entitled
will be based on the employee’s length of employment with the town. A full-time
employee with one or more years of employment shall be entitled to vacation as
follows:
 
Length of Employment for Full-Time Employees Allotted Vacation Time
Employed 1 year but less than 3 years        1 week of vacation
Employed 3 years but less than 10 years      2 weeks of vacation
Employed 10 years but less than 20 years     3 weeks of vacation
Employed 20 or more years                    4 weeks of vacation
 
   (B)   The anniversary-date procedure will be followed, and employees will
plan vacations with their supervisors so that due consideration to the needs of
the town will be given.
      (1)   Vacation may be taken in part or in full but must be taken within
the year following the year in which it was earned.
      (2)   A vacation request for a specific time can be denied if it would be
detrimental to the operation of the department.
      (3)   Accrued vacation leave is an asset of the employee, and pay for
this time shall be made to the employee’s estate upon resignation, termination,
or death.
      (4)   Part-time or seasonal employees are ineligible for vacation leave
with pay. However, if agreeable with their immediate supervisors, they may take
nonpaid leave when necessary.
      (5)   In calculating vacation leave, the employee’s starting date with
the town will be used as long as the service has been continuous.
(Prior Code, § 35.061)
   (C)   Vacation time will not be carried over to the following year, and no
pay will be issued for vacation time not used by the end of the year. Comp time
is to be used prior to vacation days and personal days.
Hourly Schedules
Department Hours Lunch
Hourly Schedules
Department        Hours                             Lunch
Utility personnel 7:00 a.m. through 3:30 p.m.       30 minutes unpaid lunch
Town Hall office  9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m. daily 1 hour unpaid lunch
Police
1st shift         8:00 a.m. through 4:00 p.m.       1 hour unpaid lunch
2nd shift         4:00 p.m. through midnight
3rd shift         Midnight through 8:00 a.m.
 
(Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992; Ord. 106-24; passed 11-12-2024)
§ 33.067 PERSONAL DAYS; SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   All full-time employees shall receive five personal days with pay.
      (1)   Personal days will be distributed equally over four quarters.
Personal days will be lost if not taken by the end of the year.
      (2)   Upon terminating employment with the town, personal days shall be
prorated according to the number of months employed for the year.
   (B)   An employee off sick for three days or more must have a doctor’s
statement to return to work.
   (C)   Paid sick leave, if approved by the Council, will be paid to all full-
time employees for hospital stays and recuperation periods for a maximum of 30
working days or six weeks per calendar year per occurrence.
      (1)   Sick pay will be 80% of the employees regular pay of which $150 per
week is expended through the insurance company and the town compensating the
amount beyond the $150 to equal 80% of the employee’s weekly wage.
      (2)   Comp time is to be used prior to personal and vacation days (in
that order).
      (3)   To alleviate payroll issues, an employee on sick leave will receive
his or her pay through the town payroll. The insurance checks will be signed
for release and deposited into the fund that payroll was charged.
(Prior Code, § 35.062) (Ord. 100-04, passed 1-12-2004; Ord. 106-24; passed 11-
12-2024)
§ 33.068 COMPENSATORY TIME; STANDBY.
   (A)   Authorized time off with pay for employees not eligible for overtime
pay is to be used for the purpose of compensating employees for extra hours
worked in addition to their assigned work schedule.
      (1)   Compensatory time off must have prior approval of the department
head and the Town Supervisor.
      (2)   All employees except sworn full-time police officers shall receive
compensation as mandated by the Fair Labor Standards Act, being 29 U.S.C. §§
201 through 219, in conjunction with “Compensatory Time Off and Gap Time”.
      (3)   Sworn full-time police officers shall follow the schedule below.
         (a)   Any compensation time accumulated and taken within the same 28-
day cycle shall be exchanged at a one-hour-for-one-hour rate.
         (b)   For any 28-day cycle, hours worked in excess of 160 and less
than or equal to 171 hours shall be granted compensatory time of at the rate of
1:1.
         (c)   For any 28-day cycle, hours worked in excess of 171 hours shall
be awarded reimbursement in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act and
any “Compensatory Time Off” agreements between the town and the employee.
         (d)   All compensatory time off must have prior approval of the Town
Marshal and the Council.
(Prior Code, § 35.063)
   (B)   Utility employees shall receive comp time as overtime.
   (C)   Stand-by time will be on weekly rotation to a different employee each
week. If an employee cannot be on call or wear his or her pager during this
period, the employee shall forfeit the stand-by credit unless an exchange
agreement is worked out and approved by the Council prior to that week.
   (D)   Compensation time will be given as one-and-a-half time for each hour
worked over, following 40 hours of physically worked time. Personal days,
vacation time, and holidays are not considered physically worked time.
   (E)   All comp time is to be initialed and detailed by the employee and his
or her supervisor. No comp time will be calculated for periods of less than 15
hours over following an actual 40-hour work week.
   (F)   Compt time is to be used prior to vacation and personal days. Compt
time is required as soon as possible, and only December may be carried over
because of weather.
(Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992; Ord. 106-24, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 33.069 PROFESSIONAL LEAVE.
   Authorized leave with pay for employees to attend conferences, workshops,
conventions, or other appropriate activities which will further his or her
effectiveness on the job. Authorization will come from the Council and must be
prior to the activity if the employee is to receive pay. Authorization from the
Council is required if overnight lodging is involved.
(Prior Code, § 35.064) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.070 TRAINING LEAVE.
   Authorized leave or release time for employees to take advantage of training
opportunities which will improve their skills and/or contribute to the town.
The Council shall authorize reimbursement for cost relating to approved
training.
(Prior Code, § 35.065) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.071 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.
   (A)   Employees may take up to three days of paid time off to attend the
funeral and make any necessary arrangements due to the death of an immediate
family member, except where allowed additional time off for bereavement under
applicable state law.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      IMMEDIATE FAMILY. Consists of the employee’s:
         (a)   Spouse, domestic partner, child, sibling, parents, grandparents,
and grandchildren;
         (b)   The child, siblings, or parents of the employee’s spouse or
domestic partner; and/or
         (c)   Brother-in-law, sister-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, and
grandparents-in-law.
   (C)   Employees must notify their supervisor as soon as possible if they
need to take bereavement leave. Approval of bereavement leave will occur in the
absence of any unusual town operating requirements. Any employee may, with his
or her supervisor’s approval, use any available paid leave for additional time
off beyond three days as necessary.
(Prior Code, § 35.066) (Ord. 106-24; passed 11-12-2024)
§ 33.072 MILITARY LEAVE.
   Any employee who is a member of the Reserve Armed Forces shall be entitled
to a leave of absence without loss of pay for not more than 15 calendar days
annually, provided the employee has submitted notification papers to his or her
supervisor. Upon receipt of military pay voucher, the Clerk-Treasurer will pay
the employee the difference between that amount and the regular pay.
(Prior Code, § 35.067) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.073 JURY LEAVE.
   Jury service may be granted to employees who are required to serve as a
juror or to appear as a witness for the federal, state, or city government. All
employees, when summoned, shall immediately inform the Council. Salary payments
will be reduced by the amount received from the court for jury duty. Payment by
the court to the employee for traveling expenses may be retained by the
employee.
(Prior Code, § 35.068) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.074 MATERNITY LEAVE.
   A full-time employee with one-year continuous service may receive maternity
leave of up to six months without loss of seniority or benefits.
(Prior Code, § 35.069) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.075 UNPAID LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
   (A)   Employees may be granted a personal leave of absence without pay at
the discretion of the Council in consultation with the Town Supervisor. An
employee desiring a leave of absence shall make written application to the Town
Supervisor and receive written approval of the Council before such leave
begins. The application shall state the dates for which leave is requested and
reasons for such leave.
   (B)   Unpaid leaves of absence may be denied if the requested leave
interferes with the efficient operation of the department. All approved leaves
of absence without pay shall sustain loss of seniority and benefits. Leaves of
absence may not be granted for more than six months, after which the employee
may return to his or her former position if available. An employee absent from
work due to accident or illness will be guaranteed the right to return to the
same job provided he or she returns to work within six months from the last day
worked if approved by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 35.070) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.076 INSURANCE.
   Health, hospitalization, and life insurance is available to all full-time
employees and qualified dependents. The employee is eligible to enroll in the
insurance program after 90 days of probation. All premiums related to this
insurance are paid through the town.
(Prior Code, § 35.071) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.077 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT FUND.
   All full-time employees must participate in PERF when they start employment
with the town.
(Prior Code, § 35.072) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.078 UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION.
   Eligible town employees are covered by the unemployment compensation program
administered through the Employment Security Division of the State Department
of Revenue. Generally, this compensation is available to those who are
terminated from town employment through no fault of their own (layoffs,
cutbacks, and the like) and are actively seeking employment elsewhere.
Eligibility is determined by the Employment Security Division on a case basis.
(Prior Code, § 35.073) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.079 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION INSURANCE.
   All employees covered by workers’ compensation insurance to the extent of
normal legal benefits. The employee has the responsibility of reporting any
accident or injury which occurs to his or her immediate supervisor and the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 35.074) (Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.080 EXPENSES FOR TRAVEL, CONVENTIONS, AND EDUCATION.
   (A)   The town will reimburse employees for authorized mileage, meals, and
lodging upon submission of itemized claim with receipts.
      (1)   Any employee obligated to use his or her own vehicle outside the
boundaries of the town will be reimbursed for mileage and parking tolls.
Mileage sheets should be submitted to the Council for approval and subsequent
payment.
            (2)   Any travel requiring overnight accommodations must be
approved by the Council prior to departure.
(Prior Code, § 35.075)
   (B)   (1)   Any employee that attends conventions or meetings pre-approved
by the Council, with exception of monthly IMPA or mandatory State Board of
Accounts meetings of one or more days, will be reimbursed for meal expenses
with proper receipts if meals are not included in the registration cost.
      (2)   Mileage will be reimbursed at the rate set by the Internal Revenue
Service for business use when a town vehicle is not available for
transportation.
(Prior Code, § 31.02)
(Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992; Ord. 219-94, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 227-1-95,
passed - -1995; Ord. 236-1-96, passed 8-19-1996; Ord. 106-24, passed 11-12-
2024)
§ 33.081 SPECIAL MEETINGS COMPENSATION.
   (A)   When a special meeting and/or executive meeting is called by the
Council President, each Council member, Clerk-Treasurer, and Town Attorney, if
requested to attend, shall be compensated at the amount of $25 per meeting,
paid from the department pertaining to the meeting.
   (B)   The compensation will be in addition to the base pay.
(Prior Code, § 31.01) (Ord. 106-24, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 33.082 SALARIES; WAGES.
   The wages and salaries of town employees are adopted an incorporated as part
of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 102-97, passed 8-11-1997; Ord. 102-98, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 102-99,
passed 9-13-1999; Ord. 101-00, passed 8-14-2000; Res. 00-103, passed 12-11-
2000; Ord. 104-01, passed 8-13-2001; Ord. 102-02, passed 5-13-2002; Ord. 104-
02, passed 8-12-2002; Ord. 104-13, passed 12-8-2003; Ord. 100-04, passed 1-12-
2004; Ord. 102-04, passed 3-8-2004; Ord. 105-04, passed 9-13-2004; Ord. 105-05,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 107-06, passed - -2006; Ord. 100-06, passed 1-9-2006;
Ord. 107-07, passed - -2007; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-11-2008; Ord. 102-09, passed
9-14-2009; Ord. 105-09, passed 9-14-2009; Ord. 102-10, passed 1-11-2010; Ord.
104-10, passed 5-10-2020; Ord. 106-10, passed 10-11-2010; Ord. 110-10, passed
12-13-2010; Ord. 101-11, passed 3-14-2011; Ord. 103-11, passed 10-10-2011; Ord.
100-12, passed 1-9-2012; Ord. 103-12, passed 6-11-2012; Ord. 109-12, passed 9-
10-2012; Res. 12-116, passed 11-19-2012; Ord. 111-12, passed 12-10-2012; Ord.
108-13, passed 12-23-2013; Ord. 103-14, passed 11-10-2014; Ord. 107-15, passed
11-9-2015; Ord. 101-16, passed 3-9-2016; Ord. 107-16, passed 11-14-2016; Ord.
106-17, passed 9-11-2017; Ord. 104-18, passed 10-8-2018; Ord. 100-19, passed 1-
14-2019; Ord. 103-19, passed 7-8-2019; Ord. 106-19, passed 8-12-2019; Ord. 101-
20, passed 5-11-2020; Ord. 105-20, passed 5-21-2020; Ord. 109-20, passed 8-10-
2020; Ord. 101-21, passed 3-8-2021; Ord. 111-21, passed 9-13-2021; Ord. 102-22,
passed 3-14-2022; Ord. 112-22, passed 9-12-2022; Ord. 105-24, passed 5-13-2024;
Ord. 106-24, passed 11-12-2024; Ord. 105-25, passed - -2025)
DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS; GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES
§ 33.095 EMPLOYEES SUBJECT TO DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS.
   Employees are subject to disciplinary action as a result of a violation of
rules, regulations, or policies as determined by the supervisor and Council.
Employees of the Marshal’s Department are also subject to the rules and
regulations of that department. Such disciplinary action may include, but will
not be limited to, the following procedure:
   (A)   First offense. Written reprimand;
   (B)   Second offense. One-day suspension without pay;
   (C)   Third offense. Three-day suspension without pay;
   (D)   Fourth offense. Subject to discharge.
(Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.096 CATEGORIES OF INFRACTIONS.
Category Infraction Disciplinary Action
Category      Infraction                                                                      Disciplinary
                                                                                              Action
Accidents/    Failure to report an accident or injury
equipment
             First offense                                                                   Reprimand
             Second offense                                                                  Subject to
                                                                                              discharge
             Willful damage to equipment                                                     Subject to
                                                                                              discharge
             Unauthorized or improper use of equipment                                       Subject to
                                                                                              discharge
             Failure to follow safety regulations                                            4 step
Attendance    Failure to notify supervisor within 1 hour of starting time when unable to      4 step
              report for duty
             Reporting late for a work shift without prior explanation                       4 step
             Absent 3 consecutive working days without notifying supervisor                  Voluntary
                                                                                              quit
Conduct       Drinking or immoral conduct while on duty or on town property                   Subject to
                                                                                              discharge
             Drinking prior to reporting for duty where employee’s condition is such that iSubject to
              will affect the proper performance                                              discharge
             Theft or dishonesty of any kind                                                 Subject to
                                                                                              discharge
             Discourtesy to public                                                           4 step
             Disobeying the direct order of an immediate supervisor                          2 step
             Fighting on town property                                                       2 step
             Striking a supervisor                                                           Subject to
                                                                                              discharge
             Restricting, interrupting, or interfering with the work of others               4 step
             Failure to report to supervisor before leaving the work area for personal       4 step
              reasons
             Exercising undelegated authority                                                4 step
             Verbal abuse of supervisor                                                      4 step
              Where operations are continuous, an employee shall not leave a post until       2 step
             replaced by the next shift employee or until he or she is relieved by a         (Police
              supervisor                                                                      Department)
Miscellaneous Falsification of records or claim of illness or injury                          Subject to
                                                                                              discharge
             Falsification of time sheet, clocking another employee in or out, or tampering  Subject to
              with the time clock                                                             discharge
             Making false statements or supplying false information about an employee
             First offense                                                                   Reprimand
             Second offense                                                                  Subject to
                                                                                              discharge
             Falsification of mileage claim form                                             Subject to
                                                                                              discharge
             Unauthorized transportation of passengers in town vehicle
             First offense                                                                   Reprimand
             Second offense                                                                  Subject to
                                                                                              discharge
             Filing of false or incomplete employment application                            Subject to
                                                                                              discharge
             Carrying firearms or weapons onto the town’s premises without approval of the Subject to
              Council                                                                         discharge
             Current drivers license must be held at all times                               Subject to
                                                                                              discharge
             Unauthorized posting, removing, or defacing of signs, notices, or writing in    4 step
              any form on bulletin boards
             Abusing the two 15-minute break periods allowed to the employees each working   4 step
              day
             Leaving assigned duties during working hours without permission                 4 step
             Smoking in restricted areas                                                     4 step
             Refusing to attend training classes pertaining to job, safety, or first aid     4 step
              when requested by the Council
             No employee will be allowed to sleep while on duty                              2 step
             Failure to observe the safety practices, rules, and regulations as outlined by  4 step
              OSHA or the Council
 
(Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.097 GRIEVANCE POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of the town to treat all employees equitably and
fairly in matters affecting their employment. Each employee of the town will be
provided ample opportunity to understand and resolve matters affecting his or
her employment which the employee believes are unjust. Grievance procedure
instructions shall be made available to each employee, and the presentation of
any grievance shall be considered the right of each employee without fear of
reprisal.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. A
GRIEVANCE is defined as:
      (1)   Alleged poor working conditions;
      (2)   The unjust application of discipline; and/or
      (3)   The unfair application, interpretation, or violation of the town’s
uniform rules and regulations or those of the department in which the employee
works.
(Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.098 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
   The following steps are the approved grievance procedures for employees of
the town.
   (A)   Step 1. An employee who feels aggrieved should first discuss the
grievance with their supervisor. If the employee does not obtain satisfaction,
he or she should proceed with the next step.
   (B)   Step 2. An employee wishing further appeal may request a meeting in
executive session with the Council. Such a request must be in writing and be
submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer within five days of the receipt of the written
decision of the Town Supervisor. The decision of the Council is final.
(Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
§ 33.099 SEXUAL/UNLAWFUL HARASSMENT.
   (A)   The town sets forth the position and policy of the town regarding
sexual and other unlawful harassment. Violations of this section will be
subject to discipline up to and including termination.
   (B)   The town is committed to providing a workplace free of:
      (1)   Sexual and sex-based harassment, intimidation, threats, coercion,
or discrimination (which includes harassment based on gender, pregnancy,
childbirth, or related medical conditions); and
      (2)   Harassment, intimidation, threats, coercion, or discrimination
based on such factors as race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age,
physical disability, mental disability, medical condition, marital status,
sexual orientation, family-care leave status, genetic information, or veteran
status, without limitation.
   (C)   The town strongly disapproves of and will not tolerate harassment of
employees by managers, supervisors, or coworkers. Similarly, the town will not
tolerate harassment by its employees of non-employees with whom the town has a
business, service, or professional relationship.
   (D)   HARASSMENT includes written, verbal, physical, and visual conduct that
creates an intimidating, offensive, or hostile work environment or that
interferes with work performance.
      (1)   Such conduct constitutes HARASSMENT when:
         (a)   Submission to the conduct is made either an explicit or implicit
condition of employment;
         (b)   Submission to or rejection of the conduct is used as the basis
for an employment decision; or
         (c)   The harassment interferes with an employee’s work performance or
creates an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment.
      (2)   HARASSING CONDUCT can take many forms and includes but is not
limited to: slurs, jokes, statements, gestures, pictures, or cartoons regarding
an employee’s sex, race, color, national origin, religion, age, physical
disability, mental disability, medical condition, ancestry, marital status,
sexual orientation, family-care leave status, or veteran status.
      (3)   SEXUALLY HARASSING CONDUCT in particular includes all of the
prohibited actions in this division as well as other unwelcome conduct such as
requests for sexual favors, conversation containing sexual comments, and
unwelcome sexual advances.
      (4)   Such conduct is absolutely prohibited by the town. It is prohibited
by federal and state statutes, regulations, and guidelines. Sexual harassment
undermines the integrity of the employment relationship and will not be
tolerated in any form.
   (E)   Complaints will be investigated promptly and in a confidential manner
to the extent practical. When, after investigation, the town has reason to
believe that an employee did in fact violate the town’s policy prohibiting
sexual or other unlawful harassment, the town will immediately take appropriate
disciplinary action to end the harassment and to prevent the misconduct from
recurring. Sexual and other unlawful harassment will be grounds for immediate
discipline up to and including termination of employment.
      (1)   All actions taken to investigate and resolve sexual and other
unlawful harassment complaints shall be conducted in such a manner as to
respect all parties’ privacy. The identities of the complaining party and the
person accused of the harassment will be kept confidential to the extent
possible.
      (2)   There will be no retaliation or discrimination against any employee
for making a sexual and other unlawful harassment complaint. The town will make
follow-up inquiries to ensure that the harassment has not resumed and to
prevent retaliation from being taken.
      (3)   False accusations of harassment will not be tolerated. Given the
nature of this type of discrimination, everyone must also recognize that false
accusations of harassment can have serious effects on innocent individuals.
      (4)   Should an employee be found to have engaged in a violation of this
policy or knowingly provide a false charge, he or she will be subject to
discipline up to and including termination of employment.
   (F)   It is the responsibility of all management personnel at all levels,
including those people serving temporarily as supervisors, to enforce the
town’s sexual and other unlawful harassment policy. Every supervisor has an
affirmative duty to maintain a work environment free from sexual and other
unlawful harassment. Management personnel who fail to enforce this policy
strictly and promptly may also be subject to disciplinary action up to and
including termination.
   (G)   There shall be no express time limits for initiating complaints for
sexual or other unlawful harassment. However, every effort should be made to
file the complaint as soon as possible, preferably within 48 working hours
after any incident occurs, while the facts and potential supporting witness
statements are readily available.
   (H)   The following procedure shall apply in initiating a sexual harassment
complaint:
      (1)   Any person who is aggrieved by any form of sexual harassment, who
feels comfortable doing so, should directly inform the offending person that
the conduct is offensive and must stop.
      (2)   If the aggrieved person does not wish to communicate directly with
the offending person, or if the direct communication with the offending person
is not successful, the aggrieved person shall contact the offending person’s
immediate supervisor or Human Resources. If the complaint involves someone in
the employee’s direct line of supervision, then the employee should inform
another supervisor of the complaint.
      (3)   All complaints of sexual harassment will be put in writing and
promptly investigated by the town for appropriate remedial action, which may
include counseling, written warning, demotion, suspension, termination, or any
other appropriate action.
   (I)   This policy shall be implemented in the following manner.
      (1)   A copy of the resolution codified herein in its entirety and the
attachments thereto, including this policy, shall be provided to all fiscal
officers of the town.
      (2)   A copy of the resolution codified herein in its entirety and the
attachments thereto, including this policy, shall be made available at the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer of the town for public inspection.
      (3)   Any other such action that would communicate the policies
established herein to the employees and elected or appointed officials of the
town may be taken to implement this policy.
      (4)   This policy is deemed implemented by the town upon the taking of
any of the above actions.
(Res. 17-102, passed 6-12-2017)
§ 33.100 TERMINATION.
   All nonprobationary employees terminated may have an exit interview with the
Council in executive session. Notices of termination will be approved by the
Town Supervisor and reviewed by the Council. Keys and any property belonging to
the town will be turned in before the Clerk-Treasurer will issue the final
paychecks.
(Ord. 207-92, passed 7-13-1992)
CHAPTER 34: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Section
   
34.01   Establishment
   
34.02   Conflicts
   
34.03   Schedule of ordinance violations
   
34.04   Multiple violations
   
34.05   Payment procedure; maximum amounts
   
34.06   Right to trial
§ 34.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The town has hereby established an Ordinance Violations Bureau for the town
and appointed the Clerk-Treasurer as the Clerk of the Ordinance Violations
Bureau to perform all duties allowed under I.C. 33-36-2-3.
(Ord. 102-15, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 34.02 CONFLICTS.
   The general and specific penalty sections of the town’s code shall remain in
effect, except where a specific penalty set forth herein conflicts with the
specific or general penalty sections of the town’s code, in which case the
penalty set forth herein amends such conflicting specific or general penalty
section of the town’s code.
(Ord. 102-15, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 34.03 SCHEDULE OF ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS.
   The following ordinances of the code shall be subject to an admission of
violations before the Clerk of the Ordinance Violations Bureau:
Schedule of Ordinances Subject to Admission of Violation Before the
Clerk of the Ordinance Violations Bureau
Town Code Citation or Description of Civil Penalty Second or Subsequent
Ordinance Number      Violation                    Violation Penalty
Schedule of Ordinances Subject to Admission of Violation Before the Clerk of
the Ordinance Violations Bureau
Town Code                                                       Second or
Citation or  Description of Violation            Civil Penalty  Subsequent
Ordinance                                                       Violation
Number                                                          Penalty
                                                                $250 per
Ord. 104-12  Park rules, regulations, and signs  $200           incident after
                                                                the first
                                                                violation
                                                                $200 per
Ord. 101-12  Cases involving dog bites           $200           incident after
                                                                the first
                                                                violation
                                                                Each offense
                                                                thereafter to
                                                 $25 for a      increase by an
                                                 loose dog;     additional $25
                                                 $200 if the    up to $250;
                                                 dog is         $200 per
Ord. 104-08; Dogs roaming loose beyond owner’s transported to incident if
Ord. 101-12  premises                            the Animal     the dog is
                                                 Protection     transported to
                                                 League by the  the Animal
                                                 Town Police    Protection
                                                 Department     League by the
                                                                Town Police
                                                                Department
                                                                Second
                                                                violation is
                                                                $75; third
                                                                violation is
             Regulation of alternative                          $100; fourth
Ord.102-08   transportation                      $50            violation is
                                                                suspension of
                                                                use on public
                                                                roadways for
                                                                the remainder
                                                                of the year
Ord. 295     Regulating burning of trash         $25            $25 per
                                                                incident
             Burning in violation of §§
             92.15,
             92.17, and
             92.18 (e.g., burning garbage;
             burning junk, leaves, lumber,
             rubbish or straw after 5:30 p.m.,
295-1973     before 6:00 a.m., or anytime on     $25            $25 per
             Sunday; burning combustible                        incident
             material on any asphalt or tar
             street; burning combustible
             material in any location that
             endangers life or property or in
             amounts that cause damage to
             others)
§
130.99(C);   Curfew violation; unlawful                         $50 per
Ord. 316     discharge of firearm in town        $50            incident
(passed 10-
11-76)
 
(Ord. 102-15, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 34.04 MULTIPLE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person, corporation, individual, or organization who commits more
than one violation of any of the offenses specifically noted herein within any
30-day period will be subject to an increased fine as set forth above for
second or subsequent violations.
   (B)   Every day or part of a day that a violation is committed or continues
in existence is a separate violation for which civil penalties may be imposed.
(Ord. 102-15, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 34.05 PAYMENT PROCEDURE; MAXIMUM AMOUNTS.
   (A)   The Clerk of the Ordinance Violations Bureau shall accept written
appearances, waivers of trial, admissions of violations, and payment of civil
penalties up to but not exceeding $250 in ordinance violation cases.
   (B)   Civil penalties shall be paid to, receipted by, and accounted for by
the Clerk of the Ordinance Violations Bureau under procedures provided by the
State Board of Accounts. Payment of such civil penalties may be made in person
or by mail.
   (C)   All sums collected by the Clerk of the Ordinance Violations Bureau as
civil penalties for ordinance violations shall be accounted for and paid to the
town as provided by law.
(Ord. 102-15, passed 2-9-2015)
§ 34.06 RIGHT TO TRIAL.
   (A)   (1)   A person, corporation, individual, or organization charged with
an ordinance violation is entitled to a trial before a court as provided by law
unless the person, corporation, individual, or organization waives the right to
trial and enters an admission of the violation with the Clerk of the Ordinance
Violations Bureau.
      (2)   Upon admission, the Clerk of the Ordinance Violations Bureau shall
assess and receive from the violator the amount prescribed by the schedule
provided in §
34.03. If a person, corporation, individual, or organization charged with a
violation wishes to exercise the right to trial, that person shall appear
before the Clerk of the Ordinance Violations Bureau and deny the violation or
enter a written denial with the Clerk.
   (B)   If a person, corporation, individual, or organization denies an
ordinance or code violation; fails to satisfy a civil penalty assessed by the
Clerk of the Ordinance Violations Bureau after having entered an admission of
violation; or fails to deny or admit such a violation, the Clerk of the
Ordinance Violations Bureau shall report this fact to the Town Attorney who
shall then initiate proceedings against the person, corporation, individual, or
organization for the alleged ordinance violation.
(Ord. 102-15, passed 2-9-2015)
CHAPTER 35: TOWN POLICIES
Section
   
35.01   Municipal elections
   
35.02   Adoption of town seal
   
35.03   Frankton Day
   
35.04   Participation in registered cities and towns program
   
35.05   Nondiscrimination policy
   
35.06   Title VI plan
   
35.07   ADA compliance
   
35.08   Anti-nepotism
   
35.09   Losses; shortages; thefts
   
35.10   Identity theft
   
35.11   Internal control standards
   
35.12   Procedures governing meetings
   
35.13   Special meetings
   
35.14   Legal holidays designated
   
35.15   Association membership dues
   
35.16   Council to set compensation
   
35.17   Electronic communications
   
35.18   Independent purchasing agency
   
35.19   Town credit/debit cards
   
35.20   Emergency electric service
   
35.21   License required for vehicle operation
   
35.22   Equal distribution of overtime
   
35.23   INDOT agreements
   
35.24   Smoking
   
35.25   Public records; use for commercial purposes prohibited
§ 35.01 MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   (A)   The Council provides that its members are to be elected at large by
the voters of the whole town.
(Prior Code, § 30.01)
   (B)   The town will conduct its own municipal elections at one general
polling place, being the Town Hall, as provided by I.C. 3-10-7-22.
(Res. 07-102, passed 7-9-2007)
Statutory reference:
   Election of Council members, see I.C. 36-5-2-5
§ 35.02 ADOPTION OF TOWN SEAL.
   The Council adopts a common seal bearing the words “Town of Frankton,
Indiana — Seal”.
(Prior Code, § 30.02)
Statutory reference:
   Seal and parliamentary procedure, see I.C. 36-5-2-9
§ 35.03 FRANKTON DAY.
   The Council designates December 4 as Frankton Day. The citizens of the town
are encouraged to recognize and celebrate the anniversary of the incorporation
of the town.
(Prior Code, § 36.01)
Statutory reference:
   Indiana Day, see I.C. 1-1-10-1
§ 35.04 PARTICIPATION IN REGISTERED CITIES AND TOWNS PROGRAM.
   The town pledges its full support and cooperation to the Registered Cities
and Towns Program.
(Prior Code, § 36.02) (Res. 85-64, passed 10-14-1985)
§ 35.05 NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of the town that no discrimination on the basis of
race, religion, age, color, sex, national origin, or ancestry be condoned or
permitted against any person or persons in the recruitment or hiring of
employees, in any personnel transaction, in the provision of government
services, in the accessibility of town programs and facilities, in the
solicitation of bids, or the award of public contracts.
   (B)   All complaints of discrimination against any officer or personnel of
town shall be referred to the Council, which shall promptly make orders
appropriate to the circumstances of such case.
(Prior Code, § 36.03) (Ord. 223-96, passed 2-12-1996)
§ 35.06 TITLE VI PLAN.
   The Title VI Implementation Plan is adopted and incorporated as part of this
code as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Res. 20-102, passed 4-13-2020)
§ 35.07 ADA COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Transition Plan. The Americans with Disabilities Act Transition Plan
is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if
set out at length herein.
      (1)   The plan is hereby approved and adopted to be utilized as a guide
for moving the town toward compliance of the required ADA standards and
regulations.
      (2)   The town will fully consider the schedule of modifications
contained therein and will direct its consultant to provide amended copies of
the plan reflecting modifications to be made in the near future.
   (B)   Employment. The town does not discriminate on the basis of disability
in its hiring or employment practices and complies with all regulations as
outlined by the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission under Title 1 of
the (ADA).
   (C)   Effective communication. The town will, upon request, provide
appropriate aids and services leading to effective participation for people
with disabilities to participate equally in the town’s programs, services, and
activities. Anyone who requires an auxiliary aid or service for effective
participation or modification of policies or procedures to participate in a
service, program, or activity should contact the office of the Clerk-Treasurer
as soon as possible, but no later than 48 hours before the scheduled event.
   (D)   Modification to policies and procedures. The town will make all
reasonable modifications to policies and programs to ensure that people with
disabilities have an equal opportunity to enjoy all of its programs, services,
and activities. The ADA does not require the town to take any action that would
fundamentally alter the nature of its services or programs or impose an undue
financial or administrative burden to the town.
      (1)   Grievances regarding a service, program, or activity of the town
that is not accessible to persons with disabilities should be directed to the
Clerk-Treasurer and use the appropriate grievance procedure form.
      (2)   The town will not place a surcharge on a particular individual with
a disability or any group of individuals with disabilities to cover the cost of
providing auxiliary aids/services or reasonable modifications of policy, such
as retrieving items from locations that are open to the public but are not
accessible to persons who use wheelchairs.
   (E)   Procedures. The town has adopted an internal grievance procedure
providing for prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any action
prohibited by the U.S. Department of Justice regulations implementing Title II
of the ADA. Title II states, in part, that “no otherwise qualified disabled
individual shall, solely by reason of such disability, be excluded from the
participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination
in programs, services, or activities sponsored by a public entity”.
      (1)   Step one: File the grievance. Complete the state’s Americans with
Disabilities Act Title II Grievance Form.
         (a)   The grievance form can be found on ada.gov or in the ADA
Coordinator’s office located in the Town Hall. A grievance may be communicated
in writing, by e-mail, by fax, or by telephone, but must follow the format of
the state’s Americans with Disabilities Act Title II grievance form.
         (b)   A grievance concerning the accessibility of town services,
programs, or activities should be addressed to “Frankton Clerk-Treasurer, ADA
Coordinator”.
      (2)   Step two: Acknowledgment. A grievance should be filed within 90
days after the grievant party becomes aware of the alleged violation. The ADA
Coordinator will send an acknowledgment of receipt of the grievance within 12
working days.
      (3)   Step three: Informal resolution. Following the filing of a
grievance, the ADA Coordinator shall determine whether, and to what extent, an
investigation of the grievance is warranted.
         (a)   Any resulting investigation shall be conducted by the ADA
Coordinator or his or her designee. A thorough investigation affords all
interested persons and their representatives an opportunity to submit evidence
relevant to a grievance.
         (b)   The ADA Coordinator will complete the investigation within 60
calendar days of receipt of the grievance.
         (c)   If appropriate, the ADA Coordinator will arrange to meet with
the grievant to discuss the matter and attempt to reach an informal resolution
of the grievance. Any informal resolution of the grievance shall be documented
in the ADA Coordinator file and the case will be closed.
      (4)   Step four: Written determination. If an informal resolution of the
grievance is not reached in Step 3, within 60 calendar days of receipt of the
grievance, a written determination as to the validity of the complaint and
description of the resolution, if appropriate, shall be forwarded by the ADA
Coordinator to the Executive Officer for approval.
      (5)   Step five: Final determination and resolution. The ADA Coordinator
shall communicate the determination and resolution to the grievant within 90
calendar days of receipt of the grievance, unless the Executive Officer
authorizes additional time for further consideration of the grievance. Any
authorized extension of time will be communicated to the grievant. Any request
for reconsideration of the response to the grievance shall be at the discretion
of the Executive Officer.
   (F)   Pursuit of other remedies. If the grievant is not satisfied with the
town’s handling of the grievance at any stage of the process or does not wish
to file a grievance through the town’s ADA Title II grievance procedures, the
grievant may file a complaint directly with the U.S. Department of Justice or
other appropriate state or federal agency. Use of the town’s grievance
procedure is not a prerequisite to the pursuit of other remedies.
   (G)   Resolution considerations. The resolution of any specific grievance
will require consideration of varying circumstances such as the specific nature
of the disability; the nature of the access to services, programs, or
facilities at issue; the essential eligibility requirements for participation;
the health and safety of others; and the degree to which an accommodation would
constitute a fundamental alteration to the service, program, or facility or
cause an undue hardship to the town. Accordingly, the resolution by the town of
any one grievance does not constitute a precedent upon which the town is bound
or upon which other complaining parties may rely.
   (H)   File maintenance. The Clerk-Treasurer ADA Coordinator shall maintain
ADA Grievance files for three years.
(Ord. 113-12, passed - -; Res. 13-101, passed 2-11-2013)
§ 35.08 ANTI-NEPOTISM.
   (A)   Policy summary. It shall be the policy of the town to take all
reasonable steps to identify and prevent violations of I.C. 36-1-20.2 et al.
(Nepotism) and I.C. 36-1-21 et al. (Contracting with a Unit). In order to carry
out such policy, the town hereby adopts the following specific policy for
identifying violations of I.C. 36-1-20.2 et al. and I.C. 36-1-21 et al.
   (B)   Identification of violations of the Anti-Nepotism Policy.
      (1)   The town shall maintain records with respect to the direct line of
supervision of each employee of the town and shall prepare documentation of any
familial relationships defined as “relatives” pursuant to I.C. 36-1-20.2 et al.
and 36-1-21 et al. with respect to employees employed by the town on July 1,
2012.
      (2)   Effective July 1, 2012, the town shall require that each new
employee read, complete, and sign the verification of applicant for employment
of compliance with the town’s Anti-Nepotism Policy and shall require employees
to immediately notify the town of any change in information recorded on such
form during their employment with the town.
      (3)   Effective July 1, 2012, prior to the time the town enters into a
contract or renewal of a contract for goods or services or a contract for
public works, the individual or business entity with whom the town is
contracting must certify to the town that the individual, business, or anyone
with an ownership interest in the business, is not a relative of a Council
member as defined by this section and I.C. 36-1-20.2 et al. and I.C. 36-1-21 et
al.
   (D)   Incorporation of I.C. 36-1-20.2 et al. and I.C. 36-1-21 et al. The
town hereby incorporates the minimum requirements and provisions of I.C. 36-1-
20.2 et al. and 36-1-21 et al., including all future supplements and amendments
thereto which become law from time to time, and make them a part hereof as if
fully set out herein.
   (E)   Compliance by elected and appointed officials and employees.
      (1)   The town finds that no single member of the Council can act for the
body to make work assignments, compensation, grievances, advancement, or a
performance evaluation without prior authority of a majority of the Council
and, therefore, without such authority by the majority, he or she will not be
in the direct line of supervision of any employee.
(I.C. 36-5-2-9.4)
      (2)   All elected and appointed officials and employees of the town are
hereby directed to cooperate fully in the implementation of the policies
created by the resolution codified herein and shall demonstrate compliance with
the same. Each elected official shall annually, by December 31 of each year,
certify in writing, subject to the penalties for perjury, and on the form
attached to the resolution codified herein, that the officer has not violated
I.C. 36-1-20.2 et al. or 36-1-21 et al.
      (3)   Failure to abide by or cooperate with the implementation,
compliance, and certifications required by this section is a violation of I.C.
36-1-20.2 et al. and I.C. 36-1-21 et al. and may result in the discipline,
including termination, of an employee or a transfer from the direct line of
supervision or other curative action. An elected or appointed official of the
town who fails to abide by or cooperate with the implementation, compliance,
and mandated certifications of this section may be subject to action allowed by
law.
   (F)   Implementation. This policy shall be implemented in the following
manner.
      (1)   A copy of the resolution codified herein in its entirety and the
attachments thereto, including this policy, shall be posted at the town’s
offices where similar employment posters or other notices to employees are
located.
      (2)   A copy of the resolution codified herein in its entirety and the
attachments thereto, including this policy, shall be provided to each of the
town’s employees and elected and appointed officials.
      (3)   A copy of the resolution codified herein in its entirety and the
attachments thereto, including this policy, shall be made available at the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection.
      (4)   Any other such action(s) that would communicate the policies
established herein to the employees and elected or appointed officials of the
town may be taken to implement this policy.
      (5)   This policy is deemed implemented by the town upon the taking of
any of the above actions.
(Res. 12-103, passed 6-11-2012)
§ 35.09 LOSSES; SHORTAGES; THEFTS.
   (A)   The Council approves the following policy regarding erroneous or
irregular material variances, losses, shortages, and thefts. The Council shall
take any and all necessary action that may be required to implement such policy
and to review, monitor, and update the policy as necessary.
   (B)   (1)   The town sets a threshold for all erroneous or irregular
variances, losses, shortages, and thefts of town funds and property to be
considered “material” and thus required to be reported to the State Board of
Accounts under I.C. 5-11-1-27 and State Examiner Directive 2015-6.
      (2)   This section outlines the procedures required when a material
variance, loss, shortage, or theft occurs as well as procedures for maintenance
of documentation and resolution of incidents that do not meet the materiality
threshold established by this section.
   (C)   The materiality threshold at which point the town will be required to
report erroneous or irregular variances, losses, shortages, and thefts to the
State Board of Accounts shall be $100.
      (1)   If the erroneous or irregular variance, loss, shortage, or theft is
not cash or a cash equivalent, the value of the item at the time of the
variance, loss, shortage, or theft shall be used to determine whether the
materiality threshold has been met.
      (2)   All erroneous or irregular variances, losses, shortages, or thefts
of $100 or more shall be reported immediately to the State Board of Accounts
according to the procedures established by that agency. In addition, all
erroneous or irregular variances, losses, shortages, or thefts that occur more
than one time in a month and which, in the aggregate, total $100 or more shall
be reported immediately to the State Board of Accounts.
   (D)   The town shall maintain records and documentation concerning erroneous
or irregular variances, losses, shortages, and thefts in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles and the internal control standards
developed and provided by the State Board of Accounts, as may be amended from
time to time.
   (E)   The town shall investigate all erroneous or irregular variances,
losses, shortages, and thefts regardless of whether they meet the materiality
threshold established by this policy. Upon conclusion of each investigation,
the town shall implement procedures designed to prevent the recurrence of such
incidents and, if applicable, take appropriate disciplinary action against any
employees responsible for the incident.
   (F)   An employee of the town or other public officer who has knowledge of
or reasonable cause to believe that there has been a misappropriation of public
funds or assets of the public office shall immediately send written notice of
the misappropriation to the State Board of Accounts and the Office of the
Madison County Prosecutor.
   (G)   This policy shall be implemented in the following manner.
      (1)   A copy of the resolution codified herein in its entirety and the
attachments thereto, including this policy, shall be provided to all fiscal
officers of the town.
      (2)   A copy of the resolution codified herein in its entirety and the
attachments thereto, including this policy, shall be made available at the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer of the town for public inspection.
      (3)   Any other such action that would communicate the policies
established herein to the employees and elected or appointed officials of the
town may be taken to implement this policy.
      (4)   This policy is deemed implemented by the town upon the taking of
any of the above actions.
(Res. 18-100, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 35.10 IDENTITY THEFT.
   (A)   The Identity Theft Policy is adopted and incorporated as part of this
code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
   (B)   The town may take any and all necessary action as may be required to
implement such policy and to review, monitor, and update as necessary the
Identity Theft Policy. Such review shall include at least annually a report to
the Council or a designated committee of the Council regarding the operation of
the Identity Theft Policy and any modifications recommended by the Clerk-
Treasurer.
(Res. 08-103, passed 10-13-2008)
§ 35.11 INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CONTROL ENVIRONMENT. The demonstration of a commitment of the town to:
         (a)   Integrity and ethical values;
         (b)   Oversight of the internal control system;
         (c)   Establish an organization structure that oversees the
operations, reporting and compliance of the objectives of the internal controls
system;
         (d)   Attracting, developing, and retaining competent individuals; and
         (e)   Evaluating performance and holding individuals responsible for
internal control duties and responsibilities.
      CONTROL ACTIVITIES. The town actions and tools established through
policies and procedures that go towards the detection, prevention, or reduction
of identified risks of loss while still providing government operations by
designing control activities, designing information systems, and implementing
policies.
      INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION. The internal and external communication
needed to support an internal controls system that is valued and used by
receiving quality information, internally communicating quality information,
and externally communicating quality information.
      MONITORING ACTIVITIES. The activities of the town officials to see that
all of the components of the internal control system that meet or exceed the
standards herein are functioning properly by:
         (a)   Establishing and operating monitoring activities and then
evaluating them on an ongoing or periodic basis; and
         (b)   The timely remediation of deficiencies.
      RISK ASSESSMENT. The process that identifies and assesses internal and
external risks and establishes tolerances of the town sufficient to:
         (a)   Enable the identification of risks and the amount of risks
tolerated;
         (b)   Identify, analyze and to risks;
         (c)   Consider the potential for fraud in the risk assessment process;
and
         (d)   Identify, analyze, and respond to significant changes impacting
the internal control system.
   (B)   The town finds that its mission as related to an internal control
system is as follows:
      (1)   Provision of a democratic governmental structure at the grassroots
level;
      (2)   Provision of services as determined through the political process,
including but not limited to police, fire, streets, roads, economic
development, and parks;
      (3)   Promotion of government efficiency, accountability, reliability,
and transparency; and
      (4)   Promotion of safeguards to reduce the risk of loss due to fraud,
waste, abuse, mismanagement, or errors.
   (C)   The town finds that its interrelated and often overlapping objectives
as related to an internal control system are as follows:
      (1)   Operations objectives which involve the ways governmental services
are performed and the performance of those providing governmental services,
including by way of example: budgeting, purchasing, permitting, cash
management, and planning among others;
      (2)   Reporting objectives which involve the filing of financial and non-
financial information to those inside the government and those outside of the
government, including by way of example: filing the annual report, audit and
examination cooperation, filing uniform conflict of interest forms, and the
other filings with any governmental agency or official or information required
to be kept such as an OSHA log and responding to a public records request among
others; and
      (3)   Compliance objectives involve the adherence to law and regulations,
including by way of example: following guidance documents such as the State
Board of Accounts’ manuals, bulletins, directives; the Department of Local
Government Finance’s forms and directions; and other outside-of- government
trainings and documents such as the State Association of Cities and Towns
(IACT) and the State League of Municipal Clerks and Treasurers, among others,
as appropriate for the town.
   (D)   The town adopts and directs the minimum level of internal control
standards and internal procedures for an internal control system that includes
the following five standards to promote government accountability and
transparency as described in the Uniform Internal Control Standards for Indiana
Political Subdivisions guidance document from the Board of Accounts dated
September 2015 and as thereafter modified:
      (1)   Control environment;
      (2)   Risk assessment;
      (3)   Control activities;
      (4)   Information and communication; and
      (5)   Monitoring.
   (E)   The town adopts and directs the following principles in explanation of
the pertinent standards above be followed at all levels of the town government:
      (1)   Control environment.
         (a)   The oversight body and management demonstrate a commitment to
integrity and ethical values;
         (b)   The oversight body oversees the town’s internal control system;
         (c)   Management establishes an organizational structure, assigns
responsibility, and delegates authority to achieve the town’s objectives;
         (d)   Management demonstrates a commitment to attract, develop, and
retain competent individuals; and
         (e)   Management evaluates performance and holds individuals
accountable for their internal control responsibilities.
      (2)   Risk assessment.
         (a)   Management defines objectives clearly to enable the
identification of risks and defines risk tolerances;
         (b)   Management identifies, analyzes, and responds to risk related to
achieving the defined objectives;
         (c)   Management considers the potential for fraud when identifying,
analyzing and responding to risks; and
         (d)   Management identifies, analyzes, and responds to significant
changes that could impact the internal control system.
      (3)   Control activities.
         (a)   Management designs control activities to achieve objectives and
respond to risks;
         (b)   Management designs the town’s information system and related
control activities to achieve objectives and respond to risks; and
         (c)   Management implements control activities through policies.
      (4)   Information and communication.
         (a)   Management uses quality information to achieve the town’s
objectives;
         (b)   Management internally communicates the necessary quality
information to achieve the town’s objectives; and
         (c)   Management externally communicates the necessary quality
information to achieve the town’s objectives.
      (5)   Monitoring.
         (a)   Management establishes and operates monitoring activities to
monitor the internal control system and evaluate the results; and
         (b)   Management remediates and identifies internal control
deficiencies on a timely basis.
   (F)   The town adopts the internal control standards above so as to
establish an effective internal control system for the town through its design,
implementation, and operation.
   (G)   The town directs that the above standards be used to design,
implement, operate, and modify current operations, reporting, and compliance
objectives that will safeguard the assets of the town; promote reliability,
accountability, and transparency of financial and non-financial information;
and to assure compliance with laws and regulations for each office, department,
and personnel (as defined below) for an effective and reasonable internal
control system of the town.
   (H)   The town authorizes the Clerk-Treasurer, Council President, and Police
Chief (Fiscal Committee) together with the advice of the Town Attorney to
review the current internal control systems of the town and adopt a policy for
the future internal control systems, subject to the approval of the Council, to
be effective after June 30, 2016 and perform an annual review or more if
determined necessary for compliance with this section.
   (I)   The personnel, whether an official or employee of the town whose
official duties include receiving, processing, depositing, disbursing, or
otherwise having access to funds that belong to the federal government, state
government, a political subdivision, or another governmental entity shall
comply with these minimum internal control standards and procedures and any
other policy regarding standards and procedures determined necessary by the
town now and as modified in the future.
   (J)   The personnel of the town, both elected and appointed, whose official
duties include receiving, processing, depositing, disbursing, or otherwise
having access to funds that belong to the federal government, state government,
a political subdivision, or another governmental entity shall be trained at
least once during a calendar year and annually thereafter, unless on leave
status, on the minimum internal control standards and procedures and any other
standards and procedures determined necessary by the town and shall cooperate
with the town fiscal officer or designee so that the fiscal officer can timely
certify to the State Board of Accounts that the training was received annually
by the personnel as provided by law.
   (K)   The town authorizes the Committee, subject to the approval of the
Council, to determine the position and person who are the personnel referred to
in divisions (I) and (J) above and notify such personnel.
   (L)   The Council delegates to the Fiscal Committee, subject to Council
approval, the authority and/or duties including creating the internal control
systems policy.
   (M)   All elected and appointed officials and employees of the town are
hereby directed to abide by and to cooperate fully in the implementation of the
internal control system of the town.
   (N)   An employee who fails to abide by or cooperate with the
implementation, compliance, and certifications connected with the internal
control systems commits a violation of and may result in the discipline,
including termination, of the employee.
   (O)   An elected or appointed official of the town who fails to abide by or
cooperate with the implementation and the mandated certifications of the
internal control system may be subject to any action allowed by law.
   (P)   The ordinance codified herein may be implemented by any and all of the
following actions or such others as authorized by this Council:
      (1)   Posting a copy of the ordinance codified herein in its entirety in
at least one of the locations in the town where it posts employee posters or
other notices to its employees;
      (2)   Providing a copy of the ordinance codified herein to its employees
and elected and appointed officials;
      (3)   Providing or posting the adoption of the ordinance codified herein;
or
      (4)   Any such other action or actions that would communicate the
policies established herein this section to its employees and elected and
appointed officials.
(Ord. 103-16, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 35.12 PROCEDURES GOVERNING MEETINGS.
   The Council adopts the following rules of parliamentary procedure to govern
its meetings.
   (A)   The members-elect of the Council shall hold their first regular
meeting on the first Monday in January after their election, at the hour of 7:
30 p.m. local time in the Town Hall. The regular meetings of the Council shall
be held on the second and fourth Monday of each month at 7:30 p.m. local time
in the Town Hall.
   (B)   Any regular meeting of the Council may be adjourned to a future day or
hour. At that adjourned meeting, the Council may transact any business which
might have been transacted at the regular meeting of which it is a
continuation. At the adjourned meeting, the Council shall not be limited to
completing particular items of business which have actually been entered upon
and left unfinished at the regular meeting, unless the order of adjournment of
the regular meeting limited the work of the adjourned meeting.
   (C)   The President of the Council shall preside over all meetings of the
Council. The President of the Council shall take the chair precisely at the
hour fixed for the meeting and shall call the Council to order if a quorum is
present.
   (D)   (1)   The business of the Council shall be taken up in the following
order:
         (a)   Roll call;
         (b)   Reading of the minutes of the last meeting;
         (c)   General committee reports;
         (d)   Public hearing (opportunity for citizens to speak);
         (e)   New business;
         (f)   Unfinished business;
         (g)   Bills and claims; and
         (h)   Adjournment.
      (2)   The order of business may be suspended or altered by a two-thirds
vote of the Council.
   (E)   The President of the Council shall preserve order and decorum in all
Council meetings.
   (F)   The President shall ask for the “yeas” and “nays” on any question
before the Council when a vote on it is necessary.
   (G)   When a resolution is offered or a report or other matter is presented
to the Council, the presiding officer may accept it; if an objection is made,
then the presiding officer shall require a formal motion.
   (H)   When a motion has been made by a Council member, the presiding officer
shall state it, or if written, cause it to be read by the Clerk-Treasurer
before it is debated.
   (I)   After a motion made by a Council member has been stated by the
presiding officer or read by the Clerk-Treasurer, it may be withdrawn by the
Council member only if there has been no vote on, or amendment to, the motion.
   (J)   When a question is under debate before the Council, any motion to
adjourn, to lay on the table, or to call the previous question shall be in
order; these motions shall be voted on without a debate. Any member may move to
postpone to a day certain, to refer to, or amend, or to postpone indefinitely.
Except as otherwise provided, the motions shall have precedence in the order in
which they are arranged in this division (J).
   (K)   A motion to adjourn and a motion to fix a time at which the Council
shall adjourn shall always be in order. A motion to fix a time at which to
adjourn shall take precedence over a motion to adjourn.
   (L)   A motion to table an amendment shall not conclude debate on the motion
proposed to be amended.
   (M)   A motion before the Council calling for the previous question shall
have the effect of calling for a vote by the Council on the matter then under
discussion.
   (N)   A motion to postpone a matter before the Council to a day certain can
be amended only by altering the date of postponement.
   (O)   A motion to amend a motion before the Council and a motion to amend
that amendment shall always be in order. It shall also be in order to offer a
further amendment by way of a substitute, to which only one amendment may be
offered.
   (P)   A motion postponed indefinitely shall be taken up again only by
majority vote of the Council. No motion postponed indefinitely may be taken up
at the same or next succeeding meeting of the Council at which it was
postponed.
   (Q)   Every amendment shall be germane.
   (R)   When a motion has been carried or lost, any Council member voting with
the majority may move for the reconsideration of the vote at either at the same
or at the next succeeding meeting. A motion to reconsider shall take precedence
over all other motions except a motion to adjourn. Debate on a motion to
reconsider shall be in order only if the main question is debatable.
   (S)   Every ordinance shall be numbered in the order in which it is
introduced to the Council.
   (T)   Every ordinance shall be read three times in its entirety before voted
on by the Council. The ordinance may be read by title only at the second and
third reading if so ordered by majority vote of the Council.
   (U)   If the President of the Council is absent or otherwise unable to
preside, the Council shall designate a member to serve as presiding officer.
(Prior Code, § 30.03)
§ 35.13 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   The presiding officer may call special meetings.
   (B)   Except as otherwise required by state law, notice shall be given for
special meetings according to the following procedure.
      (1)   Notice of the date, time, and place of the meeting shall be given
at least 48 hours before the meeting by posting a copy of the notice at the
door of Town Hall or by mailing written notices to each Council member and all
news media who have filed requests for such notices as set out in state law.
The Clerk-Treasurer shall retain copies of the notices given under this
division and shall file a verified statement that notice was properly given.
      (2)   The Council may conduct emergency meetings upon giving the notice
required by state law.
      (3)   Every Council meeting shall be open to the public. The Council may
not enter into executive session except in compliance with state law.
      (4)   The Town Hall shall be open for business from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday of each week. The Town
Hall shall be closed on Saturdays, Sundays, and all legal holidays.
(Prior Code, § 30.04)
§ 35.14 LEGAL HOLIDAYS DESIGNATED.
   (A)   The Council shall designate all town legal holidays in the annual
salary ordinance.
   (B)   This section shall not effect any action taken by the Council during
regular or special sessions. Any action taken by the Council on any legal
holiday shall be valid for all purposes.
(Prior Code, § 30.05)
Cross-reference:
   Paid holidays, see §
33.065
Statutory reference:
   Legal holidays, see I.C. 1-1-9-1
§ 35.15 ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIP DUES.
   (A)   The Council is authorized to budget and appropriate funds to provide
for the payment of membership dues for the town, its elected and appointed
officials, and the members of its boards, councils, departments, or agencies in
any local, regional, state, or national associations of a civic, educational,
or governmental nature which have as their purpose the improvement of municipal
operations.
   (B)   The Council is authorized to budget and appropriate funds to pay the
expenses of duly authorized representatives to attend the meetings and
functions of organizations to which the town belongs.
   (C)   The Council shall designate the person or persons who shall represent
the town at any meeting or function of such organizations.
(Prior Code, § 30.06) (Ord. 125-83, passed 1-10-1983)
§ 35.16 COUNCIL TO SET COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Council shall fix the compensation, salaries, and benefits of its
town officers and employees in a salary ordinance to be adopted annually.
   (B)   The Council may require that every town officer execute a bond payable
to the town in a sum approved by the Council and conditioned on the faithful
performance of the duties of the office and for the payment to the proper
person of monies received by the officer.
(Prior Code, § 30.07) (Ord. 122-82, passed 11-22-1982)
Statutory reference:
   Compensation of town officials, see I.C. 36-5-3-2
§ 35.17 ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The resolution codified herein shall be known as the “Electronic
Meetings Policy” of the Council and applies to the Council and any committee
appointed directly by this Council or its presiding officer.   
      (2)   The provisions of I.C. 5-14-1.5-1 et seq., including definitions,
apply to the resolution codified herein.
   (B)   (1)   Subject to divisions (C) and (E) below, any member may
participate in a meeting by any electronic means of communication that:
         (a)   Allows all participating members of the governing body to
simultaneously communicate with each other; and
         (b)   Other than a meeting that is an executive session, allows the
public to simultaneously attend and observe the meeting.
      (2)   A member who participates by an electronic means of communication
shall be considered present for purposes of establishing a quorum and may
participate in final action only if the member can be seen and heard.
      (3)   All votes taken during a meeting at which at least one member
participates by an electronic means of communication must be taken by roll call
vote.
   (C)   (1)   At least 50% of the members must be physically present at a
meeting at which a member will participate by means of electronic
communication. Not more than 50% of the members may participate by an
electronic means of communication at that same meeting.
      (2)   A member may not attend more than a 50% of the meetings in a
calendar year by an electronic means of communication unless the member’s
electronic participation is due to:
         (a)   Military service;
         (b)   Illness or other medical condition;
         (c)   Death of a relative; or
         (d)   An emergency involving actual or threatened injury to persons or
property.
      (3)   A member may attend two consecutive meetings (a set of meetings) by
electronic communication. A member must attend in person at least one meeting
between sets of meetings that the member attends by electronic communication
unless the member’s absence is due to:
         (a)   Military service;
         (b)   Illness or other medical condition;
         (c)   Death of a relative; or
         (d)   An emergency involving actual or threatened injury to persons or
property.
   (D)   The minutes or memoranda of a meeting at which any member participates
by electronic means of communication must:
      (1)   Identify each member who:
         (a)   Was physically present at the meeting;
         (b)   Participated in the meeting by electronic means of
communication; and
         (c)   Was absent.
      (2)   Identify the electronic means of communication by which:
         (a)   Members participated in the meeting; and
         (b)   Members of the public attended and observed the meeting if the
meeting was not an executive session.
   (E)   No member of the Council may participate by means of electronic
communication in a meeting at which the Council may take final action to:
      (1)   Adopt a budget;
      (2)   Make a reduction in personnel;
      (3)   Initiate a referendum;
      (4)   Impose or increase a fee;
      (5)   Impose or increase a penalty;
      (6)   Exercise the Council’s power of eminent domain; or
      (7)   Establish, impose, raise, or renew a tax.
   (F)   If an emergency is declared by the governor under I.C. 10-14-3-12 or
the Council President under I.C. 10-14-3-29, members are not required to be
physically present for a meeting until the emergency is terminated.
   (G)   Members may participate in a meeting by any means of communication
provided that:
      (1)   At least a quorum of the members participate in the meeting by
means of electronic communication or in person;
      (2)   The public may simultaneously attend and observe the meeting unless
the meeting is an executive session; and
      (3)   The minutes or memoranda of the meeting must comply with division
(D) above.
   (H)   All votes taken during a meeting at which at least one member
participates by an electronic means of communication must be taken by roll call
vote.
(Res. 21-102, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 35.18 INDEPENDENT PURCHASING AGENCY.
   (A)   The Town Clerk Purchasing Agency (the “Purchasing Agency”) is
established as the purchasing agency for the town.
   (B)   The Purchasing Agency shall have all the powers and duties authorized
under I.C. 5-22 as may be supplemented from time to time by ordinances adopted
by the Council and policies adopted by the Purchasing Agency.
   (C)   The Purchasing Agency shall act as the purchasing agency for every
agency, board, office, branch, bureau, commission, council, department, or
other establishment of the governmental body of the town.
   (D)   The Purchasing Agency may designate in writing any employee of the
town as a purchasing agent.
(Ord. 101-98, passed 6-8-1998)
§ 35.19 TOWN CREDIT/DEBIT CARDS.
   (A)   The Council has authorized the Clerk-Treasurer to apply for a credit
line through PNC Bank in the amount of $18,000. Each issued card will have the
name of the employee in the above named position and will have a credit limit
of $2,000 per card.
   (B)   The Cities and Towns Bulletin and Uniform Compliance Guidelines (lune
2000) issued by the State Board of Accounts states in part that:
      (1)   Care should be taken that no interest, carrying charges, or
penalties are incurred due to late payments.
      (2)   All claims filed in connection with use of the credit cards must be
itemized as provided in I.C. 5-11-10 before being approved and paid. If the
claims are not itemized or properly documented, they shall be returned to the
employee user for correction.
      (3)   If any interest or penalty is incurred due to late filing or the
furnishing of documentation by an employee, the employee shall be held
responsible for paying the interest or penalty charges.
   (C)   In regards to sales tax, the employee needs to request a sales exempt
form prior to use from the Clerk-Treasurer for the removal of sales tax. If
sales tax is incurred, the employee shall be responsible for payment of the
tax.
   (D)   Each card holder, at the end of each year by December 31, shall show
physical proof of the card that it is in his or her possession to the Clerk-
Treasurer.
   (E)   The Council is desirous that this credit card not be used for purchase
of any personal items. Each user of the credit card will get permission from
the Clerk-Treasurer or Utility Clerk before each use.
      (1)   A sign out sheet will be made available, and each user will sign
out the card for each use.
      (2)   The sign out sheet will have the name of the user, time, date it is
being used, purpose of use, fund being charged, and the date/time the card is
returned to Clerk-Treasurer.
   (F)   Credit cards will not be kept overnight without the consent of Clerk-
Treasurer or Utility Clerk.
(Ord. 116-22, passed 10-10-2022)
§ 35.20 EMERGENCY ELECTRIC SERVICE.
   When electricians for the town are on vacation or sick leave, the town has
made arrangements for a qualified and licensed standby at a basic rate of $30.
If he or she is called out, he or she will be paid $20 per hour for each hour
worked. Two Council members shall specify emergency status.
(Prior Code, § 31.03) (Ord. 219-94, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 227-1-95, passed - -
1995; Ord. 236-1-96, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 35.21 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR VEHICLE OPERATION.
   Any employee working for the town and operating a vehicle which would
require a commercial drivers license will be reimbursed by the town for the $28
testing fee and the $35 physical fee required to obtain a commercial driver’s
license.
(Prior Code, § 31.04) (Res. 92-132, passed 2-10-1992)
§ 35.22 EQUAL DISTRIBUTION OF OVERTIME.
   The hours of overtime standby each week shall be equally distributed among
the town employees so that no one or two employees are paid all the overtime.
(Prior Code, § 31.05) (Res. 88-103, passed 5-9-1988)
§ 35.23 INDOT AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   The President of the Council is hereby authorized and confirmed to
have the authority to execute any INDOT agreements and all other documents
related thereto and all documents related to any INDOT grant programs for and
on behalf of and to bind the town.
   (B)   The Council hereby ratifies all prior agreements and associated
documents executed by the President of the Council prior to the effective date
of the resolution codified herein.
(Res. 21-105, passed 11-8-2021)
§ 35.24 SMOKING.
   The Council approves the following smoking policy. The town shall take any
and all necessary action that may be required to implement such policy and to
review, monitor, and update as necessary the smoking policy.
   (A)   The town does not discriminate against any employee or employee group,
nor are any special rights afforded to either tobacco product users or non-
tobacco product users by this policy. The town does not and will not
discriminate against an applicant or employee based on his or her use of
tobacco products outside the course of employment.
   (B)   This policy should be implemented in a spirit of cooperation,
courtesy, and mutual respect. In addition, this policy is implemented to ensure
the town is complaint with applicable laws. The harassment of either a tobacco
product user employee or non-tobacco product user employee will not be
tolerated. Violations of this policy will be subject to discipline up to and
including termination.
   (C)   Tobacco product use is not permitted within any town facility or
within eight feet of any public entrance to a town facility. Signs or similar
notices stating “State Law Prohibits Smoking Within Eight Feet of This
Entrance” shall be posted and shall be maintained at all public entrances to
town facilities.
   (D)   This policy shall be implemented in the following manner:
      (1)   A copy of the resolution codified herein in its entirety and the
attachments thereto, including this policy, shall be posted at the town’s
offices where employment posters or other notices to employees are located.
      (2)   A copy of the resolution codified herein in its entirety and the
attachments thereto, including this policy, shall be provided to each of the
town’s employees and elected and appointed officials.
      (3)   A copy of the resolution codified herein in its entirety and the
attachments thereto, including this policy, shall be made available at the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection.
      (4)   Signs stating “State Law Prohibits Smoking Within Eight Feet of
This Entrance” shall be posted and maintained at all public entrances to town
facilities.
      (5)   Any other such action(s) that would communicate the policies
established herein to the employees and elected or appointed officials of the
town may be taken to implement this policy.
      (6)   This policy is deemed implemented by the town upon the taking of
any of the above actions.
(Res. 88-96, passed - -; Res. 12-105, 6-11-2012)
§ 35.25 PUBLIC RECORDS; USE FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibited use. No individual or entity receiving public records under
I.C. 5-14-3-3(d) shall use such records for commercial purposes. This
prohibition does not apply to records used for news reporting, nonprofit
activities, or academic research.
   (B)   Discretion to deny. If the town reasonably believes that a requester
intends to use public records for commercial purposes, the town may deny the
request.
(Ord. 104-25, passed - -2025)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE
      
51.   UTILITIES REGULATIONS GENERALLY
      
52.   ELECTRIC
      
53.   WATER
      
54.   SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   License required
   
50.03   Application for license
   
50.04   License fee; insurance
   
50.05   Revocation of license
   
50.06   Rules of collection
   
50.07   Storage of junk
   
50.08   Enforcement; notice of violation
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Rejected food wastes, and includes every waste accumulation of
animal, fruit, or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attends
the preparation, use, cooking, and dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl,
fruit, or vegetables.
   JUNK. Any worn out, cast-off, or discarded article or material prepared for
destruction; or collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some other
use; and any unwholesome or combustible substance or material which creates an
obnoxious condition and is injurious to health or offensive to the aesthetic
sense, including but not limited to any appliance incapable of being operated
under its own power and any fire hazard. Any article or material which,
unaltered or unchanged and without further conditioning, can be used for its
original purpose as readily as when new shall not be deemed JUNK.
   JUNKYARD. Any lot, parcel of real estate, or building used for storing,
salvaging, or processing garbage, junk, or rubbish or offering any such
material for sale. JUNKYARD does not mean any lot, parcel of real estate, or
building used by any foundry or manufacturing plant for the storage of garbage,
junk, or rubbish ordinarily in the operation of the foundry or manufacturing
business.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or
society.
   RUBBISH. Any waste material other than garbage or offal, including but not
limited to: wire, chips, shavings, bottles, broken glass, crockery, tin, cast
or wooden ware, hoses, rags, stumps, tree trunks, paper, boots, shoes, ashes,
metal, dirt, sweepings, boxes, cans, and wood.
(Prior Code, § 50.01) (Ord. 14, passed 2-24-1891; Ord. 29, passed - -1898; Ord.
200, passed 1-18-1960) Penalty, see §
50.99
Statutory reference:
   Littering, see I.C. 35-45-3-2
§ 50.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall collect garbage or rubbish without having first obtained a
license.
(Prior Code, § 50.02) (Ord. 242, passed 10-18-1965; Ord. 342, passed 5-12-1980)
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Every applicant for a waste disposal license shall complete a written
application and shall file it in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer. The
application shall state:
   (A)   The name and present address of the applicant;
   (B)   The address of the applicant during the four years prior to the date
of the application;
   (C)   If the applicant has any employment other than the collection of
garbage and rubbish;
   (D)   If the applicant has a state chauffeur’s license and, if so, the
license number;
   (E)   The type of vehicle to be used, giving the year, model, and type of
bed or body and capacity of the vehicle; and
   (F)   A statement by the applicant indicating his or her intention of
complying with all laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations governing the
disposal of the garbage and rubbish.
(Prior Code, § 50.03) (Ord. 242, passed 10-18-1965; Ord. 342, passed 5-12-1980)
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 LICENSE FEE; INSURANCE.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation collecting rubbish
or garbage in the town shall submit to the office of the Clerk-Treasurer a
yearly license fee in the amount of $25 and proof of insurance of a combined
single limit of $1,000,000.
      (2)   The license will expire on December 31 each year and shall be
renewed on or before January 31.
   (B)   The applicant shall furnish a certificate or duplicate insurance
policy indicating that he or she carries insurance for property damage in an
amount not less than $25,000, liability insurance with limits of not less than
$100,000 for each person, and up to $300,000 for any one accident to the Clerk-
Treasurer before the issuance of the license.
(Prior Code, § 50.05)
(Ord. 242, passed 10-18-1965; Ord. 342, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 102-06, passed
4-10-2006) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any license issued under the terms of this section may be revoked by
the Council upon showing that the applicant is not collecting garbage and
rubbish in a satisfactory manner or upon his or her conviction for any
violation of state or town law.
   (B)   The Council shall conduct a hearing to determine if any license should
be revoked. The license holder shall receive written notice of the hearing at
least ten days before it occurs.
(Prior Code, § 50.06) (Ord. 242, passed 10-18-1965; Ord. 342, passed 5-12-1980)
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06 RULES OF COLLECTION.
   The licensee shall submit a copy of the schedule and policies governing his
or her collection of garbage and rubbish. The schedule and policies shall enter
into effect upon approval of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 50.07) (Ord. 242, passed 10-18-1965; Ord. 342, passed 5-12-1980)
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 STORAGE OF JUNK.
   No person shall deposit, store, or maintain any garbage, junk, or rubbish
except within a building.
(Prior Code, § 50.08) (Ord. 14, passed 2-24-1891; Ord. 29, passed - -1898; Ord.
200, passed 1-18-1960) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.08 ENFORCEMENT; NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any violation of §
50.07 shall constitute a public nuisance.
   (B)   (1)   If any person in possession of any property within the town
permits a violation of §
50.07 to occur, the Council shall order the Police Department to post a written
notice on the property or to serve the notice personally or by certified mail
upon that person.
      (2)   If a firm or corporation is in possession of the property, the
notice may be served at its place of business or by certified mail. The notice
shall state that the violation must be corrected no later than seven days
following the receipt of the notice.
(Prior Code, § 50.09) (Ord. 14, passed 2-24-1891; Ord. 29, passed - -1898; Ord.
200, passed 1-18-1960)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of §§
50.01 through
50.03 or §§ 5.05 through
50.06 shall be fined not less than $3 nor more than $2,500. Each day a
violation continues constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   If any person fails to correct the violation before the expiration
of the period stated in the notice, that person shall be fined not less than $3
and not more than $10. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 50.99)
   (B)   Failure to renew by the deadline in §
50.04(A) will result in a $10 per day late fee not to exceed $100.
Noncompliance of §
50.04 will result in a citation for ordinance violation if hauling continues
after failure to pay.
(Ord. 14, passed 2-24-1891; Ord. 29, passed - -1898; Ord. 200, passed 1-18-
1960; Ord. 102-06, passed 4-10-2006)
CHAPTER 51: UTILITIES REGULATIONS GENERALLY
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Certain organizations exempt from year-round payment
   
51.02   Unpaid balance on rented property
   
51.03   Credit history fee
   
51.04   Meter readings
   
51.05   Department of Storm Water Management
   
51.06   Jurisdiction
   
51.07   Reconnection times
   
51.08   Service fees; after hours
   
51.09   Hourly rates and charges for utility departments
Payment Procedures
   
51.20   Billing procedures; due date
   
51.21   Delinquency/default; notice; disconnection
   
51.22   Budget customers
   
51.23   Project Safe customers
   
51.24   Remittance of payment
   
51.25   Returned checks; insufficient funds
   
51.26   Installation charges; meter installation
   
51.27   Payment extensions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 CERTAIN ORGANIZATIONS EXEMPT FROM YEAR-ROUND PAYMENT.
   The Council will allow all tax-exempt, nonprofit organizations to be able to
be exempt from paying year-round utilities; for example, Frankton Heritage
Days, Frankton Pee Wee League, and the like; as their utility consumption is
often less than six months out of the year.
(Prior Code, § 51.01) (Res. 89-121, passed 2-13-1989)
§ 51.02 UNPAID BALANCE ON RENTED PROPERTY.
   The town will not accept payment for electric or water deposits from a new
tenant if a landlord or property owner owes an outstanding balance on his or
her utility account or a sewage balance on a previous tenant’s account of that
particular property.
(Prior Code, § 51.02) (Ord. 210-92, passed 10-12-1992)
§ 51.03 CREDIT HISTORY FEE.
   As of March 14, 1988, there will be a $2 fee for letters of a credit
history. This saves a former utility customer a large deposit when moving to
another town.
(Prior Code, § 51.03) (Res. 88-102, passed - -)
§ 51.04 METER READINGS.
   (A)   Utility customers are responsible for furnishing meter readings to the
town hall between the first to the tenth day of each month when meters are not
accessible to the meter reader for reasons such as dogs, fences, patio
enclosures, cars parked over meters, etc. These readings can be furnished by
phone, mail, fax, drop box, or in person.
   (B)   Any customer who does not furnish a meter reading to Town Hall will
receive an estimated bill each month. When a meter is estimated for a period of
four consecutive months, the meter will be disconnected on the tenth day of the
fourth month, at which time a meter reading and a $35 reconnect fee per utility
must be submitted to Town Hall before service will be restored.
   (C)   Adjustments will not be made to bills for over-estimated meters.
   (D)   A customer will owe a minimum bill on that particular meter each month
until usage reaches the estimated reading.
(Ord. 105-99, passed 9-13-1999; Ord. 108-21, passed 9-13-2021)
§ 51.05 DEPARTMENT OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   The Council adopts the provisions of I.C. 8-1.5-5 establishing a
Department of Storm Water Management governed by a Board of Storm Water
Management and a storm water district.
   (B)   The Council creates a special taxing district that includes all
territory within the town’s corporate boundaries as provided in I.C. 8-1.5-5-5.
   (C)   The Council establishes a Board of Storm Water Management which shall
consist of three directors (one member shall serve a one-year term or until his
or her successor is appointed; one member shall serve a two-year term or until
his or her successor is appointed; and one member shall serve a three-year term
or until his or her successor is appointed), each appointed by the President of
the Council, not more than two of whom may be of the same political party as
provided in I.C. 8-1.5-5-4.
(Ord. 115-21, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 51.06 JURISDICTION.
   The town’s electric and water utilities are hereby removed from the
jurisdiction of the State Utility Regulatory Commission.
(Ord. 101-01, passed 7-9-2001)
§ 51.07 RECONNECTION TIMES.
   A utility customer, when disconnected for nonpayment of utilities, must
contact Town Hall prior to 5:00 p.m. that day with normal payment procedures in
order to have service restored. If contact is made after 5:00 p.m., the
customer will remain without utilities until 7:00 a.m. minimum the next day.
(Ord. 103-03, passed 7-14-2003)
§ 51.08 SERVICE FEES; AFTER HOURS.
   A $25 service fee shall be charged to any customer for each occasion that a
utility employee is called out on overtime for a non-emergency situation.
Overtime is considered any time other than the hours of Monday through Friday
from 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., with the exception of designated holidays.
(Ord. 107-02, passed 10-14-2002)
§ 51.09 HOURLY RATES AND CHARGES FOR UTILITY DEPARTMENTS.
Schedule of Hourly Rates for Utility Services and Street Departments
Schedule of Hourly Rates for Utility Services and Street Departments
Administrative fee             $50
Backhoe/bobcat                 $75 per hour
Blade/chain repair and replace $125 per job
Bucket/auger/dump truck        $75 per hour
Chase trucks                   $50 per hour
Debris/disposal fee            $150 per load
Jet truck                      $75 per hour
Laborer (per employee)         $50 per hour
Mowers (all)                   $250 per hour
Saws/weed trimmers             $50 per hour
 
(Ord. 110-21, passed 9-13-2021)
PAYMENT PROCEDURES
§ 51.20 BILLING PROCEDURES; DUE DATE.
   (A)   The Council directs the town’s utility companies (electric, water, and
sewage) to prescribe to the following payment procedures in §§
51.20,
51.21(A),
51.22, and
51.23.
   (B)   Customers who pay utilities on a monthly basis must pay in full by the
fifth of each month. Those accounts not paid by the fifth of the month will be
charged late charges at the rate set by the State Utility Regulatory
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 51.15) (Ord. 172-87, passed - -; Ord. 174-88, passed - -; Ord.
179-88-A, passed - -)
§ 51.21 DELINQUENCY/DEFAULT; NOTICE; DISCONNECTION.
   (A)   Customers who have not paid their current utility bills by the next
billing will become delinquent and will be notified that the delinquent bill
must be paid within ten days unless an agreement is made with the utility
office. Normal procedure for that agreement is to pay current billing plus $50
to catch up the delinquent account. If the agreement is broken, service will be
disconnected without notice.
(Prior Code, § 51.16)
   (B)   Any utility customer who has a problem with paying his or her utility
bills may contact the utility company and sign an agreement. However, failure
to keep that agreement will place the customer in default and service will be
disconnected.
(Prior Code, § 51.19)
   (C)   The utility office will no longer issue a notice of delinquency to
customers after the fifth of the month as the “notice to disconnect” is now
printed on the back side of the regular monthly utility bill.
   (D)   Due to an increase of bankruptcies, foreclosures, and transients, the
current system allows a customer to have utilities for 90 days without making a
payment.
      (1)   In order not to cause hardship, customers currently owing more than
one month will receive a notice to pay their current bill plus $25 until the
bill is current. The delinquent bill will be due by the fifteenth of each
month.
      (2)   Disconnects will be done after the fifteenth of the month if no
payment is received, and a $35 reconnect fee per utility will be due in
addition to the amount of the utility bill.
      (3)   Arrangements to extend payment can be made; however, no extension
will be allowed past the fifth of the following month.
(Ord. 172-87, passed - -; Ord. 174-88, passed - -; Ord. 179-88-A, passed - -;
Ord. 103-02, passed 6-10-2002; Ord. 103-10, passed 5-10-2010; Ord. 108-21,
passed 9-13-2021)
§ 51.22 BUDGET CUSTOMERS.
   (A)   Budget customers who do not pay their budget agreement payment by the
fifth of each month will be penalized at the same rate as monthly customers. A
budget payment not paid by the next billing cycle will be delinquent, and
services will be disconnected without further notice. The normal procedure for
delinquent budget consumers is to pay current billing plus $50 to catch up
delinquent accounts.
   (B)   Budget customers must pay their outstanding balance no later than
September 1 of any given year. Those customers with credit balances will have
their balances credited to their accounts.
(Prior Code, § 51.17) (Ord. 172-87, passed - -; Ord. 174-88, passed - -; Ord.
179-88-A, passed - -)
§ 51.23 PROJECT SAFE CUSTOMERS.
   Project Safe customers will have 30 days to pay their accounts in full or
sign an agreement with the utility office. Failure to keep the agreement will
be cause for disconnection (after March 15).
(Prior Code, § 51.18) (Ord. 172-87, passed - -; Ord. 174-88, passed - -; Ord.
179-88-A, passed - -)
§ 51.24 REMITTANCE OF PAYMENT.
   The town will require a customer to remit entire payment of any arrearage
and current amount of his or her utility bill each month for the following
reasons:
   (A)   The customer has been disconnected three times in a 12-month period;
   (B)   The customer has filed a bankruptcy which included town utilities;
and/or
   (C)   The customer has moved back to the town and previously left the town
owing a utility bill which was turned over to the collection agency.
(Prior Code, § 51.20) (Ord. 100-97, passed 3-10-1997)
§ 51.25 RETURNED CHECKS; INSUFFICIENT FUNDS.
   The current NSFC fee will increase effective immediately to $39 per each
returned check.
(Ord. 107-21, passed 9-13-2021)
§ 51.26 INSTALLATION CHARGES; METER INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Each new resident or business that wishes to install utilities will
follow the rules in §§
52.23,
53.19, and
54.037. The only exception being that if the property is situated so that the
area around or near is undeveloped, the maximum electric, water, sewer, and
storm drain line size will be required as to aid in future development. All
cost will be borne by the owner or developer.
   (B)   Electric and water meter installation charges are increased to $25
each. An electric or water meter is billable monthly whether or not consumption
is used. This service is generally requested by having meters removed to avoid
minimum monthly utility charges for zero consumption when a resident will be
absent from his or her property by two or more consecutive months. The fee is
payable at such time meters are reinstalled.
(Ord. 101-03, passed 5-12-2003; Ord. 103-06, passed 4-10-2006)
§ 51.27 PAYMENT EXTENSIONS.
   All emergency extension payments will be limited to one per year. This
refers to all payment extension beyond the fifteenth regular disconnect date.
(Ord. 105-07, passed 8-13-2007)
CHAPTER 52: ELECTRIC
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Curtailment rules
   
52.02   Peak management credit
   
52.03   Disconnection and reinstatement of service
   
52.04   Monthly charges
   
52.05   Energy Assistance Program
   
52.06   Incentives; credits
Rates and Charges
   
52.20   Residential
   
52.21   Commercial
   
52.22   Municipal; security lights
   
52.23   Connections; distribution system
   
52.24   Deposit
   
52.25   Analog meter fee
Interconnection Standards
   
52.40   Application
   
52.41   Compliance
   
52.42   Customer responsibilities
   
52.43   Inspections; employee access
   
52.44   Insurance; liability
 
   
52.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 CURTAILMENT RULES.
   The utility may curtail electric service according to the following
procedures. When the utility is notified that its supplier is implementing each
of the following steps, the utility will also implement these steps
immediately.
   (A)   Service Priority Class VIII customers shall be notified by press
release to fully curtail their service.
   (B)   After the public notice is given to Service Priority Class VIII
customers, curtailment of service to Service Priority Class VII customers will
begin and shall continue until a service level is reached of not more than 90%
percent but not less than 80% of service obligation or base monthly
consumption, whichever is applicable. If further curtailments are necessary,
curtailment will commence and proceed sequentially as necessary through Service
Priority Classes VI, V, IV, III and II customers, provided that the curtailment
to each succeeding lower numbered Service Priority Class shall be at least 10%
but not more than 20% percent less than the next higher-numbered Service
Priority Class beginning with Service Priority Class VII customers.
   (C)   When Service Priority Class VII is curtailed to a level of 35% of
service obligation or base monthly consumption, any further necessary
curtailments shall be made from next succeeding Service Priority Classes,
beginning with Service Priority Class VI, until each class through Service
Priority II reaches 35% level, provided that each reduction, until a Service
Priority Class shall be curtailed to the 35% level, shall maintain the interval
of at least 10% but not more than 20% between succeeding Service Priority
Classes.
   (D)   After Service Priority Classes VII, VI, V, IV, III, and II are
curtailed to a level of not more than 35% of service obligation or base monthly
consumption, Service Priority Classes VII through II inclusive will be further
curtailed by equal percentages until 100% curtailment occurs.
   (E)   After Service Priority Classes VII, VI, V, IV, III, and II are in 100%
curtailment, curtailment shall commence in Service Priority Class I as
necessary.
(Prior Code, § 52.01) (Ord. 325, passed 2-21-1978)
§ 52.02 PEAK MANAGEMENT CREDIT.
   (A)   IMPA has adopted a peak management program for the purpose of
implementing direct load control of central air conditioners and electric water
heaters; and, to encourage participation in the peak management program, IMPA
will provide a credit against a member’s purchased power expense for each
switch installed on its customers’ appliances in the amount of $1 per month
(year round) for water heaters and $2 per month (June through September only)
for central air conditioners.
   (B)   (1)   There shall be and there is established, for the use of and the
service rendered by the Town Utility, the peak management credit described in
the appendix attached to Ord. 224-95; and
      (2)   All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are
repealed; provided however, that the peak management credit described herein
shall not be in full force and effect unless and until the same shall be
approved by the State Utility Regulatory Commission, and until such time as the
approval of the Commission shall direct.
      (3)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage; provided however, that the peak management credit described herein
shall not become effective unless approved by the State Utility Regulatory
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 52.02) (Ord. 224-95, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 52.03 DISCONNECTION AND REINSTATEMENT OF SERVICE.
   The current reconnect fee on electric will increase effective immediately to
$35 per utility for customers who have been disconnected for nonpayment of
their utilities.
(Ord. 108-21, passed 9-13-2021)
§ 52.04 MONTHLY CHARGES.
   Each user shall pay a monthly base charge in addition to the following per-
kilowatt-hour rate adopted, and including the tracking factor rate multiplied
by the total kilowatt hours. The tracking factor rate is controlled by the
wholesale electric provider and varies on a quarterly basis.
(Ord. 106-22, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 52.05 ENERGY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
   (A)   The town shall participate in the County Energy Assistance Program,
excluding the provision for placing accounts under a moratorium of
disconnection from December through March. Any account receiving energy
assistance will continue to receive a delinquent notice and follow the same
procedure guidelines as any customer in disconnect status.
   (B)   JobSource, acting as administrative agency of EAP, shall receive
notice on each transmittal form that is signed and returned by the Utility
Clerk, that the moratorium for disconnect will not apply for accounts with the
town’s electric utility.
(Ord. 109-08, passed 11-10-2008)
§ 52.06 INCENTIVES; CREDITS.
   The Council hereby adopts the local economic development rider, and such
adoption shall be effective immediately.
   (A)   This local economic development rider (“rider”) is available to
qualifying customers (as defined herein) to encourage new operations or
expansions of existing operations within the service territory of the town’s
electric utility (the “utility”).
   (B)   A QUALIFYING CUSTOMER is a new or existing non-residential customer in
the utility’s service territory that is establishing new operations or
expanding existing operations such that the new or expanded operations will
result in new or additional demand of at least one MW (1,000 kW) at one
delivery point (the “qualifying demand”), and the new or expanded operations
has involved a capital investment of at least $1,000,000 within the utility’s
service territory.
      (1)   For a qualifying customer that is expanding operations, qualifying
demand is measured from the average monthly peak demand for the 12 months
immediately preceding the effective date specified in the service application
(as defined herein). For a qualifying customer that is establishing new
operations, qualifying demand is measured from zero.
      (2)   A QUALIFYING CUSTOMER is not a customer:
         (a)    With “new” demand that results from a change in ownership of an
existing establishment without qualifying new load;
         (b)   Renewing service following interruptions such as equipment
failure, temporary plant shutdown, strike, economic conditions, or natural
disaster; or
         (c)   That has shifted its load from one operation or customer to
another within the utility’s service territory.
      (3)   The utility may determine exclusively, without recourse by any
customer, whether an event has occurred that would prevent a customer from
being a qualifying customer.
   (C)   Beginning with the effective date specified in a qualifying customer’s
service application, the utility will receive from Indiana Municipal Power
Agency (“IMPA”) a credit on the utility’s wholesale bill for the qualifying
demand of such qualifying customer.
      (1)   The utility will pass on the full amount of such credit to the
qualifying customer on each bill following the effective date specified in the
service application for a total of 60 months.
      (2)   For reference, the credit provided by IMPA and passed on to the
qualifying customer and applicable to the qualifying demand will be calculated
according to the following schedule:
 
Months 112  20%
Months 1324 15%
Months 2548 10%
Months 4960 5%
 
      (3)   In order to receive the credit as calculated above, the qualifying
customer must meet the minimum qualifying demand requirement during each month
of the incentive period (months one through 60). Failure to meet the minimum
qualifying demand requirement during a particular month will result in a credit
of zero for that particular month.
   (D)   The qualifying customer must submit a service application to the
utility specifying:
      (1)   A description of the amount and nature of the qualifying demand;
      (2)   The basis on which the qualifying customer meets the requirements
of this rider;
      (3)   The qualifying customer’s desired effective date; and
      (4)   Any other information required by the utility.
   (E)   This rider shall terminate upon the termination of IMPA’s
corresponding economic development rider, except that any qualifying customer
receiving a credit under this rider at the time of the rider’s termination may
continue to receive such credit for the remainder of the applicable incentive
period insofar as it continues to meet the requirements of this rider.
   (F)   This rider is applicable to the following rate schedules:
(Ord. 100-17, passed 6-12-2017)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 52.20 RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   There is hereby amended and established, for the use of and the
service rendered by the electric utility system for the town, the following
rates and charges based on the customer electric use for said electric utility
system.
   (B)   Each user shall pay a monthly base charge in addition to the following
per-kilowatt-hour rate adopted, and including the tracking factor rate
multiplied by the total kilowatt hours. The tracking factor rate is controlled
by the wholesale electric provider and varies on a quarterly basis.
 
                    Usage     Rate
First               3,000 kWh $0.09614
Over                3,000 kWh $0.08677
Monthly base charge           $14.30
Notes to Table:
This schedule shall be in full force and effect with respect to electric
utility use on or after July 1, 2022 that is billed in August 2022 and due in
September 2022 and for all use thereafter.
 
(Ord. 106-22, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 52.21 COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   There is hereby amended and established, for the use of and the
service rendered by the electric utility system for the town, the following
rates and charges based on the customer electric use for said electric utility
system.
   (B)   Each user shall pay a monthly base charge in addition to the following
per-kilowatt-hour rate adopted, and including the tracking factor rate
multiplied by the total kilowatt hours. The tracking factor rate is controlled
by the wholesale electric provider and varies on a quarterly basis.
 
                    Usage     Rate
First               3,000 kWh $0.09614
Over                3,000 kWh $0.08677
Monthly base charge
Single phase                  $24.65
Three phase                   $34.51
Notes to Table:
This schedule shall be in full force and effect with respect to electric
utility use on or after July 1, 2022 that is billed in August 2022 and due in
September 2022 and for all use thereafter.
 
(Ord. 106-22, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 52.22 MUNICIPAL; SECURITY LIGHTS.
   (A)   There is hereby amended and established, for the use of and the
service rendered by the electric utility system for the town, the following
rates and charges based on the customer electric use for said electric utility
system.
   (B)   Each user shall pay a monthly base charge in addition to the following
per-kilowatt-hour rate adopted, and including the tracking factor rate
multiplied by the total kilowatt hours. The tracking factor rate is controlled
by the wholesale electric provider and varies on a quarterly basis.
 
                Usage                                  Rate
Municipal       All kWh                                $0.08677
                Street lighting                        $0.08677
                Monthly base charge (except S. Lights) $13.06
Security lights Under 400 W                            $9.61
                400 W                                  $11.59
Notes to Table:
This schedule shall be in full force and effect with respect to electric
utility use on or after July 1, 2022 that is billed in August 2022 and due in
September 2022 and for all use thereafter.
 
(Ord. 106-22, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 52.23 CONNECTIONS; DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
   (A)   Overhead and underground service is available in the forms of primary,
secondary, and temporary service voltages where the utility’s electrical
facilities are installed or can be extended in accordance with local codes and
ordinances.
   (B)   The town has established the following specifications, fees, and
charges to be followed when installing overhead and underground electric
utilities to new or existing residential or business customers.
      (1)   Prior to the connection of any new overhead or underground electric
service, the responsible party will pay the town an electric service connection
fee of $250 per meter.
      (2)   Electric distribution facilities will be determined individually by
request and prepaid before installation. Construction that is in excess of 50
feet of service line will be at the total cost of the owner.
      (3)   Any cost includes cost of labor, material, and equipment necessary.
   (C)   Prior to the sale of lots, all easements and rights of way in, under,
and across said lots or subdivisions as in the town’s judgment will be properly
recorded and will cause all purchasers of lots to be cognizant thereof by
reference thereto in written agreements between the parties.
(Ord. 103-07, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 52.24 DEPOSIT.
   Every user of the utility shall pay the following sums as a deposit for
electrical service:
 
Deposit
Homeowner       All electric     $30
                No electric heat $15
                Meter            $50
Renter          All electric     $100
                No electric heat $50
Rental/contract Meter            $250
 
(Prior Code, § 52.22) (Ord. 124-83, passed 1-10-1983; Ord. 126-83, passed 1-24-
1983; Ord. 109-21, passed 9-13-2021)
§ 52.25 ANALOG METER FEE.
   The Council authorizes the Frankton Municipal Utilities (FMU) to charge
customers a flat fee of $50 per month for expense of in-person and manual-input
meter readings for customers allowed to utilize older analog meters.
(Res. 2021-104, passed 10-25-2021)
INTERCONNECTION STANDARDS
§ 52.40 APPLICATION.
   (A)   A customer desiring to interconnect renewable generation facilities
with the utility’s grid shall complete an interconnection application and
submit the application to the utility for review. After receipt of the
application, the utility shall conduct such further inspection of the renewable
generation facilities as the utility deems necessary and approve or deny the
application.
   (B)   If the application is denied, the utility shall provide a written
response to the customer explaining why the application was denied. The utility
is hereby authorized to charge a reasonable application fee to offset costs
involved with reviewing the application, inspecting the renewable generation
facilities, and otherwise ensuring compliance with this subchapter.
   (C)   If the interconnection application is approved, then the customer
agrees that no changes shall be made to the configuration of the renewable
generation facilities, as that configuration is described in the application,
and no relay or other control or protection settings specified in the
application shall be set, reset, adjusted, or tampered with except to the
extent necessary to verify that the renewable generation facilities comply with
the utility’s approved settings.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to connect or maintain
the connection of a renewable generating facility to the utility’s grid without
obtaining the utility’s approval of an interconnection application.
(Ord. 101-18, passed 7-9-2018) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.41 COMPLIANCE.
   In addition to such other requirements as the utility deems necessary, any
renewable generation facility allowed to interconnect to the utility’s grid
must comply with:
   (A)   The National Electrical Code and the National Electrical Safety Code,
as each may be revised from time to time;
   (B)   The utility’s rules and regulations and the utility’s general terms
and conditions for electric service, each as contained in the utility’s
electric tariff and each as may be revised from time to time; and
   (C)   All other applicable local, state, and federal codes and laws, as the
same may be in effect from time to time.
(Ord. 101-18, passed 7-9-2018) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.42 CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   For any approved renewable generation facilities interconnected to the
utility’s grid, the customer shall install, operate, and maintain, at the
customer’s sole cost and expense, the renewable generation facilities in
accordance with the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers’
applicable Standard for Interconnecting Distributed Resources with Electric
Power Systems, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   The customer shall be responsible for protecting, at the customer’s
sole cost and expense, the renewable generation facilities from any condition
or disturbance on the utility’s electric system including, but not limited to:
voltage sags or swells, system faults, outages, loss of a single phase of
supply, equipment failures, and lightning or switching surges.
   (C)   The customer shall operate any interconnected renewable generation
facilities in such a manner as not to cause undue fluctuations in voltage,
intermittent load characteristics, or otherwise interfere with the operation of
the utility’s electric system.
   (D)   At all times when the renewable generation facilities are being
operated in parallel with the utility’s electric system, the customer shall
operate the renewable generation facilities in a manner that no disturbance
will be produced to the service rendered by the utility to any of its other
customers or to any electric system interconnected with the utility’s electric
system.
   (E)   The customer’s control equipment for the renewable generation
facilities shall immediately, completely, and automatically disconnect and
isolate the renewable generation facilities from the utility’s electric system
in the event of a fault on the utility’s electric system, a fault on the
customer’
      (1)   The automatic disconnecting device included in such control
equipment shall not be capable of reclosing until after service is restored on
the utility’s electric system.
      (2)   Additionally, if the fault is with the customer’s renewable
generation facilities, such automatic disconnecting device shall not be
reclosed until after the fault is isolated from the customer’s renewable
generation facilities.
(Ord. 101-18, passed 7-9-2018) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.43 INSPECTIONS; EMPLOYEE ACCESS.
   (A)   Upon reasonable advance notice to the customer, the utility shall have
access to any interconnected renewable generation facilities to perform on-site
inspections to:
      (1)   Verify that the installation and operation of the renewable
generation facilities comply with the requirements of this subchapter; and
      (2)   Verify the proper installation and continuing safe operation of the
renewable generation facilities.
   (B)   The utility shall also have at all times immediate access to breakers
or any other equipment that will isolate the renewable generation facilities
from the utility’s electric system.
   (C)   The utility shall not be responsible for any costs the customer may
incur as a result of such inspection(s).
   (D)   The utility shall have the right and authority to isolate approved
interconnected renewable generation facilities at the utility’s sole discretion
if the utility believes that:
      (1)   Continued interconnection and parallel operation of the renewable
generation facilities with the utility’s electric system creates or contributes
(or will create or contribute) to a system emergency on either the utility’s or
the customer’s electric facilities;
      (2)   The renewable generation facilities are not in compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter; or
      (3)   The renewable generation facilities interfere with the operation of
the utility’s electric system. In non-emergency situations, the utility shall
give the customer reasonable notice prior to isolating the renewable generation
facilities.
(Ord. 101-18, passed 7-9-2018) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.44 INSURANCE; LIABILITY.
   (A)   The customer shall procure and keep in force, during all periods of
parallel operation of the renewable generation facilities with the utility’s
electric system, homeowners, commercial, or other insurance to protect the
interests of the utility as a named insured, with insurance carriers acceptable
to the utility, and in amounts not less than those reasonably determined by the
utility to be necessary taking into consideration the nameplate capacity,
configuration, and type of the renewable generation facilities.
   (B)   The customer shall indemnify and hold harmless the utility, the town,
its employees, representatives, agents, and subcontractors from and against all
claims, liability, damages and expenses, including attorney’s fees, based on
any injury to any person, including the loss of life, or damage to any property
including the loss of use thereof, arising out of, resulting from, or connected
with, or that may be alleged to have arisen out of, resulted from, or connected
with, an act or omission by the customer, its employees, agents,
representatives, successors or assigns in the construction, ownership,
operation or maintenance, of the customer’s renewable generation facilities.
   (C)   If the utility is required to bring an action to enforce its rights
under this section, either as a separate action or in connection with another
action, and said rights are upheld, the customer shall reimburse the utility
for all expenses, including attorney’s fees, incurred in connection with such
action.
(Ord. 101-18, passed 7-9-2018) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person or entity found to be in violation of §
52.40(D) shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $2,500 for each such
violation, plus costs. In addition to the foregoing fines and at the utility’s
sole discretion, property where a renewable generating facility is unlawfully
connected to the utility’s grid may be disconnected from the utility’s grid
until an interconnection application is approved. Every day that a violation of
§
52.40(D) occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 101-18, passed 7-9-2018)
CHAPTER 53: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Town as pollution management agency
   
53.02   Repairs; inspections
   
53.03   Water hardness
   
53.04   Cross-connections
Rates and Charges
   
53.15   Metered rates per month
   
53.16   Minimum charge per month
   
53.17   Fire protection service
   
53.18   Private sprinklers
   
53.19   Tap charge deposit; meter deposit
   
53.20   Disconnection; reinstatement of service
   
53.21   Collection of deferred payment charges
   
53.22   Temporary users
   
53.23   Bulk water fee
 
   
53.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 TOWN AS POLLUTION MANAGEMENT AGENCY.
   The town desires to be the approved, designated management agency for the
control of water pollution sources within its area of legal jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 53.01) (Res. 87-89, passed 12-14-1989)
§ 53.02 REPAIRS; INSPECTIONS.
   Any repairs needed by residents on their side of the water meter must be
inspected by an authorized employee of the town utility before it is covered
up. This is to ensure that proper parts and procedures are used in repairing
the line as not to weaken the structure. The customer is responsible for any
repairs at the yoke connection and beyond.
(Ord. 107-08, passed 9-8-2008) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.03 WATER HARDNESS.
    The level of water hardness will be kept at ten until further notice.
(Res. 04-103, passed 7-12-2004)
§ 53.04 CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical arrangement, including cross-connection
control devices not in working order, whereby the public water supply
distribution system of the town is directly connected, either continuously or
intermittently, with any secondary source of supply, sewer, drain, conduit,
pool, piping, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device that
contains (or may contain) and is capable of imparting to the public water
supply: contaminants, contaminated water, sewage, or other waste or liquid of
unknown or unsafe quality.
   (B)   No person or entity receiving water from the town’s public water
supply shall construct or permit to be constructed or maintain or permit to be
maintained any cross-connection. No interconnection shall be established
whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply
other than the regular public water supply of the town may enter the supply or
distribution system of the town unless private, auxiliary, or emergency water
supply and the method of the connection and use of such supply shall have been
approved by the town’s water utility and by the State Department of
Environmental Management in accordance with 327 I.A.C. 8-10.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the town’s water utility to cause inspections
to be made of all properties served by the town’s public water system where
cross-connections with the public water system are deemed possible. The
frequency of inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards
involved shall be established by the town’s water utility.
   (D)   Upon presentation of credentials, the agent or representative of the
town’s water utility shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable
time to examine the property served by a connection to the town’s public water
system for cross-connections. On request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of any
property so served shall furnish to said agent or representative any pertinent
information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The
refusal of access or requested pertinent information shall be deemed evidence
of the presence of cross-connections.
   (E)   The town’s water utility is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation
of this section exists and to take such other precautionary measures deemed
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination to the town’s public water
system.
      (1)   Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice is
served on the owner, lessee, or occupant of the property or premises where a
violation is found or suspected to exist.
      (2)   Water service to such property shall not be restored until the
cross-connection(s) have been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of
this section.
   (F)   If it is deemed by the town’s water utility that a cross-connection or
any emergency endangers public health, safety, or welfare and requires
immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the Clerk-
Treasurer and delivered to the affected premises, service may be immediately
discontinued. The owner, lessee, or occupant of the affected premises shall
have an opportunity for hearing within ten days of such emergency
discontinuance.
   (G)   All customers receiving water from the town’s public water supply and
using toxic or hazardous liquids; all hospitals, mortuaries, wastewater
treatment plants, laboratories, and all other users identified in 327 I.A.C. 8-
10-4(c); install and maintain a reduced pressure principal backflow preventer
in the main water line serving each building on the premises. The backflow
preventer must be installed in an easily accessible location not subject to
flooding or freezing and shall not be installed below ground level.
   (H)   In addition to the types of facilities listed in 327 I.A.C. 8-10-4(c),
the following customer facilities must install a backflow prevention device in
accordance with division (G) above:
      (1)   Frankton Elementary School, 1303 E. Clyde Street; and
      (2)   Frankton High School, 610 E. Clyde Street.
   (I)   If, in the judgement of the Superintendent of the town’s water
utility, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of
the town’s public water system, the town’s water utility shall give notice to
the affected water consumer to install such an approved device immediately. The
water consumer shall, at his or her own expense, install such an approved
device at a location and in a manner approved by the town’s water utility and
shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices as required by
the town’s water utility and in accordance with 327 I.A.C. 8-10.
   (J)   The ordinance codified herein does not superseded the State Plumbing
Code or 327 I.A.C. 8-10, but is supplementary to them.
(Ord.110-17, passed 12-11-2017) Penalty, see §
53.99
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 53.15 METERED RATES PER MONTH.
   (A)   There is hereby amended and established for the use of and the service
rendered by the water utility system of the town, the following rates and
charges based on customer water use of said water utility system.
 
                        Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
Metered Rates per Month Phase I Phase II
First 3,000 gallons     $12.46  $22.75
Next 4,000 gallons      $6.93   $12.46
Next 4,000 gallons      $6.00   $10.80
Over 15,000 gallons     $5.08   $9.14
Notes to Table:
*The schedule above shall be in full force and effect with respect to Phase
I, water utility use, effective July 1, 2024, that is billed in August 2024
and for all subsequent use through June 2025.
**The rates with respect to Phase II water utility use shall be in full force
and effect July 1, 2025 and all subsequent use thereafter.
 
(Ord. 102-24, passed 6-10-2024)
§ 53.16 MINIMUM CHARGE PER MONTH.
   Each user shall pay a minimum charge in accordance with the following
applicable size of meter installed, for which the user will be entitled to the
quantity of water set out in the schedule of rates in §
53.15.
Size of Meter Gallons Allowed Phase I Phase II
Size of Meter  Gallons Allowed Phase I Phase II
5/8 to 3/4 in. 3,000           $37.94  $68.27
1 in.          5,000           $55.37  $99.64
1 and 1/2 in.  7,000           $64.61  $116.26
2 in.          10,000          $73.84  $132.87
3 in.          16,000          $101.52 $182.69
4 in.          23,000          $129.20 $232.51
6 in.          45,500          $230.72 $415.19
8 in.          70,000          $332.24 $597.33
Notes to Table:
*The schedule above shall be in full force and effect with respect to Phase
I, water utility use, effective July 1, 2024, that is billed in August 2024
and for all subsequent use through June 2025.
**The rates with respect to Phase II water utility use shall be in full
force and effect July 1, 2025 and all subsequent use thereafter.
 
(Ord. 102-24, passed 6-10-2024)
§ 53.17 FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE.
   There is hereby amended and established for the use of and the service
rendered by the water utility system of the town, the following rates and
charges based on customer water use of said water utility system:
   (A)   Municipal hydrant rental, per annum, per hydrant: $224.26, utility
maintained; and
   (B)   Private hydrant rental, per annum, per hydrant: $224.26, utility
maintained.
(Ord. 102-24, passed 6-10-2024)
§ 53.18 PRIVATE SPRINKLERS.
   There shall be and there is established for the use of, and the service
rendered by, the water utility system of the town the following rates and
charges based upon the use of water supply for the water utility system.
 
Private Sprinklers Rate per Year
2-in. line         $22.75
4-in. line         $102.35
6-in. line         $227.45
8-in. line         $403.70
10-in. line        $631.15
 
(Prior Code, § 53.13) (Ord. 286, passed 6-12-1972; Ord. 335, passed 10-8-1979;
Ord. 336, passed 11-26-1979; Ord. 135-84, passed 9-10-1984)
§ 53.19 TAP CHARGE DEPOSIT; METER DEPOSIT.
   (A)   The water tap-on or connection fee collected for tapping the water
main shall increase as follows:
 
Water Tap-On/Connection Fees
5/8- or 3/4-in. meter tap $1,000
1 in. or larger meter tap The labor, equipment, and material costs incurred
Notes for Table:
*In no event shall the charge for such connection be less than $1,000.
**This fee shall be collected from the customer prior to installation of the
service.
 
   (B)   In accordance with I.C. 36-9-23-26, the fees and charges established
in division (A) above shall be automatically extended to cover any additional
property that is subsequently served without any additional action by this
Council, hearing, or notice.
   (C)   The Council desires to amend and increase the meter deposit fees per
meter as follows:
 
Meter Deposit Fees
Homeowner       $30
Rental/contract $100
 
(Res. 13-103, passed 5-13-2013; Ord. 109-21, passed 9-13-2021)
§ 53.20 DISCONNECTION; REINSTATEMENT OF SERVICE.
   The current reconnect fee of $25 will increase effective immediately to $35
per utility.
(Ord. 108-21, passed 9-13-2021)
§ 53.21 COLLECTION OF DEFERRED PAYMENT CHARGES.
   All bills for water service not paid within 15 days from the due date stated
in the bill shall be subject to a collection or deferred payment charge of 10%
on the first $3 and 3% on the amount over $3.
(Prior Code, § 53.16) (Ord. 286, passed 6-12-1972; Ord. 335, passed 10-8-1979;
Ord. 336, passed 11-26-1979)
§ 53.22 TEMPORARY USERS.
   The Waterworks Superintendent shall estimate the quantity of water to be
consumed by temporary users, such as contractors and circuses. The
Superintendent may require any temporary user to prepay a charge based on the
estimation of the quantity of water used.
(Prior Code, § 53.17) (Ord. 286, passed 6-12-1972; Ord. 335, passed 10-8-1979;
Ord. 336, passed 11-26-1979)
§ 53.23 BULK WATER FEE.
   There is hereby amended and established for the use of and the service
rendered by the water utility system of the town, the following rates and
charges based on customer water use of said water utility system.
 
First 3,000 gallons or less   $65
Any amount over 3,000 gallons Figured at the residential water rate plus sales
                              tax
Notes to Table:
Remaining gallons shall follow the rate charts (§§ 53.15 and 53.16)
 
(Prior Code, § 53.18) (Res. 92-134, passed 7-13-1992; Ord. 102-24, passed 6-10-
2024)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Penalties for noncompliance with §
53.02 will be enforced at $100 per instance by the Council, payable at Town
Hall.
(Ord. 107-08, passed 9-8-2008)
CHAPTER 54: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
54.001   Definitions
   
54.002   Compliance
   
54.003   Annexation not required for service
   
54.004   Destroying or tampering with municipal sewage works
   
54.005   Collection of unpaid sewage liens
   
54.006   Existing sewer line maintenance
Sewer Use Requirements
   
54.020   Regulation of discharges
   
54.021   Capacity required for new connections
   
54.022   Privies, septic tanks, and cesspools
   
54.023   Owner required to install suitable toilet facilities
   
54.024   Private sewage disposal systems
Building Sewers and Connections
   
54.035   Permit required
   
54.036   Classes of permits; fees
   
54.037   Costs to be borne by owner
   
54.038   Separate sewer required for every building; exception
   
54.039   Use of old building sewers
   
54.040   Materials and specifications
   
54.041   Inspections; supervision of connections
   
54.042   Excavations; barricades and lights
Discharges into Public Sewers
   
54.055   Prohibited discharges
   
54.056   Restricted discharges; subject to Council review
   
54.057   Council action upon improper discharge
   
54.058   Pretreatment; control facilities
   
54.059   Control manholes
   
54.060   Measurements and tests
   
54.061   Special agreements
   
54.062   Treatment of unpolluted and industrial cooling water
   
54.063   Users to provide information; determination of charges
   
54.064   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors
   
54.065   Accidental discharges
Rates and Charges
   
54.080   Charges established; user classes
   
54.081   Sewer rates; monthly usage
   
54.082   Determination of use
   
54.083   Patron not a user of city water
   
54.085   Where city water and other water used
   
54.085   Multiple users of single meters
   
54.086   Mobile homes, apartments, and the like
   
54.087   Use in excess of 15,000 gallons
   
54.088   Wastewater credits
   
54.089   Adjustments for fire protection
   
54.090   Charges based on volume, strength, and character
   
54.091   Testing standards; surcharge determination
   
54.092   Billing; collection
   
54.093   Cost analysis studies provided
   
54.094   Cost reductions to sewage works
   
54.095   Rates effective; other charges
Administration and Enforcement
   
54.110   Power to enforce bylaws and regulations
   
54.111   Inspections; liability; right of entry
   
54.112   Appeal procedure
 
   
54.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 54.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMMONIA or NH3-N. The same as ammonia nitrogen measured as nitrogen. The
laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth
in “Standard Methods” as defined below.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). Of sewage, sewage effluent, polluted
waters, or industrial wastes shall mean the quantity of dissolved oxygen in
milligrams per liter required during stabilization of the decomposable organic
matter by aerobic biochemical action under standard laboratory procedures for
five days at 20°C (68°F). The laboratory determinations shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in “Standard Methods”.
   BUILDING OR HOUSE DRAIN. The lowest horizontal piping of building drainage
system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to a point approximately five feet
outside the foundation wall of the building.
      (1)   BUILDING DRAIN, SANITARY. A building drain which conveys sanitary
or industrial sewage only.
      (2)   BUILDING DRAIN, STORM. A building drain which conveys storm water
or other clean water drainage, but no wastewater.
   BUILDING OR HOUSE LATERAL SEWER OR HOUSE CONNECTIONS. The extension from the
building drain to the sewerage system or other place of disposal.
      (1)   BUILDING SEWER, SANITARY. A building sewer which conveys sanitary
or industrial sewage only.
      (2)   BUILDING SEWER, STORM. A building sewer which conveys storm water
or other clean water drainage, but no wastewater.
   CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. Five-day measure at pollutant
parameters carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). Of sewage, sewage effluent, polluted waters,
or industrial wastes is a measure of the oxygen equivalent of that portion of
organic matter in a sample which is susceptible to oxidation by a strong
chemical oxidant. The laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in “Standard Methods”.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES
permit if the treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants and in fact
does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.
      (1)   The term SUBSTANTIAL DEGREE is not subject to precise definition,
but generally contemplates removals in the order of 80% or greater. Minor
incidental removals in the order of 10% to 30% are not considered substantial.
      (2)   Examples of the additional pollutants which may be considered
COMPATIBLE include:
         (a)   Chemical oxygen demand;
         (b)   Total organic carbon;
         (c)   Phosphorus and phosphorus compounds;
         (d)   Nitrogen and nitrogen compounds; or
         (e)   Fats, oils, and greases of animal or vegetable origin (except as
prohibited where these materials would interfere with the operation of the
treatment works).
   COUNCIL. The Town Council of the town or any duly authorized officials or
boards acting on its behalf.
   DEBT SERVICE COSTS. The average annual principal and interest payments on
all proposed revenue bonds or other long-term capital debt.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EXCESSIVE STRENGTH SURCHARGE. An additional charge which is billed to users
for treating sewage wastes with an average strength in excess of normal
domestic sewage.
   FECAL COLIFORM. Any of a number of organisms common to the intestinal tract
of man and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pollution.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment facility
approved by the town.
   GARBAGE. Any solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, or dispensing of
food and from handling, storage, or sale of produce.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant which is not defined as a compatible
pollutant, including nonbiodegradable dissolved solids, and further defined in
40 C.F.R. part 403.
   IDEM. Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
      (1)   Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substances or form of energy
discharged or permitted to flow or escape from an industrial, manufacturing,
commercial, or business process or from the development, recovery, or
processing of any natural resource carried on by a person, and shall further
mean any waste from an industrial sewer.
      (2)   The wastewater discharges from industrial, trade, or business
processes as distinct from employee wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences.
   INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from the ground through such means as, but not limited to:
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. INFILTRATION does
not include and is distinguished from inflow.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both infiltration and
inflow without distinguishing the source.
   INFLOW. The water discharged into a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to: roof leader, cellar, yard
and area drains, foundation drains, unpolluted cooling water discharges, drains
from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross- connections from storm
sewers, combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff, street-
wash waters, or drainage. INFLOW does not include, and is distinguishable from
infiltration.
   INSPECTOR. The person or persona duly authorized by the town through its
Council to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and their
connection to the public sewer system.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTOR. A contributor which:
      (1)   Has a flow of more than 25,000 gallons per average workday;
      (2)   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in §
307(a) of the Federal Act or state statutes and rules;
      (3)   Has a flow greater than 5% of flow carried by the municipal system
receiving the waste; or
      (4)   Is found by the town, state control agency, or the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) to have significant impact, either
singly or in connection with other contributing industries, on the wastewater
treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system’s effluent quality, or air
emissions generated by the system.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   NPDES PERMIT. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit setting
forth conditions for the discharge of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants to the navigable waters of the United States pursuant to § 402 of
Pub. Law No. 95-217.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse,
pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. As follows.
      (1)   For the purpose of determining surcharges, NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE
shall mean wastewater or sewage having an average daily concentration as
follows:
         (a)   SS not more than 174 mg/l;
         (b)   BOD not more than 148 mg/l; or
         (c)   Ammonia-nitrogen not more than 40 mg/l.
      (2)   As defined by origin, wastewaters from segregated domestic and/or
sanitary conveniences as distinct from industrial processes.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. All costs, direct and indirect, necessary
to provide adequate wastewater collection, transport, and treatment on a
continuing basis and produce discharges to receiving waters that conform with
all related federal, state, and local requirements. These costs include
replacement.
   OTHER SERVICE CHARGES. Tap charges, connection charges, area charges, and
other identifiable charges other than excessive strength surcharges.
   pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
   PERSON.
      (1)   Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, partnership,
copartnership, joint stock company, trust, estate, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency, the state, the United States, or
other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns;
      (2)   Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity; and
      (3)   The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular
shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
   PHOSPHORUS. The chemical element phosphorus, total. The laboratory
determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in
“Standard Methods”.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POW. The reduction or alteration
can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, process
changes, or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(d); and
shall include all applicable rules and regulations contained in the code of
Federal Regulations as published in the Federal Register, under § 307 of Pub.
Law No. 95-217, under 40 C.F.R. part 403 pursuant to the Act, and amendments.
   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned by public authority.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is owned and controlled by the public authority
and will consist of the following increments.
      (1)   COLLECTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewaters from individual point-source discharges.
      (2)   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
      (3)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment facility.
      (4)   PUMPING STATION. A station positioned in the public sewer system at
which wastewater is pumped to a higher level.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. The expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sanitary and industrial wastes and to
which storm, surface, and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. The combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions
(including polluted cooling water). The two most common types of sewage are as
follows.
      (1)   INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE. A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes
discharged from any industrial establishment and resulting from any trade or
process carried on in that establishment (this shall include the wastes from
pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water).
      (2)   SANITARY SEWAGE. The combination of liquid and water-carried wastes
discharged from toilet and other sanitary pumping facilities.
   SEWAGE WORKS. The structures, equipment, and processes to collect,
transport, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent
and accumulated residual solids.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SEWER USE REGULATIONS. Regulates the use of public and private sewers.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than five minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
of flow during normal operation and which adversely affects the sewage works.
   STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition,
at the time of analysis of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater” prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer for conveying water, ground water, or unpolluted water
from any source and to which sanitary and/or industrial wastes are not
intentionally admitted.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the municipal sewage works of the
town, or his or her authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids which either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquid and which are removable by
laboratory filtration. Their concentration shall be expressed in milligrams per
liter. Quantitative determination shall be made in accordance with procedures
set forth in “Standard Methods”.
   TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
   TOWN. The town acting by and through the Council.
   TOXIC AMOUNT. Concentrations of any pollutant or combination of pollutants
which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause adverse
effects such as cancer, genetic mutations, and physiological manifestations, as
defined in standards issued pursuant to the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§
1251 through 1387 (Pub. Law No. 95-217).
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to, or better than, the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USER CHARGES. Charges levied on users of the wastewater treatment works for
the cost of operation and maintenance of such works pursuant to § 204(b) of
Pub. Law No. 92-500.
   USER CLASS. The division of wastewater treatment customers by source,
function, waste characteristics, and process or discharge similarities (for
example, residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, and governmental
in the user charge system).
      (1)   COMMERCIAL USER. Any establishment involved in a commercial
enterprise, business, or service, which based on a determination by the town,
discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences.
      (2)   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Any federal, state, or local governmental user
of the wastewater treatment works.
      (3)   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any manufacturing or processing facility that
discharges industrial waste to a wastewater treatment works.
      (4)   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Any establishment involved in a social,
charitable, religious, and/or educational function, which based on a
determination by the town, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or
wastes from sanitary conveniences.
      (5)   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment works whose premises or
building is used primarily as a residence for one or more persons, including
all dwelling units and the like.
   VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER. The material in the sewage solids transformed to
gases or vapors when heated to 550°C for 15 to 20 minutes.
   WASTEWATER. Water in which sewage has been discharged.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
(Prior Code, § 54.001) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989; Ord. 182-89, passed 2-
27-1989)
§ 54.002 COMPLIANCE.
   All provisions of this chapter and limits set herein shall comply with any
applicable state and/or federal requirements now, or projected to be, in
effect.
(Prior Code, § 54.002) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.003 ANNEXATION NOT REQUIRED FOR SERVICE.
   It is not necessary for an area to be annexed to the town to receive sewage
treatment services from the town sanitary sewage system.
(Prior Code, § 54.003) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.004 DESTROYING OR TAMPERING WITH MUNICIPAL SEWAGE WORKS.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest.
(Prior Code, § 54.004) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.005 COLLECTION OF UNPAID SEWAGE LIENS.
   (A)   The town is authorized to employ a collection agency to collect unpaid
sewage liens due and owing to the town.
   (B)   Any administrative costs required to collect the unpaid sewage liens
shall be added to the lien.
(Prior Code, § 54.005) (Ord. 186-89, passed 10-9-1989)
§ 54.006 EXISTING SEWER LINE MAINTENANCE.
   The following procedure will apply upon receiving a work order notifying the
town of a problem with any sewer line.
   (A)   Upon obtaining a signed contract from the customer, as described
herein, the town agrees to dig the approximate area to search out the cause of
the problem and, if possible, correct it to the best of its ability.
   (B)   Upon signing the contract developed by the town and as amended from
time to time, the customer gives the town the right of access to his or her
property for work needed to correct the problem and agrees to pay any costs
found to be the customer’s responsibility as described herein.
      (1)   If the cause of the problem or repair required is found to be
attributable to the repair of the private sewer lateral connection between the
foundation wall of the customer’s structure and the town’s sewer main/trunk,
then the customer shall be responsible for the expense of labor and equipment
used to correct the problem.
      (2)   If the cause of the problem or repair required is found to be
attributable to the repair of the town’s sewer main/trunk, then the town shall
bear the expense of the repair.
(Ord. 102-12, passed 4-9-2012)
SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 54.020 REGULATION OF DISCHARGES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any human excrement,
garbage, or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sanitary
sewer, either directly or indirectly, storm water, surface water, ground water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted water, or
unpolluted industrial water.
   (C)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, cooling water, unpolluted water, or unpolluted industrial process
water may be admitted to storm sewers which have adequate capacity for their
accommodation. No person shall use such sewers, however, without the specific
permission of the town.
   (D)   No person shall place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner, on public or private property within the jurisdiction of the
town, any wastewater or other polluted water except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter and the NPDES
permit.
   (E)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural
outlet any wastewater or other polluted water except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter and the NPDES
permit.
(Prior Code, § 54.020) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.021 CAPACITY REQUIRED FOR NEW CONNECTIONS.
   No new connection shall be made unless there is capacity available to all
downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains, and the sewage treatment plant,
including capacity for BOD and SS.
(Prior Code, § 54.021) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.022 PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS, AND CESSPOOLS.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Prior Code, § 54.022) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.023 OWNER REQUIRED TO INSTALL SUITABLE TOILET FACILITIES.
   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for such an
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the town
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located a public sanitary sewer of the town is required at his or her expense
to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that
the public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line.
(Prior Code, § 54.023) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.024 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of §
54.023, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of $600 shall be paid to the town
at the time the application is filed.
   (B)   A permit for private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction
and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the work is ready for final inspection before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made within 72 hours of the receipt of notice
by the Superintendent.
   (C)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Board of
Health and/or IDEM. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system which does not meet ISBH and/or IDEM requirements and guidelines. No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   (D)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system as provided in division (C) above, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter,
and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities
shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
   (E)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the town.
   (F)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to the sewer within 90 days, and the private sewage disposal system
shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
   (G)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
(Prior Code, § 54.024) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989; Ord. 102-21, passed 6-
11-2001) Penalty, see §
54.999
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 54.035 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 54.035) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.036 CLASSES OF PERMITS; FEES.
   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
      (1)   For residential and commercial service; and
      (2)   For service to establishments producing material wastes.
   (B)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application
on a special form furnished by the town.
      (1)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the Inspector.
      (2)   A permit and inspection fee of $600 for a residential or commercial
building permit and $200 for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid
to the Clerk-Treasurer at the time the application is filed.
(Prior Code, § 54.036) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989; Ord. 102-21, passed 6-
11-2001)
§ 54.037 COSTS TO BE BORNE BY OWNER.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the town
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 54.037) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.038 SEPARATE SEWER REQUIRED FOR EVERY BUILDING; EXCEPTION.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior
lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court yard, or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 54.038) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.039 USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the Inspector, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 54.039) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.040 MATERIALS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a
building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
and jointly testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the town.
      (2)   In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM,
WPCP, and Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (C)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, basement drains,
sump pumps, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of
surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in
turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (D)   (1)   The connection of a building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the town or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9.
      (2)   All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Superintendent before installation.
(Prior Code, § 54.040) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.041 INSPECTIONS; SUPERVISION OF CONNECTIONS.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Inspector when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The construction shall be made under the supervision of the Inspector or his or
her representative.
(Prior Code, § 54.041) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.042 EXCAVATIONS; BARRICADES AND LIGHTS.
   All excavations for building sewer installation must be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town.
(Prior Code, § 54.042) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
DISCHARGES INTO PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 54.055 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas;
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment,
and personnel of the sewage works, or that interferes with any treatment
process;
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to: ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch, manure, hair and fleshings, entrails,
paper, dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like, either whole or ground by
garbage grinders; or
   (E)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process; constitute a hazard to humans or
animals; create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater works;
or to exceed the limitations set forth in the applicable Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or other pretreatment standards or regulations issued by
USEPA or the IDEM. A toxic pollutant identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 through 1387, as
amended.
(Prior Code, § 54.055) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.056 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES; SUBJECT TO COUNCIL REVIEW.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, permit to be
deposited, or discharged in any manner whatsoever, any substance into a sewer
at a point different than the proposed sewer connection to the sanitary sewer
system.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the described
substances in division (D) below, materials, or wastes, if it appears likely in
the opinion of the Council that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance.
   (C)   In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Council will give consideration to the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.
   (D)   The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F or 65°C;
      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F or 0° and
65°C;
      (3)   Any garbage which has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 horsepower
(0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Council;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   (a)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc,
and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
         (b)   Wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such
degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such
materials.
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Council as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage
to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Council in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 8.0;
      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert SS such as, but not limited to:
fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime residues; or of dissolved solids such
as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate;
         (b)   Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions;
         (c)   Unusual SS, CBOD, BOD, ammonia, ammonia-nitrogen, phosphorus, or
chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on
the sewage treatment works; and/or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs as defined herein.
      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which:
         (a)   Are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage
treatment processes employed; or
         (b)   Are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(Prior Code, § 54.056) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.057 COUNCIL ACTION UPON IMPROPER DISCHARGE.
   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to
the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in §
54.056 and which, in the judgment of the Council, may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Council may:
   (A)   Require new industries or industries with significant increase in
discharges to submit information on wastewater characteristics and obtain prior
approval for discharges;
   (B)   Reject the wastes in whole or in part for any reason deemed
appropriate by the town;
   (C)   Require pretreatment of such wastes to within the limits of normal
sewage as defined;
   (D)   Require control of flow equalization of such wastes so as to avoid any
slug loads or excessive loads that may be harmful to the treatment works; and/
or
   (E)   Require payment of a surcharge on any excessive flows or loadings
discharged to the treatment works to cover the additional costs of having
capacity for and treating such wastes.
(Prior Code, § 54.057) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.058 PRETREATMENT; CONTROL FACILITIES.
   (A)   If the Council permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Council and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
   (B)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
   (C)   Pretreatment of industrial wastes from major contributing industries
prior to discharge to the treatment works is required and is subject to the
Rules and Regulations adopted by the USEPA (40 C.F.R. part 403) and “Guidelines
Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants” (40 C.F.R. part 136)
in addition to any more stringent requirements established by town and
subsequent state or federal guidelines and rules and regulations.
   (D)   Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
pretreatment of control facilities shall be submitted for approval to the town,
and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until approval in
writing is granted.
      (1)   Where such facilities are provided, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operating order by the owner at his
or her expense and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the town to
determine that such facilities are being operated in conformance with
applicable federal, state, and local laws and permits.
      (2)   The owner shall maintain operating records of the influent and
effluent to show the performance of the treatment facilities and for comparison
against town monitoring records.
(Prior Code, § 54.058) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.059 CONTROL MANHOLES.
   (A)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner or any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer, to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes.
   (B)   Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent.
      (1)   The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense
and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.
      (2)   Agents of the town, the State Water Pollution Control Agencies, and
the USEPA shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing.
(Prior Code, § 54.059) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.060 MEASUREMENTS AND TESTS.
   (A)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of water
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater,” published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at the control manhole, except for application for NPDES permits and
report thereof such shall be conducted in accordance with rules and regulations
adopted by the USEPA, 40 C.F.R. part 136 and any subsequent revisions subject
to approval by the town.
   (B)   In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
   (C)   (1)   Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.
      (2)   The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and SS analyses are
obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined
from periodic grab samples.
(Prior Code, § 54.060) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.061 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the town and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the town for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern
at such rates as are compatible with §
54.081.
(Prior Code, § 54.061) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.062 TREATMENT OF UNPOLLUTED AND INDUSTRIAL COOLING WATER.
   (A)   Unpolluted water from air conditioners, cooling, condensing tems, or
swimming pools shall be discharged to a storm sewer where it is available or to
a combined sewer approved by the town; where a storm sewer is not available,
discharge may be to a natural outlet approved by the town and by the state.
   (B)   Industrial cooling water, which may be polluted with insoluble oils or
grease or suspended solids, shall be pretreated for removal of pollutants, and
the resultant clear water shall be discharged in accordance with division (A)
above.
(Prior Code, § 54.062) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.063 USERS TO PROVIDE INFORMATION; DETERMINATION OF CHARGES.
   (A)   The town may require users of the treatment works, other than
residential users, to supply pertinent information on wastewater flow
characteristics. Such measurements, tests, and analyses shall be made at the
user’s expense. If made by the town, an appropriate charge may be assessed to
the user at the option of the town.
   (B)   The strength of wastewaters shall be determined, for periodic
establishment of charges provided for in the sewer rate regulations, from
samplings taken at the aforementioned structure at any period of time and of
such duration and in such manner as the town may elect, or at any place
mutually agreed upon between the user and the town. Appropriate charges for
sampling and analysis may be assessed to the user at the option of the town.
The results of routine sampling and analysis by the user may also be used for
determination of charges after verification by the town.
(Prior Code, § 54.063) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.064 GREASE, OIL, AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the town, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, or
other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors or traps will not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
      (1)   All interceptors or traps shall be of a type and capacity approved
by the town and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning
and inspection. They shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperatures and shall be of
substantial construction, and be gas tight and equipped with easily removable
covers.
      (2)   Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors or traps
shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously
efficient operation at all times.
   (B)   Specifications for grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be in
accordance with §§ 711, 712, 713, of the “State Plumbing Rules”, 1981 edition,
(660 I.A.C. 9) originally published as (4 IR 2398), which identifies, amends,
and incorporates therein the “Uniform Plumbing Code”, 1979 Edition. Copies of
the aforementioned code and rules, regulations, and codes adopted herein by
reference are on file as required by law in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 54.064) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.065 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   Users of the treatment works shall immediately notify the town of any
unusual flows or wastes that are discharged accidentally or otherwise to the
sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 54.065) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989) Penalty, see §
54.999
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 54.080 CHARGES ESTABLISHED; USER CLASSES.
   Every person whose premises are served by the sewage works shall be charged
for the service provided. These charges are established each user class, as
defined, in order that the sewage works shall recover, from each user and user
class, revenue which is proportional to his or her use of treatment works in
terms of volume and load. User charges are levied defray the cost of operation
and maintenance (including replacement) of treatment works. User charges shall
be uniform in magnitude within a user’s class.
   (A)   User charges are subject to the rules and regulations adopted by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency published in the Federal Register on
February 17, 1984 (40 C.F.R. § 35.2140). Replacement costs, which are recovered
through the system of user charges, shall be based upon the expected useful
life of the sewage works equipment.
   (B)   Class I. The various classes of users of the treatment works for the
purpose of this subchapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   Residential;
      (2)   Commercial;
      (3)   Governmental;
      (4)   Institutional; and
      (5)   Industrial.
(Prior Code, § 54.075) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.081 SEWER RATES; MONTHLY USAGE.
   (A)   For the use of the service rendered by sewage works, rates and charges
shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of real
estate, or building that is connected with the town sanitary system or
otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water, or other
liquids, either directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewage system of the
town.
      (1)   Such rates and charges include user charges, debt service costs,
excessive strength surcharges, and other service charges, which rates and
charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in an amount
determined in divisions (A)(4), (A)(6), and (B) below.
      (2)   The sewage rates and charges shall be based on the quantity of
water used on or in the property or premises subject to such rates and charges
as the same is measured by the water meter there in use plus a base charge
based on the size of water meter installed except as herein otherwise provided.
      (3)   For the purpose of billing and collecting the charges for sewage
service, the water meters shall be read monthly and the users shall be billed
each month (or period equaling a month).
      (4)   For residential users of the sewage works that are unmetered water
users or accurate meter readings are not available, the monthly charge shall be
determined by single-family dwelling units except as herein provided. Sewage
service bills shall be rendered once each month (or period equaling a month).
The schedule on which the rates and charges will be determined is as follows:
 
Monthly Rate
User                                     User Charge Debt Service Total
Residential; single-family dwelling unit $13.91      $10.04       $23.95
 
      (5)   For the service rendered to the town, the town shall be subject to
the same rates and charges established in harmony therewith.
      (6)   In order to recover the cost of monitoring industrial wastes, the
town shall charge the user not less than $50 per sampling event plus the actual
cost for collecting and analyzing the sample(s) as determined by the town or by
an independent laboratory. This charge will be reviewed on the same basis as
all other rates and charges in this chapter.
      (7)   The Council shall not grant free service to any lot, parcel of real
estate, or building which is connected to the town sanitary system or otherwise
discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water, or other liquids, either
directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewage system of the town.
(Prior Code, § 54.076)
   (B)   (1)   Effective as of July 1, 2025, there is hereby amended and
established, for the use of and the service rendered by the wastewater utility
system for the town, the following rates and charges based on the customer
water use for said wastewater utility system.
 
Metered Rates Per Month Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
   Per 1,000 gallons    $13.8128
 
      (2)   In addition to the metered rate set forth in division (B)(1) above,
each user shall pay a minimum charge in accordance with the following
applicable size of meter installed. Multiple units or facilities on one sewer
tap shall pay a base rate per unit.
Size of Meter Minimum Monthly Rate
Size of Meter Minimum Monthly Rate
5/8 in.       $27.78
1 in.         $73.82
1 and 1/2 in. $91.92
2 in.         $109.86
3 in.         $160.36
4 in.         $218.31
6 in.         $319.44
 
      (3)   The rates in this division (B) shall be in full force and effect
with respect to wastewater utility use on or after July 1, 2025 that is billed
in August 2025 and for all subsequent use thereafter.
(Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989; Ord. 101-24, passed 6-10-2024)
§ 54.082 DETERMINATION OF USE.
   The quantity of water discharged into the sanitary sewage system and
obtained from sources other than the utility which serves the town shall be
determined by the town in such manner as the town shall reasonably elect, and
the sewage service shall be billed at the appropriate rate in §
54.081 except as hereinafter provided in this section. The town may make proper
allowances in determining the sewage bill for quantities of water shown on the
records to be consumed, but which are also shown to the satisfaction of the
town that such quantities do not enter the sanitary sewage system.
(Prior Code, § 54.077) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.083 PATRON NOT A USER OF CITY WATER.
   (A)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate, or building other than a
single-family dwelling unit discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes,
water, or other liquids into the town’s sanitary sewage system, either directly
or indirectly, is not a user of water supplied by the water utility serving the
town, and the water used thereon or therein is not measured by a water meter or
is measured by a water meter not acceptable to the town, then the amount of
water used shall be otherwise measured or determined by the town.
   (B)   In order to ascertain the rate or charge provided in this chapter, the
owner or other interested party shall, at their expense, install and maintain
meters, weirs, volumetric measuring devices, or any adequate and approved
method of measurement acceptable to the town for the determination of sewage
discharge.
(Prior Code, § 54.078) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.084 WHERE CITY WATER AND OTHER WATER USED.
   (A)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate, or building discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water, or other liquids into the town’s
sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, is a user of water
supplied by the water utility serving the town, and in addition, is a user of
water from another source which is not measured by a water meter or is measured
by a meter not acceptable to the town, then the amount of water used shall be
otherwise measured or determined by the town.
   (B)   In order to ascertain the rates or charges, the owner or other
interested parties shall, at their expense, install and maintain meters, weirs,
volumetric measuring devices, or any adequate and approved method of
measurement acceptable to the town for the determination of sewage discharge.
(Prior Code, § 54.079) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.085 MULTIPLE USERS OF SINGLE METERS.
   In the event two or more residential lots, parcels of real estate, or
buildings discharging sanitary sewage, water, or other liquids into the town’s
sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, are users of water and
the quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then in each such
case, for billing purposes, the quantity of water used shall be averaged for
each user and the base charge and the flow rates and charges shall apply to
each of the number of residential lots, parcels of real estate, or buildings
served through the single water meter.
(Prior Code, § 54.080) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.086 MOBILE HOMES, APARTMENTS, AND THE LIKE.
   In the event two or more dwelling units such as mobile homes, apartments, or
housekeeping rooms discharging sanitary sewage, water, or other liquids into
the town’s sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, are users of
water and the quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then in
such case, billing shall be for a single service in the manner set out
elsewhere herein, except that an additional units charge shall be added thereto
in the amount of $6.75 per month per dwelling unit over one served through the
single water meter. In the case of mobile home courts, the number of dwelling
units shall be computed and interpreted as the total number of mobile home
spaces available for rent plus any other dwelling units served through a meter.
A DWELLING UNIT shall be interpreted as a room or rooms or any other space or
spaces in which cooking facilities are provided.
(Prior Code, § 54.081) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.087 USE IN EXCESS OF 15,000 GALLONS.
   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate, or building discharging sanitary
sewage, industrial wastes, water, or other liquids into the town’s sanitary
sewage system, either directly or indirectly, and uses water in excess of
15,000 gallons per month, and it can be shown to the satisfaction of the town
that a portion of water as measured by the water meter or meters does not and
cannot enter the sanitary sewage system, then the owner or other interested
party shall, at his or her expense, install and maintain meters, weirs,
volumetric measuring devices, or any adequate and approved method of
measurement acceptable to the town for the determination of sewage discharge.
(Prior Code, § 54.082) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.088 WASTEWATER CREDITS.
   (A)   In order that domestic and residential users of sewage services shall
not be penalized for the sprinkling of lawns during the months of July, August,
and September, the billing for sewage service for residences and/or domestic
users for the months of July, August, and September shall be based upon the
greater of the water usage for the previous months of January, February, and
March or 3,000 gallons per month.
      (1)   In the event the water usage for the months of July, August, and
September is less than the greater of the water usage of the previous months of
January, February, and March or 3,000 gallons per month, then the billing for
sewage service shall be computed on the actual water used in the month for
which the sewage service bill is being rendered.
      (2)   Domestic and/or residential sewage service, as applicable to the
sprinkling rate, shall apply to each lot, parcel of real estate, or building
which is occupied and used as a residence. The sprinkling rate shall not apply
to any premises which are partially or wholly used for industrial or commercial
purposes.
      (3)   In the event a portion of such premises shall be used for
commercial or industrial purposes, the owner shall have the privilege of
separating the water service so that the residential portion of the premises is
served through a separate meter, and in such case, the water usage as
registered by the water meter serving such portion of the premises used for
residential purposes would qualify under the sprinkling rate.
(Prior Code, § 54.083)
   (B)   Wastewater credit will no longer be issued for excessive water use for
any reason other than a water leak registered on a customer’s meter for up to a
maximum period of three months.
   (C)   Due to rust disturbance and stress on water lines, fire hydrants will
no longer be accessed to fill swimming pools.
(Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989; Res. 21-100, passed 2-8-2021) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.089 ADJUSTMENTS FOR FIRE PROTECTION.
   Where a metered water supply is used for fire protection as well as for
other uses, the town may, in its discretion, make adjustments in the minimum
charge and in the use charge as may be equitable.
(Prior Code, § 54.084) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.090 CHARGES BASED ON VOLUME, STRENGTH, AND CHARACTER.
   In order that the rates and charges may be justly and equitably adjusted to
the service rendered to users, the town shall base it charges not only on the
volume, but also on strength and character of the stronger-than-normal domestic
sewage and wastes which it is required to treat and dispose of. The town shall
require the user to determine the strength or content of all sewage and wastes
discharged, either directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewage system in
such manner, by such method, and at such times as the town may deem practicable
in light of the conditions and attending circumstances of the case. In order to
determine the proper change, the user shall furnish a central sampling point
available to the town at all times.
(Prior Code, § 54.085) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.091 TESTING STANDARDS; SURCHARGE DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Normal sewage domestic waste strength should not exceed ammonia-
nitrogen in excess of 40 mg/l of fluid, suspended solids in excess of 174 mg/
l of fluid, or biochemical oxygen demand in excess of 148 mg/l of fluid.
Additional charges for treating stronger-than-normal domestic waste shall be
made on the following basis.
      (1)   Rate surcharge based upon suspended solids. There shall be an
additional charge of cents per pound of suspended solids for suspended solids
received in excess of 174 mg/l of fluid.
      (2)   Rate surcharge based upon BOD. There shall be an additional charge
of cents per pound of biochemical oxygen demand for BOD received in excess of
148 mg/l of fluid.
      (3)   Rate surcharge based upon ammonia-nitrogen. There shall be an
additional charge of cents per pound of ammonia-nitrogen received in excess of
40 mg/l of fluid.
   (B)   The determination of suspended solids, five-day carbonaceous
biochemical oxygen demand, biochemical oxygen demand, ammonia-nitrogen,
phosphorus, ammonia, and COD contained in the waste shall be in accordance with
the latest copy of “Standard Methods for the Elimination of Water, Sewage and
Industrial Wastes” as written by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation;
and in accordance with “Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of
Pollutants”, 40 C.F.R. part 136.
(Prior Code, § 54.086) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.092 BILLING; COLLECTION.
   Such rates and charges shall be prepared, billed, and collected by the town
in the manner provided by law and ordinance.
   (A)   The rates and charges for all users shall be prepared and billed
monthly. Annually, each user shall be notified of the portion of the total
billing charged for operation, maintenance, and replacement for that user
during the preceding year.
   (B)   (1)   The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant or tenants
occupying the properties served unless otherwise requested in writing by the
owner, but such billing shall in no way relieve the owner from the liability in
the event payment is not made as herein required.
      (2)   The owners or properties served, which are occupied by a tenant or
tenants, shall have the right to examine the collection records of the town for
the purpose of determining whether bills have been paid by such tenant or
tenants, provided that such examination shall be made at the office at which
such records are kept and during the hours that such office is open for
business.
   (C)   As is provided by statute, all rates and charges not paid when due are
declared to be delinquent and a penalty of 10% of the amount of the rates and
charges shall thereupon attach thereto. The time at which such rates or charges
are due is now fixed at 15 days after the date of the mailing of the bill.
(Prior Code, § 54.087) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.093 COST ANALYSIS STUDIES PROVIDED.
   (A)   Each ten years, and in order to ensure rates and charges for sewage
services may remain fair and equitable and in proportion to the cost of
providing services to the various users of user classes, the town shall cause a
study to be made including, but not limited to:
      (1)   An analysis of the costs associated with the treatment of excessive
strength effluents from industrial users, volume and delivery flow rate
characteristics attributed to the various users or user classes; and
      (2)   The financial position of the sewage works and the adequacy of its
revenue to provide reasonable funds for the operation and maintenance,
replacement, debt service requirements, and capital improvements to the
wastewater treatment systems.
   (B)   These studies shall be conducted by officers or employees of the town,
or by a firm of certified public accountants, or a firm of consulting
engineers, which firm shall have expertise in such studies, or by such
combination of officers, employees, certified public accountants, or engineers
as the town shall determine to be best under the circumstances.
   (C)   Within a reasonable time following completion of such a study, the
Council shall consider the risk, benefit and costs involved in any required
maintenance, capital improvements, or replacement of facilities and, according
to the discretion of the elected officials of the town, revise and adjust the
rates and charges to maintain the proportionality and sufficiency of the rates.
(Ord. 102-12, passed 4-9-2012)
§ 54.094 COST REDUCTIONS TO SEWAGE WORKS.
   The Council is further authorized to enter into special rate contracts with
customers of the sewage works where clearly defined reduction in cost to the
sewage works can be determined, and such reduction shall be limited to such
reduced costs.
(Prior Code, § 54.089) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.095 RATES EFFECTIVE; OTHER CHARGES.
   (A)   The rates and charges as herein set forth shall become effective on
the first full billing period occurring after the adoption this subchapter.
   (B)   Other service charges, including but not limited to connection
charges, area charges, tap charges, permit fees, and inspection fees, shall be
as required in the sewer use regulations.
(Prior Code, § 54.090) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 54.110 POWER TO ENFORCE BYLAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The town shall make and enforce such bylaws and regulations as may be
deemed necessary for the safe, economical, and efficient management of the
town’s sewage system, pumping stations, and sewage treatment works; for the
construction and use of house sewers and connections to the sewage treatment
works and the sewage collection system; and for the regulation, collection, and
rebating and refunding of such rates and charges.
   (B)   The town is authorized to prohibit dumping of wastes into the town’s
sewage system which, in its discretion, are deemed harmful to the operation of
the sewage treatment works of the town; or to require methods affecting
pretreatment of the wastes to comply with the pretreatment standards included
in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to
the sewage works or as contained in the EPA General Pretreat Regulations, 40
C.F.R. part 403, and any amendments thereto or the Town Pretreatment Program
Plan.
(Prior Code, § 54.100) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.111 INSPECTIONS; LIABILITY; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   (1)   The Superintendent, Inspector, and other duly-authorized
employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   The Superintendent or his or her representative shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil,
refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or
facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) above, the Superintendent or duly-authorized employees of the
town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
town employees, and the town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage
to its property by town employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
§
54.059.
   (C)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the town
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the town holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purpose of, but not limited to: inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Prior Code, § 54.101) (Ord. 181-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.112 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The rules and regulations promulgated by the town after approval by
the Council shall, among other things, provide an appeal procedure whereby a
user shall have the right to appeal a decision of the administrator of the
sewage system and user charge system to the Council, and that any decision
concerning the sewage system or user charges of the Council may be appealed to
the Circuit Court of the county under the appeal procedures provided for in the
State Administrative Adjudication Act.
   (B)   The rules and regulations promulgated by the town after approval by
the Council shall, among other things, provide for an appeal procedure whereby
a user shall have the right to appeal a decision of the administrator of the
sewage system and user charge system to the Council, and that any decision
concerning the sewage system or user charges of the Council may be appealed to
the Circuit Court of the county under the appeal procedures provided for in the
State Administrative Adjudication Act.
(Prior Code, § 54.102) (Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 54.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter shall
be served by the town with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the town for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the
town by reason of such violation.
(Prior Code, § 54.998)
   (C)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in divisions (A) and (B) above shall be guilty of a violation and
on conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $2,500 for each
violation. Each day in which any violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 54.999)
(Ord. 182-89, passed 2-27-1992)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   RECREATIONAL AND ALTERNATIVE VEHICLES
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Traffic-control devices
Administration and Enforcement
   
70.15   Duty of Town Marshal
   
70.16   Records of traffic violations
   
70.17   Police to investigate accidents; studies
   
70.18   Accident reports
   
70.19   Annual traffic safety report
   
70.20   Traffic Engineer
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this traffic code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. As follows:
      (1)   A vehicle located on public property illegally;
      (2)   A vehicle left on public property continuously without being moved
for three days;
      (3)   A vehicle located on public property in such a manner as to
constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or vehicle
traffic on a public right-of-way;
      (4)   A vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control of that property for more than 48 hours;
      (5)   A vehicle from which there has been removed the engine,
transmission, or differential; or that is otherwise partially dismantled or
inoperable and left on public property;
      (6)   A vehicle that has been removed by a towing service or a public
agency upon request of an officer enforcing a statute or ordinance other than
this traffic code, if the vehicle once impounded is not claimed or redeemed by
the owner or his or her agent within 15 days of its removal; or
      (7)   A vehicle that is six or more model-years old and mechanically
inoperable and left on private property continuously in a location visible from
public property for more than 30 days.
   ALLEY. A street intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or
buildings in urban districts and not intended for the use of through vehicular
traffic.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. As follows:
      (1)   Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles, and such
ambulances as are operated by or for hospitals or health and hospital
corporations pursuant to I.C. 16-31-1 et seq.;
      (2)   Vehicles other than ambulances which are owned by persons, firms,
or corporations other than hospitals, are used in emergency service, and are
designated as emergency vehicles by the state’s Department of Highways; and
      (3)   Ambulances which are owned by persons, firms, or corporations other
than hospitals and which are approved by the state’s Emergency Medical Services
Commission.
   AUTOMOBILE SCRAPYARD. A business organized for the purpose of scrap metal
processing, automobile wrecking, or operating a junkyard.
   BICYCLE. Any foot-propelled vehicle, irrespective of the number of wheels in
contact with the ground.
   BUREAU. The state’s Bureau of Motor Vehicles acting directly or through its
duly authorized officers and agents.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
50% or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 500 feet or more is
occupied by buildings in use for business.
   COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of the Bureau.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway; and
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   HOLIDAY. Any day designated by the Council under §
35.14 of this code.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles;
or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at
any other angle may come in conflict.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersection
highway shall be regarded as a separate INTERSECTION. In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways of such highway shall be regarded as a separate
INTERSECTION.
   LOADING ZONE. A space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the
loading or unloading of passengers or property.
   OFFICER. As follows:
      (1)   A regular member of the State Police;
      (2)   A regular member of the Town Police Department;
      (3)   The Town Marshal or any Town Marshal Deputy;
      (4)   A regular member of the county’s police force; or
      (5)   Any individual of an agency designated to enforce this title.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE. All signs, signals, markings, and devices
(including railroad advance warning signs) not inconsistent with this chapter,
placed, or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device not inconsistent with this title
whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
   OWNER. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or in the event a
vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee. In the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled
to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be
deemed the OWNER for the purpose of this act.
   PARKING. To stop or stand a vehicle except for a short period of time to
load or unload merchandise or passengers.
   PARKING SPACE. A designated portion of the surface of a highway of
sufficient length and depth to accommodate a vehicle of reasonable dimensions.
The designated portion shall be indicated and marked off as required by state
law.
   PARTS. All components of a vehicle which, as assembled, do not constitute a
complete vehicle.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, or
corporation.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. All property other than public property.
   PUBLIC AGENCY. The Police Department. The Police Department is given the
responsibility for removal, storage, and disposal of abandoned vehicles.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. A public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park, or
other state, county, or municipal property.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway
not comprising a business district, when the property on such highway for a
distance of 500 feet or more is, in the main, improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the highway.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
   SCRAP METAL PROCESSOR. An establishment having facilities for processing
iron, steel, or nonferrous scrap and whose principal product is scrap iron and
scrap steel or nonferrous scrap for sale for remelting purposes.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a highway between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property line intended for use by
pedestrians.
   STAND or STANDING. To halt a vehicle except for a short period of time to
receive or discharge merchandise or passengers.
   STOP or STOPPING.
      (1)   When required, means complete cessation of movement.
      (2)   When prohibited, means any halting (even momentarily) of a vehicle,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of an officer or traffic-control device or signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   TOWING SERVICE. A business that engages in moving or removing disabled
vehicles and, once removed, to store or impound vehicles.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, street cars, vehicles, and
other conveyances, (either singly or together) while using any highway for
purposes of travel.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, § 70.01)
Statutory reference:
   State law definitions, see I.C. 9-13-2
§ 70.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The Town Marshal may temporarily erect official traffic-control
devices when required by an emergency. The Town Marshal shall advise the
Council of this action at its next regular meeting.
(Prior Code, § 70.20)
   (B)   (1)   Crosswalks and safety zones. The Town Marshal may designate and
maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the
roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in the opinion of the Council,
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at other
places as it may deem necessary.
      (2)   Traffic lanes. The Town Marshal may mark traffic lanes upon the
roadway of any street or highway.
(Prior Code, § 70.21)
(Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.15 DUTY OF TOWN MARSHAL.
   The Town Marshal and Police Department shall enforce this title and I.C. 9-
13-1-1 et seq., make arrests for traffic violations, investigate accidents, and
cooperate with town officials in the administration of traffic laws and in
developing methods to improve traffic conditions.
(Prior Code, § 70.35) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981)
§ 70.16 RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Police Department shall keep a record of all violations of this
title and I.C. 9-13-1-1 et seq., of which any person has been charged, together
with a record of the final disposition of all the alleged offenses. The record
shall indicate all types of violations and the total of each. The records shall
be maintained for at least five years from the date of the alleged violation.
   (B)   All forms for records and notices of violations shall be serially
numbered. Each record and notice shall be available for public inspection. A
written record shall be available for public inspection showing the disposal of
all the forms for each month and year.
(Prior Code, § 70.36) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981)
§ 70.17 POLICE TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS; STUDIES.
   (A)   The Town Marshal shall investigate traffic accidents and arrest and
assist in the prosecution of persons charged with violations of this title or
I.C. 9-13-1-1 et seq.
   (B)   The Police Department shall conduct studies of all locations where
accidents are numerous and recommend remedial measures to the Council.
(Prior Code, § 70.37) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981)
§ 70.18 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident shall file a report
of the accident or a copy of any report required to be filed with the State
Police Department with the Town Police Department in accordance with I.C. 9-26-
1-7, as amended.
   (B)   Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report
of the accident, and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of
the accident capable of making the report, that occupant shall file the report.
If there was no other occupant and if the driver is not the owner of the
vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in the accident shall, within
five days after the accident, make the report not made by the driver.
   (C)   The Town Police Department shall maintain a suitable system of filing
traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be
filed alphabetically by location. The reports shall be for the confidential use
of the Police Department, except for the uses permitted under I.C. 9-26-2-3 and
I.C. 9-26-3-4.
(Prior Code, § 70.38) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981)
§ 70.19 ANNUAL TRAFFIC SAFETY REPORT.
   (A)   The Police Department shall file an annual traffic safety report with
the Council.
   (B)   The report shall indicate:
      (1)   The number of traffic accidents;
      (2)   The number of persons killed;
      (3)   The number of persons injured;
      (4)   The number of traffic accidents investigated;
      (5)   Any recommendations for remedial measures;
      (6)   Any plans for future traffic safety activities; and
      (7)   Any other pertinent information.
(Prior Code, § 71.39) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981)
§ 70.20 TRAFFIC ENGINEER.
   The Town Marshal shall serve as the Town Traffic Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 70.40) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this traffic code for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any portion of the traffic schedules provided
in
Chapter 74 (as amended from time to time) or the parking schedules provided in
Chapter 75 (as amended from time to time), whether or not the same constitute
moving violations, shall be fined in accordance with the code and the following
schedule, in addition to court costs and/or ordinance violation costs
prescribed under I.C. 33-37-4-2, which are established by the Indiana
Legislature and are subject to change:
Violations as Provided in Chapter 74 and Chapter 75
Violations as Provided in Chapter 74 and Chapter 75
1-5 mph over the speed limit                  $16.50
6-10 mph over the speed limit                 $26.50
11-15 mph over the speed limit                $41.50
16-20 mph over the speed limit                $61.50
21-25 mph over the speed limit                $81.50
26 mph over the speed limit (or greater)*     $150
Disregarding stop sign                        $36.50
Operating a snowmobile on a prohibited street $36.50
Parking                                       $36.50
Notes to Table:
*Must see judge
 
   (C)   The general and specific penalty sections of the code shall remain in
effect, except where a specific penalty set forth herein conflicts with the
specific or general penalty sections of the code, in which case the penalty set
forth above amends such conflicting specific or general penalty section of the
code.
   (D)   The town hereby authorizes the execution of an interlocal cooperation
agreement with the Town of Edgewood for the use of the Edgewood Traffic
Violations Bureau and Edgewood Town Court to hear and dispose of the violations
of the
Chapter 74 (Traffic Schedules) and
Chapter 75 (Parking Schedules) of the code to the extent allowed by law.
      (1)   The Edgewood Town Judge shall hear such traffic cases, which
constitute ordinance violations of the ordinances codified in this traffic
code, in all instances allowed by law in accordance with I.C. 34-28-5 et seq.,
and payment of fines may be accepted by the Clerk of the Edgewood Traffic
Violations Bureau in satisfaction thereof.
         (a)   Any person charged with an offense for which payment of a fine
may be made to the Edgewood Traffic Violations Bureau shall have the option of
paying the fine within the time specified in the ordinance violation notice at
the Edgewood Traffic Violations Bureau on entering an admission and on waiving
appearance in court; or may have the option of a trial as authorized by law.
         (b)   The payment of a fine to the Edgewood Traffic Violations Bureau
shall be deemed an acknowledgment of the alleged violation.
         (c)   A person who enters into, and pays the fee for, a deferred
prosecution shall not be deemed to have admitted commission of the violation
for which the deferral was extended.
      (2)   The following duties are imposed on the Edgewood Traffic Violations
Bureau in reference to traffic offenses:
         (a)   It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts, and represent
in court those violators as are permitted and desire to admit violations and
waive court appearances.
         (b)   It shall ascertain which persons wish to be heard in court and
notify the arresting officer and witnesses, if any, to be present.
         (c)   It shall keep an easily accessible record of all violations of
which each person has been guilty during the preceding 12 months, whether the
guilt was established in court or in the Edgewood Traffic Violations Bureau.
      (3)   The Edgewood Traffic Violations Bureau shall follow the procedure
as may be prescribed by the traffic ordinances of the Town of Frankton or as
may be required by any laws of the state.
      (4)   The Edgewood Traffic Violations Bureau shall determine, in
conjunction with the attorney for the Town of Frankton, those persons to whom
deferral shall be offered and shall notify such persons of their eligibility
and the procedures for entering into a deferral contract. It shall also receive
deferred prosecution payments, provide receipts to those making payments, and
account for the funds in compliance with rules established by the Clerk-
Treasurer of Frankton and state law.
      (5)   The Edgewood Traffic Violations Bureau shall keep records and
submit summarized monthly reports to the judge for the Town of Edgewood and the
Clerk-Treasurer for the Town of Frankton of all notices issued and arrests made
for violations of the traffic laws and ordinances in the Town of Frankton and
of all the fines collected by the Edgewood Traffic Violations Bureau or the
Court for violations of the Town of Frankton’s code, and the status of every
case of violation of the provisions of the laws and ordinances. The records
shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of
each. The records shall be public records.
      (6)   There is hereby created a non-reverting fund for the purpose of
receiving fines imposed for town traffic ordinance violations issued pursuant
to the ordinance codified herein and
Chapters 74 and
75 of the code.
         (a)   The non-reverting fund hereby created shall be designated as the
Traffic Ordinance Violations Fund.
         (b)   Expenditures from the Traffic Ordinance Violations Fund shall be
limited to expenses for the Town of Frankton Police Department, Edgewood
Traffic Violations Bureau and Edgewood Town Court, the Town of Frankton
Ordinance Violations Bureau, the Town of Frankton legal expenses, and other
expenses required or allowed by state law.
   (E)   Except for offenses or violations under I.C. 9-24-6 involving the
operation of commercial motor vehicles, the town hereby establishes a deferral
program for deferring actions in accordance with I.C. 34-28-5-1, as follows:
      (1)   Actions may be deferred pursuant to this section if:
         (a)   The defendant in the action agrees to the conditions of a
deferral program offered by the attorney for the town;
         (b)   The defendant in the action agrees to pay the Clerk of the
Edgewood Town Court an initial user’s fee of $52 and a monthly user’s fee of
$10 for each month the person remains in the deferral program in addition to
penalty costs;
         (c)   The terms of the agreement are recorded in an instrument signed
by the defendant and the attorney for the Town of Frankton;
         (d)   The defendant agrees to pay a fee of $70 to the Clerk of the
Edgewood Town Court if the action involves a moving traffic offense as
described in I.C. 9-13-2-110; and
         (e)   The agreement is filed with the Edgewood Town Court.
      (2)   When a defendant complies with the terms of the agreement filed
with the Edgewood Town Court pursuant to this section, the attorney for the
Town of Frankton shall request the Court dismiss the action, and upon receipt
of such a request for dismissal of an action, the Court shall dismiss the
action. An action so dismissed may not be refiled.
(Ord. 101-15, passed 2-9-2015; Ord. 104-15, passed 6-8-2015)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Police and Fire Departments to regulate traffic in emergency
   
71.02   Non-motorized traffic
   
71.03   Use of coasters, roller skates, and similar devices
   
71.04   Public employees to obey traffic rules
   
71.05   Authorized emergency vehicles
Loads and Equipment
   
71.20   Containment of loads
   
71.21   Road weight limits
Processions and Assemblages
   
71.35   Parades and the like; permit
   
71.36   Funeral processions identified
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS TO REGULATE TRAFFIC IN EMERGENCY.
   Fire Department officers and members of the Police Department may direct
traffic in the immediate vicinity of a fire as conditions may require,
notwithstanding any provision in this code.
(Prior Code, § 71.01) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981)
§ 71.02 NON-MOTORIZED TRAFFIC.
   Every person propelling a pushcart, riding an animal, or driving any animal
drawing a vehicle upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter applicable to the driver of a vehicle except those provisions of this
chapter which by their very nature can have no application.
(Prior Code, § 71.02) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981)
§ 71.03 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk. When so crossing, the person shall be granted all the
rights and be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 71.03) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.04 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC RULES.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles
owned or operated by the United States, this state, or any political
subdivision of the state, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth
in this chapter or in I.C. 9-13-1-1 et seq. The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually
engaged in work in a street but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when
traveling to or from work.
(Prior Code, § 71.04) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981)
§ 71.05 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm may
perform any activity authorized under I.C. 9-21-1-8(b).
   (B)   The foregoing provision shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provision protect the driver from the consequences of
his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(Prior Code, § 71.05) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981)
LOADS AND EQUIPMENT
§ 71.20 CONTAINMENT OF LOADS.
   No vehicle operator shall permit any material being transported by that
vehicle to fall, leak, or be discharged onto any highway or onto any property
abutting any highway. The operator shall remove any material which falls from
the vehicle and shall notify the Town Marshal immediately if any danger to the
public exists due to the discharge of this material. The operator shall be
liable for any damage caused by this discharge.
(Prior Code, § 71.20) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.21 ROAD WEIGHT LIMITS.
   (A)   No truck or other commercial vehicle with a gross weight of 10,000
pounds or more shall be permitted on any town highway, street, or alley except:
      (1)   Local delivery trucks; or
      (2)   Owners of trucks or commercial vehicles who live within the town
limits, and whose business is outside the town limits, and then only for
ingress or egress.
   (B)   The Town Street Department shall post signs giving notice of this
section on all access streets and roads to designate routes for trucks or
commercial vehicles with a gross weight of over 10,000 pounds.
(Prior Code, § 71.21) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981; Ord. 122-82, passed 11-
22-1982) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Designated truck routes, see
Ch. 74, Sch. IV
Statutory reference:
   Size and weight restrictions, see I.C. 9-20-3 and 9-20-4
PROCESSIONS AND ASSEMBLAGES
§ 71.35 PARADES AND THE LIKE; PERMIT.
   (A)   The Council, in accordance with I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(3), regulates
processions or assemblages on the highways. No parade, procession, or
assemblage shall take place on any highway until the Town Marshal has issued a
permit for the event.
   (B)   The Town Marshal may require the applicant for a permit to observe
restrictions for public safety as a condition for the exercise of the permit,
but has no discretion to deny any application for a permit.
   (C)   This section does not apply to any funeral procession or parade
composed of members of the U.S. Armed Forces, state military forces, Police
Department, or the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 71.22) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.36 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS IDENTIFIED.
   The Town Marshal shall approve the types of pennants, flags, windshield
stickers, or other identifying insignias to be displayed upon, or other methods
to be employed to identify, vehicles in funeral processions.
(Prior Code, § 71.23) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Parking regulations adopted
   
72.02   Traffic obstruction prohibited
   
72.03   Alleys
   
72.04   Parking for vehicle sale or repairs prohibited
   
72.05   Obedience to parking signs or markings
   
72.06   Truck and bus parking
   
72.07   Parking off roadway
   
72.08   Parking in business district
   
72.09   Loading zones
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 PARKING REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The Council, in accordance with I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(1), adopts the following
regulations governing the standing or parking of vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 72.01) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981)
§ 72.02 TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle upon a highway so that less than ten
feet of the width of the roadway is available for the free movement of
vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 72.02)
   (B)   (1)   Nothing is to be placed in a town street or alley which may even
temporarily impeded traffic at any time through any street or alley. Parking
shall be permitted along streets in designated marked spaces. Temporary parking
for the purpose of making deliveries, loading, or unloading shall be permitted
along streets to the extent it does not impeded traffic or cause a safety
hazard.
      (2)   Parking shall be prohibited upon any unimproved public right-of-way
owned by the town and upon all easements owned by the town except as expressly
permitted by the ordinance codified herein, a written agreement with the town,
or as required for town or utility operations.
(Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981; Ord. 192-89, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 108-17,
passed 11-13-2017) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 ALLEYS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any alley longer
than necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers or merchandise.
   (B)   No person shall stand or park any vehicle in any alley so that less
than eight feet of width is available for the free movement of traffic. If less
than eight feet of width is available, the operator of the parked or standing
vehicle shall move it immediately upon the entrance of another vehicle into the
alley.
(Prior Code, § 72.03) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 PARKING FOR VEHICLE SALE OR REPAIRS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of
displaying the vehicle for sale. No person shall park a vehicle upon any
roadway for the principal purpose of repairing the vehicle except to the extent
required to make emergency repairs.
(Prior Code, § 72.04) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 OBEDIENCE TO PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS.
   No person shall park or stand a vehicle in any location which has been
officially signed or marked for parking on a highway or in a municipal parking
lot except within any markings and at the orientation indicated by the signs or
markings.
(Prior Code, § 72.05) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 TRUCK AND BUS PARKING.
   (A)   Residential district. No owner or operator of any truck, bus, trailer,
semitrailer, pole trailer, as defined by state law; or recreational vehicle,
tractor, or trailer, as defined by state law; which is taller, wider, or longer
than a conventional station wagon or pickup truck shall park that vehicle upon
any highway or alley within any residential district. These vehicles may park
for the time required to make deliveries or pick up merchandise if that parking
does not interrupt the regular traffic flow and does not create a safety
hazard.
   (B)   Business district. No vehicle listed in division (A) above shall park
upon any highway or alley within any business district longer than one hour.
These vehicles may park for the time required to make deliveries or pick up
merchandise in the regular course of business if that parking does not
interrupt the regular traffic flow and does not create a safety hazard.
(Prior Code, § 72.06) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 PARKING OFF ROADWAY.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on a highway other than on the
roadway or paved shoulder.
(Prior Code, § 72.07) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 PARKING IN BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   No person shall park a vehicle for more than 12 consecutive hours in any
business district.
(Prior Code, § 72.08) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.09 LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any place marked as
a loading zone for any purpose other than for the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers or materials during the times when the regulations
applicable to that curb loading zone are effective.
   (B)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle during those times in
division (A) above for more than three minutes to load or unload passengers or
for more than 20 minutes to load or unload materials.
(Prior Code, § 72.09) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
72.99
Cross-reference:
   Loading zones designated, see
Ch. 75, Sch. II
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Failure to comply with §
72.02(B) will result in the following actions.
      (1)   The town will issue a notification in writing to move the vehicle
within 24 hours.
      (2)   The town will implement at $25 fine to the vehicle owner if the
vehicle is not moved within 24 hours of notification.
      (3)   The town will tow, or cause to be towed, the vehicle at the owner’s
expense if it is not moved within 48 hours of the notification.
      (4)    In the event a vehicle is impeding access by a utility vehicle or
emergency vehicle, the vehicle must be moved immediately upon written or verbal
notice or it will be towed at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. 108-17, passed 11-13-2017)
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL AND ALTERNATIVE VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
73.01   Bicycle regulation
   
73.02   Bicycle dealers
   
73.03   Traffic regulations applicable to bicycle operation
   
73.04   Parking bicycle
   
73.05   Sidewalks
   
73.06   Roadways and bicycle paths
   
73.07   Attachment to poles
Snowmobiles
   
73.20   Operating rules
   
73.21   Recklessness prohibited
   
73.22   Schools, parks, and cemeteries
   
73.23   Operating hours
   
73.24   Minimum age
Alternative Vehicles
   
73.35   Definition
   
73.36   Operator requirements; minimum age
   
73.37   Operating hours
   
73.38   Required equipment; passenger restrictions
   
73.39   Inspections
   
73.40   Insurance
   
73.41   Parking
 
   
73.99   Penalty
BICYCLES
§ 73.01 BICYCLE REGULATION.
   (A)   The Council, in accordance with I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(9), regulates the
operation of bicycles and requires their registration and licensing. These
regulations shall apply to the operation of any bicycle on any highway or path
reserved for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   No person having custody of or responsibility for any child shall
permit that child to violate any provision of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 73.01) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.02 BICYCLE DEALERS.
   Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or secondhand
bicycles shall maintain a record of every bicycle purchased or sold, giving the
name and address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a
description of such bicycle by name or make, and the frame number of the
bicycle.
(Prior Code, § 73.02) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.03 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO BICYCLE OPERATION.
   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall have all the rights
and all the duties under the provisions of this subchapter and I.C. 9-21-11
applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations of I.C.
9-21 to provisions of I.C. 9-21-11 which by their nature can have no
application.
(Prior Code, § 73.03) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 PARKING BICYCLE.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon any highway other than upon the roadway
against the curb, upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, against a
building, or at the curb in any manner to afford the least obstruction to
pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 73.04) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
   (B)   Any person operating a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall yield the right-
of-way to any pedestrian and give an audible signal before passing the
pedestrian.
(Prior Code, § 73.05) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.06 ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing
a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Every person operating a bicycle shall use any designated bicycle path
which has been provided adjacent to a roadway, and not the roadway itself.
(Prior Code, § 73.06) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 ATTACHMENT TO POLES.
   No bicycle operator shall park a bicycle near or secure it to any publicly-
owned pole or post for more than 12 consecutive hours. No bicycle operator
shall park a bicycle near or secure it to any publicly-owned pole or post if an
official traffic-control device or signal prohibits parking or securing
bicycles at that location. No bicycle operator shall secure any bicycle to any
tree, fire hydrant, police or fire call box, or so that it impedes the normal
and reasonable movement of pedestrians or other traffic.
(Prior Code, § 73.07) (Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see §
73.99
SNOWMOBILES
§ 73.20 OPERATING RULES.
   Every snowmobile operator shall stop at all intersecting streets and keep
the vehicle headlight on at all times.
(Prior Code, § 73.20) (Ord. 337-1979, passed 11-26-1979) Penalty, see §
73.99
Cross-reference:
   Locations in which snowmobiles are prohibited, see
Ch. 74, Sch. III
§ 73.21 RECKLESSNESS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall operate any snowmobile in a reckless or unsafe manner.
(Prior Code, § 73.21) (Ord. 337-1979, passed 11-26-1979) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.22 SCHOOLS, PARKS, AND CEMETERIES.
   No person shall operate any snowmobile on any property owned by the high
school, elementary school, or in any cemetery or town property.
(Prior Code, § 73.22) (Ord. 337-1979, passed 11-26-1979) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.23 OPERATING HOURS.
   No person shall operate any snowmobile between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. except during emergencies as proclaimed by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 73.23) (Ord. 337-1979, passed 11-26-1979) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.24 MINIMUM AGE.
   No person under 14 years of age shall operate a snowmobile without the
immediate supervision of a parent or legal guardian except on property owned by
that person’s parents or legal guardian.
(Prior Code, § 73.24) (Ord. 337-1979, passed 11-26-1979) Penalty, see §
73.99
ALTERNATIVE VEHICLES
§ 73.35 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, ALTERNATE TRANSPORTATION is described as
any motorized vehicle not requiring to be plated, above 50cc, including but not
limited to electric vehicles, golf carts, and utility carts; excluding quad
runners and dirt bikes, which are off-road vehicles only.
(Ord. 102-08, passed 3-10-2008; Ord. 104-09, passed 9-14-2009)
§ 73.36 OPERATOR REQUIREMENTS; MINIMUM AGE.
   Any operator of alternative transportation must be a licensed driver under
state law, have such license on his or her person at all times, and comply with
local and state ordinance and laws.
(Ord. 102-08, passed 3-10-2008; Ord. 104-09, passed 9-14-2009) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.37 OPERATING HOURS.
   Operation of such alternative transportation shall be during daylight hours
only, with the exception that units equipped with head lights, tail lights, and
turn signals may be driven after dark on the town streets. Operation is not
permitted on county roads or state highways.
(Ord. 102-08, passed 3-10-2008: Ord. 104-09, passed 9-14-2009) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.38 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT; PASSENGER RESTRICTIONS.
   Any alternative transportation requires rearview mirrors and a slow-moving
vehicle sign. Restrict limit of passengers to the number of seats on each unit
(example: bench seats, two passengers only, and the like).
(Ord. 102-08, passed 3-10-2008) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.39 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Any alternative transportation vehicle or device must be inspected on
an annual basis. The inspection cost shall be $25 per unit to be payable to the
Town of Frankton, 108 E. Sigler Street, Frankton, IN 46044, and the inspection
shall be conducted by the Police Department. The purpose of the inspection will
be to determine if the unit is safe and in compliance with all related rules
and regulations.
   (B)   The above described inspections will be conducted by appointments
scheduled in advance by the owner. For appointments, contact the Police
Department at (765) 754-8833.
   (C)   The owner must renew the inspection on or before May 1 annually by
scheduling an appointment as described above. The Clerk’s office will maintain
records of inspection.
   (D)   The Police Department reserves the right to remove any uninspected or
unsafe alternative transportation unit.
   (E)   The Town Clerk or a designated representative will affix an inspection
sticker to the front driver’s side of each unit after a satisfactory inspection
has been completed, along with proof of insurance to be filed and recorded.
   (F)   If an alternative transportation vehicle is sold, the inspection
sticker is void. The new owner must have the vehicle inspected and follow all
rules and regulations as described above.
(Ord. 102-08, passed 3-10-2008; Ord. 100-13, passed 3-8-2013) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.40 INSURANCE.
   Each alternative transportation unit must have liability insurance, and
verification of that insurance must be presented at the time of the above
referenced inspection and carried while operating such vehicle.
(Ord. 102-08, passed 3-10-2008) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.41 PARKING.
   Parking will be parallel to, and on the right in, the same direction as the
traffic is designed to flow.
(Ord. 102-08, passed 3-10-2008)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating §§
71.01 through 71.07 may have his or her bicycle impounded for not more than 30
days. Any person violating §§
71.01 through 71.07 shall be fined $5.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
71.20 through
71.24 shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than $100.
(Prior Code, § 73.99)
   (D)   Any violators of §§
73.35 through
73.41 will be cited for local ordinance violation and fined $50 for the first
offense, $75 for the second offense, and $100 for the third offense. Additional
offenses will result in suspension of use on public roadways for the remainder
of the year.
(Ord. 337-1979, passed 11-26-1979; Ord. 104-81, passed 5-21-1981; Ord. 102-08,
passed 3-10-2008)
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
      
II.   Stop intersections
      
III.   Snowmobiles prohibited
      
IV.   Truck routes designated
      
V.   One-way streets
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   The Council, in accordance with I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(5) and (11), and I.C. 9-21-
5-6, having determined on the basis of engineering and traffic investigations
that the maximum speed permitted by state statute is greater than reasonable
and safe under the conditions found to exist on certain highways or parts of
highways, determines and declares the following reasonable and safe maximum
speed limits on the highways listed below.
Speed Limits
Street Location Speed Limit Time Ord./Res. No. Date Passed
Speed Limits
Street        Location      Speed Limit Time          Ord./Res. No. Date Passed
Any alley     —           15 mph      All times     104-81        5-21-1981
              Eighth Street             When children
Clyde Street  to Lafayette  20 mph      present       104-81        5-21-1981
              Avenue
              Clyde Street              When children
Eighth Street to Plum       20 mph      present       104-81        5-21-1981
              Street
              Clyde Street
Eleventh      two blocks to 20 mph      —           Res. 00-102   8-14-2000
Street        Jefferson
              Street
Fourth Street South from    20 mph      All times     177-88        8-8-1988
              Clyde Street
Jefferson     Eighth Street
Street        and Lafayette 20 mph      All times     104-19        8-12-2019
              Avenue
Lafayette     Jefferson                 When children
Avenue        Street to     20 mph      present       104-81        5-21-1981
              Clyde Street
Lafayette     Plum Street
Avenue        and Sheriden  20 mph      All times     104-19        8-12-2019
              Street
              Fourth Street             When children
Plum Street   to Eighth     20 mph      present       104-81        5-21-1981
              Street
Saddle Lane   All           15 mph      All times     104-81        5-21-1981
Short Street  All           15 mph      All times     104-81        5-21-1981
Washing       Sigler Street
Street        to Pipe Creek 30 mph      —           106-02        9-9-2002
              Bridge
Washington    Sigler Street
Avenue        to Pipe Creek 20 mph      All times     104-81        5-21-1981
              Bridge
Winding Way   All           15 mph      All times     104-81        5-21-1981
 
(Prior Code, Chapter 74 Schedule I) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   The Council, acting within the reasonable exercise of its police power under
I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(7), designates the following intersections as stop
intersections. All vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to these
intersections as indicated by the signs posted upon or at these intersections
to give notice of this traffic regulation.
Stop Intersections
Intersection Location Stop Ord./Res. No. Date Passed
Stop Intersections
Intersection      Location               Stop      Ord./Res. No. Date Passed
Bond Street       Maple Street           Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Bond Street       Walnut Street          Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Center Street     Plum Street            One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(southbound)
Church Street     Maple Street           Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Church Street     Walnut Street          Multi-way 104-81        5-21-1981
Clyde Street      Eighth Street          Multi-way 104-81        5-21-1981
Clyde Street      Lafayette Avenue       Multi-way 104-81        5-21-1981
Clyde Street      Washington Avenue      One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(westbound)
Delaware Street   Maple Street           One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(northbound)
Delaware Street   Walnut Street          Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Eighth Street     Lafayette Avenue       One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(southbound)
Eighth Street     Race Street            Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Factory Street    Eleventh Street        One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Factory Street    Fletcher Street        One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(eastbound)
Factory Street    Park Street            Multi-way 104-81        5-21-1981
Factory Street    Winding Way            One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(eastbound)
Fifth Street      Clyde Street           One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(southbound)
Fifth Street      Maple Street           One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Fifth Street      Plum Street            One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(northbound)
Fifth Street      Walnut Street          Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Fletcher Street   Clyde Street           One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(southbound)
Fletcher Street   Maple Street           One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(northbound)
Fourth Street     Clyde Street           One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(northbound)
Fourth Street     Lafayette Avenue       One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(southbound)
Fourth Street     Maple Street           One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Fourth Street     Mulberry Street        Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Fourth Street     Walnut Street          Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Grant Street      Eighth Street          One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(westbound)
Grant Street      Eleventh Street        One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(eastbound)
Harrison Street   Eighth Street          One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(westbound)
Harrison Street   Eleventh Street        One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(eastbound)
Harrison Street   Ninth Street           Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
High Street       Maple Street           One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(northbound)
High Street       Walnut Street          Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Jackson Street    Mill Street            Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Jackson Street    Sigler Street          Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Jefferson Street  Eighth Street          Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Jefferson Street  Eleventh Street        One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(eastbound)
Jefferson Street  Lafayette Avenue       One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(westbound)
Jefferson Street  Ninth Street           Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
John Street       Walnut Street          Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Lafayette Avenue  Sheridan               One-way   228-95        7-18-1995
(southbound)
Lafayette Avenue  Co. Rd. 500 West       —       101-97        7-14-1997
Lafayette Avenue  Plum Street and John   Multi-way 104-81        5-21-1981
                  Street
Lincoln Street    Mill Street            One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(northbound)
Locust Street     Delaware Street        One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Locust Street     Fletcher Street        Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Locust Street     Park Street            Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Lon Jean Drive    Woodworth              One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(westbound)
Madison Street    Eighth Street          Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Madison Street    Eleventh Street        One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(eastbound)
Madison Street    Lafayette Avenue       One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(westbound)
Madison Street    Ninth Street           Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Maple Street      Eighth Street          Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Maple Street      Eleventh Street        Multi-way 104-81        5-21-1981
Maple Street      John Street            Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Maple Street      Park Street            Multi-way 104-81        5-21-1981
Maple Street      Washington Avenue      One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(westbound)
Maple Street      Woodworth              One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(westbound)
Mill Street       Washington Avenue      One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(eastbound)
Mulberry Street   Fifth Street           One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(eastbound)
Mulberry Street   Lafayette Avenue       One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(westbound)
Ninth Street      Clyde Street           One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(northbound)
Ninth Street      Grant Street           One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(southbound)
Ninth Street      Jefferson Street       Four-way  238-96        10-16-1996
Park Street       Sigler Street          Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Park Street       Locust Street          —       97-101        9-8-1997
Penn Street       Delaware Street        Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Penn Street       Fletcher Street        Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Penn Street       Park Street            Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Plum Street       Eighth Street          One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(eastbound)
Plum Street       Fourth Street          Multi-way 104-81        5-21-1981
Plum Street       Washington Avenue      Multi-way 104-81        5-21-1981
Pogue Street      Eighth Street          One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(westbound)
Pogue Street      Eleventh Street        One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(eastbound)
Pogue Street      Ninth Street           Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Saddle Lane       Winding Way            One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(westbound)
Sherman Street    Eleventh Street        One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(eastbound)
Sherman Street    Lafayette Avenue       One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(westbound)
Short Street      Washington Avenue      One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(eastbound)
Sigler Street     Park Street            Four-way  103-20        5-11-2020
Sigler Street     Woodworth              One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Sixth Street      Clyde Street           One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(southbound)
Sixth Street      Plum Street            One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(northbound)
South Lafayette   Grant Street (south of
Street            Grant on South         One-way   100-25        6-18-2025
                  Lafayette)
South Lafayette   South Eighth Street    One-way   100-25        6-18-2025
Street (north)
South Lafayette
Street (north and Jefferson Street       Two-way   100-25        6-18-2025
south)
Tenth Street      Clyde Street           One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(northbound)
Tenth Street      Harrison Street        One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(southbound)
Walnut Street     Eighth Street          Multi-way 104-81        5-21-1981
Walnut Street     Eleventh Street        Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Walnut Street     John Street            Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Walnut Street     Park Street            Two-way   104-81        5-21-1981
Woodworth         Factory Street         One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(southbound)
Woodworth         Maple Street           One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(northbound)
Woodworth         Washington Avenue      One-way   104-81        5-21-1981
(southbound)
 
(Prior Code, Chapter 74 Schedule II) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE III. SNOWMOBILES PROHIBITED.
   Any person may operate a snowmobile on any public street in the town, except
as follows.
Snowmobiles Prohibited
Street Location Ord./Res. No. Date Passed
Snowmobiles Prohibited
Street          Location                              Ord./Res. No. Date Passed
Center Street   —                                   337-1979      11-26-1979
Clyde Street    Lafayette Street to Eighth Street     337-1979      11-26-1979
Eighth Street   Clyde Street to Sigler Street         337-1979      11-26-1979
Eleventh Street Clyde Street to Sigler Street         337-1979      11-26-1979
Fourth Street   Plum Street to Sigler Street          337-1979      11-26-1979
Plum Street     Center Street west to the town limits 337-1979      11-26-1979
Plum Street     Eighth Street to Fifth Street         337-1979      11-26-1979
Sigler Street   Eleventh Street to Center Street      337-1979      11-26-1979
 
(Prior Code, Chapter 74 Schedule III) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE IV. TRUCK ROUTES DESIGNATED.
   No truck or other commercial vehicle with a gross weight of 10,000 pounds or
more shall be permitted on any town highway, street, or alley, except on the
following designated route.
 
Truck Routes Designated
Street          Location                         Ord./Res. No. Date Passed
Eleventh Street Clyde Street to Sigler Street    122-82        11-22-1982
Plum Street     Center Street to Highland Avenue 122-82        11-22-1982
Sigler Street   Eleventh Street to Plum Street   122-82        11-22-1982
 
(Prior Code, Chapter 74 Schedule IV)
SCHEDULE V. ONE-WAY STREETS.
 
One-Way Streets
Street/Alley          Location             Direction Ord./Res. No. Date Passed
                      Sigler Street to the
North-south alley     east-west alley (one
between Church Street half block,          Northward 103-08        2-11-2008
and Washington Street approximately 132
                      ft.)
 
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking restrictions
      
II.   Loading zones
SCHEDULE I. PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or to avoid conflict with the law, or the
directions of a police officer, or official traffic- control device, or signal
in any of the following locations.
Parking Restrictions
Street Side Location Restriction Ord./Res. No. Date Passed
Parking Restrictions
Street        Side        Location      Restriction   Ord./Res. No. Date Passed
                                        Monday
                          102 South     through
Church Street West        Church Street Saturday, no  104-81        5-21-1981
                                        more than 15
                                        minutes
                          Seventh       8:00 a.m. to
Clyde Street  North       Street to     5:00 p.m.     104-81        5-21-1981
                          Eighth Street
                          Seventh
                          Street
Clyde Street  South       approximately —           109-17        10-9-2017
                          200 ft. to
                          the east
                          Sixth Street
Clyde Street  South       to Seventh    All times     223-95        1-9-1995
                          Street
                          Clyde Street
Eighth Street Both        to Plum       All times     104-81        5-21-1981
                          Street
                          Clyde Street
Fifth Street  East        to Plum       All times     104-81        5-21-1981
                          Street
                          Sigler Street
Fifth Street  East        to Walnut     All times     159-86        11-10-1986
                          Street
Jefferson     North and   Lafayette
Street        South       Avenue to     All times     109-10        11-8-2010
                          Eighth Street
Lafayette                 Clyde Street
Avenue        East        to Plum       All times     106-20        6-8-2020
                          Street
                          Southeast
                          corner of the
S. Church     North-bound intersection  All times     101-07        3-12-2007
                          along the
                          north-bound
                          lane
Short Street  Both        All           All times     104-81        5-21-1981
                                        Monday
                          Washington    through
Sigler Street Both        Avenue to     Saturday, no  104-81        5-21-1981
                          Fourth Street more than two
                                        hours
Sigler Street             Center Street
(West)        South       to Jackson    All times     104-99        9-13-1999
                          Street
                                        Monday
Washington                Plum Street   through
Avenue        East        to Sigler     Saturday, no  104-81        5-21-1981
                          Street        more than two
                                        hours
                                        Monday
Washington                Sigler Street through
Avenue        Both        to Walnut     Saturday, no  104-81        5-21-1981
                          Street        more than two
                                        hours
Washington                Walnut Street
Avenue        Both        to town       All times     230-95        9-11-1995
                          limits
 
(Prior Code, Chapter 75 Schedule I) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. LOADING ZONES.
   The Council designates the following locations as loading zones.
 
Loading Zones
Street            Side  Location            Time      Ord./Res. No. Date Passed
                        Northwest corner of
Sigler Street     North Sigler Street and   All times 104-81        5-21-1981
                        John Street
                        Southeast corner of
Washington Avenue East  Washington Avenue   All times 104-81        5-21-1981
                        and Walnut Street
 
(Prior Code, Chapter 75 Schedule II) Penalty, see §
70.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
93.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
      
94.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
95.   PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
      
96.   FAIR HOUSING
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
90.01   Definition
   
90.02   Notice
   
90.03   Report and removal
   
90.04   Reclaiming a vehicle; public sale
   
90.05   Abandoned vehicle fund; limitation of costs
§ 90.01 DEFINITION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, and in accordance with I.C. 9-13-2-
1, ABANDONED VEHICLE shall mean:
      (1)   A vehicle located on public property illegally;
      (2)   A vehicle left on public property without being moved for 24 hours;
      (3)   A vehicle located on public property in such a manner as to
constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic on a public right-of-way;
      (4)   A vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control of that property for more than 48 hours;
      (5)   A vehicle from which the engine, transmission, or differential has
been removed or that is otherwise partially dismantled or inoperable and left
on public property;
      (6)   A vehicle that has been removed by a towing service or public
agency upon request of an officer enforcing a statute or an ordinance other
than I.C. 9-13-2 et seq. if the impounded vehicle is not claimed or redeemed by
the owner or the owner’s agent within 20 days after the vehicle’s removal; or
      (7)   A vehicle that is at least three model years old, is mechanically
inoperable, and is left on private property continuously in a location visible
from public property for more than 20 days. For the purposes of this division
(B)(7), a vehicle covered by a tarpaulin or other plastic, vinyl, rubber,
cloth, or textile covering is considered to be visible.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the phrase ABANDONED VEHICLE shall not
include:
      (1)   A vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or constructed
for operation on privately owned raceways;
      (2)   A vehicle stored as the property of a member of the armed forces of
the United States who is on active duty assignment;
      (3)   A vehicle located on a vehicle sale lot;
      (4)   A vehicle located upon property licensed or zoned as an automobile
scrap yard;
      (5)   A vehicle registered and licensed under I.C. 9-18.1-5-5 as an
antique vehicle; or
      (6)   A golf cart or off-road vehicle.
(Ord. 104-13, passed 9-9-2013)
§ 90.02 NOTICE.
   A Town Marshal, Deputy Marshal, or reserve officer of the town (each
collectively referred to herein as an “officer”) who finds or is notified of a
vehicle or parts believed to be abandoned shall attach in a prominent place a
notice tag containing the following information:
   (A)   The date, time, officer’s name, town, and address and telephone number
to contact for information;
   (B)   The vehicle or parts are considered abandoned;
   (C)   The vehicle or parts will be removed after:
      (1)   Twenty-four hours if the vehicle is located on or within the right-
of-way of an interstate highway or any highway that is designated as part of
the state highway system under I.C. 8-23-4; or
      (2)   Seventy-two hours for any other vehicle.
   (D)   The person who owns the vehicle will be held responsible for all costs
incidental to the removal, storage, and disposal of the vehicle; and
   (E)   The person who owns the vehicle may avoid costs by removal of the
vehicle or parts within:
      (1)   Twenty-four hours if the vehicle is located on or within the right-
of-way of an interstate highway or any highway that is designated as part of
the state highway system under I.C. 8-23-4; or
      (2)   Seventy-two hours for any other vehicle.
(Ord. 104-13, passed 9-9-2013)
§ 90.03 REPORT AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   If the vehicle or part tagged under §
90.02 is not removed within the applicable period, the officer shall prepare a
written abandoned vehicle report of the vehicle or parts, including information
on the condition and missing parts. Photographs may be taken to describe the
condition of the vehicle or parts. The owner of an abandoned vehicle or parts
shall be responsible for the abandonment and liable for all of the costs
incidental to the removal, storage, and disposal in accordance with I.C. 9-22-
1-4.
   (B)   In accordance with I.C. 9-22-1-13, if the vehicle is a junk vehicle
and the market value of the abandoned vehicle or parts is less than $1,000, and
after the applicable notice period described in §
90.02, a towing service shall immediately transfer the vehicle to a storage
yard. A copy of the abandoned vehicle report and photographs, if any, relating
to the abandoned vehicle shall be provided to the storage yard. The towing
service or storage yard may dispose of such an abandoned vehicle, and maintain
records and provide any required notice to the Bureau of Motor Vehicles of the
same, in accordance with I.C. 9-22-1-13. This division (B) shall not be
construed as the adoption of an ordinance by the town in accordance with I.C.
9-22-l-13(b).
   (C)   If, in the opinion of the officer, the market value of the abandoned
vehicle or parts is at least $1,000; the officer, before placing the notice tag
described in §
90.02 on the vehicle or parts, shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain the
person who owns the vehicle or parts or who may be in control of the vehicle or
parts. After 72 hours, the officer shall require the vehicle or parts to be
towed to a storage yard.
   (D)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in divisions (B) and (C)
above, within 72 hours after removal of a vehicle to a storage yard or towing
service, the towing service shall conduct the search and provide the
notification prescribed by I.C. 9-22-1-19. However, if the vehicle or parts are
in such a condition that vehicle identification numbers or other means of
identification are not available to determine the person who owns or holds a
lien on the vehicle, the vehicle may be disposed of without notice to the
extent allowed by law.
   (E)   The storage yard or towing service storing a vehicle described in
division (C) above shall notify the town if the person who owns or holds a lien
upon the vehicle does not appear within 20 days after the notice described by
division (D) above, and the town may sell the vehicle or parts to the highest
bidder at a public sale after providing notice of the sale in accordance with
I.C. 5-3-1, except that only one newspaper insertion one week before the public
sale shall be required. A bill of sale shall be provided in accordance with
I.C. 9-22-1-24.
(Ord. 104-13, passed 9-9-2013)
§ 90.04 RECLAIMING A VEHICLE; PUBLIC SALE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding anything provided in §
90.03(B) through (E), if the properly identified person who owns or holds a
lien on a vehicle appears at the site of storage before the disposal of the
vehicle or parts and pays all costs incurred against the vehicle or parts at
that time, the vehicle or parts shall be released, and the towing or storage
service shall immediately notify the town of such release.
   (B)   Such notification shall include the name, signature, and address of
the person that owns or holds the lien on the vehicle, a description of the
vehicle or parts, costs, and the date of release.
(Ord. 104-13, passed 9-9-2013)
§ 90.05 ABANDONED VEHICLE FUND; LIMITATION OF COSTS.
   (A)   An abandoned vehicle fund is hereby established in accordance with
I.C. 9-22-1-30. The Council shall annually appropriate sufficient money to the
abandoned vehicle fund to carry out the purposes of the ordinance codified
herein, and the money remaining in the abandoned vehicle fund at the end of the
year shall remain in the abandoned vehicle fund and shall not revert to the
general fund.
   (B)   The town hereby establishes a towing charge of $75 and a storage
charge of $25 per day (not to exceed $1,500), which shall be filed with the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles. The costs for removal and storage of an abandoned
vehicle or parts not claimed by the person who owns or holds a lien on the
vehicle shall be paid from the abandoned vehicle fund; however, the proceeds of
the sale of an abandoned vehicle or parts shall be credited against the costs
of removal, storage, and disposal of the vehicle. All other costs incurred by
the town in administering this chapter shall be paid from the abandoned vehicle
fund.
   (C)   The proceeds from the sale of abandoned vehicles or parts shall be
deposited into the town’s abandoned vehicle fund.
(Ord. 104-13, passed 9-9-2013)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Vaccinations
   
91.03   Rabies
   
91.04   Restraint
   
91.05   Livestock prohibition
   
91.06   Stray animals
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any live, nonhuman vertebrate creature, domestic or wild.
   AT LARGE. Not under restraint.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. A domestic animal, as defined in I.C. 15-2.1-2-15.
   HARBORING. Permitting any animal to remain or to be fed within any person’s
enclosure, place of business, or residence, or any premises controlled by that
person for more than three consecutive days.
   LIVESTOCK. All horses, cows, goats, swine, fowl, sheep, and all related
types of animals and offspring, and any animals weighing 200 pounds or more.
LIVESTOCK shall not include any animals harbored or kept for exhibition
purposes for less than two weeks during any six-month period.
   OWNER. Any person harboring any animal.
   PERSON. A person, as defined in I.C. 15-2.1-2-39.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any animal which:
      (1)   Is “at large”;
      (2)   Attacks or molests other animals, humans, or passing vehicles;
      (3)   Damages property; or
      (4)   Disturbs a reasonable person with continuous or excessive noise.
   RESTRAINT. Confinement within the property of the owner or securing by a
lead or leash.
   STRAY. Any animal whose owner cannot be identified following reasonable
inquiry.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal constituting an immediate and serious danger to
humans or to other animals.
(Prior Code, § 91.01)
Statutory reference:
   Animal health, see I.C. 15-2.1-1-1
   Definition of domestic animal, see I.C. 15-2.1-2-15
   Definition of person, see I.C. 15-2.1-2-39
§ 91.02 VACCINATIONS.
   No person shall harbor any cat or dog which is six-months old or older and
which has not been vaccinated against rabies. A rabies vaccination tag issued
by a licensed veterinarian, an identification tag designating the owner of the
animal and the owner’s address, and a dog tag issued by the County Assessor’s
Office shall be deemed proof of compliance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 91.02) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Immunization certificates, see I.C. 15-2.1-6-5
§ 91.03 RABIES.
   (A)   Any domestic animal which has bitten a person shall be impounded at
the expense of the owner for a period of not less than 14 days and until the
County Health Officer can determine if the animal is rabid. If the animal dies
while impounded, a test shall be conducted at the expense of the owner to
determine if the animal was rabid. The death of any animal suspected to have
been rabid shall be reported to the County Health Officer immediately following
the discovery of its death.
   (B)   Any domestic animal which has been bitten by an animal suspected to be
rabid shall be confined for a period of six months at the expense of the owner
or shall be destroyed.
   (C)   No person who knows or suspects that an animal under his or her
control is rabid shall allow that animal to leave his or her control except to
be taken to the City of Anderson Animal Shelter or a veterinarian. Any person
who knows or suspects that an animal is rabid shall immediately notify the
Police Department or the County Health Officer.
(Prior Code, § 91.03) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Local animal control ordinances, see I.C. 15-2.1-6-13
§ 91.04 RESTRAINT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner of or having the
care, custody, or control of any dog to allow, suffer, or permit such dog to be
at large upon the streets or other public places in the town or in or on any
other place beyond the premises of such person, unless such dog be on a leash
or otherwise under the complete control of a person capable of controlling such
dog.
   (B)   The Police Department shall order the confinement of any animal
determined by the Department to be vicious. Any vicious animal shall be
confined within a building or secure enclosure by its owner and shall be caged
or securely muzzled unless on the property of its owner.
   (C)   In cases that a dog is transported to the Animal Protection League by
the Police Department, the town will pay a per-incident fee on a monthly basis
to the Animal Protection League for cases involving dog bites and/or if the
Police Department is unable to identify a proper address for a loose dog. The
Police Department shall comply with paper work procedures required by the
facility.
(Prior Code, § 91.04) (Ord. 227, passed 5-4-1964; Ord. 104-08, passed 2-11-
2008; Ord. 101-12, passed 4-9-2012) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Animals running at large, see I.C. 15-2.1-21-8
§ 91.05 LIVESTOCK PROHIBITION.
   No livestock shall be harbored or kept in the town.
(Prior Code, § 91.05) (Ord. 23, passed 8-24-1996) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 STRAY ANIMALS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      ANIMAL. Any live, non-human vertebrae creature, domestic or wild.
      ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The person(s) employed by the town whose duties
shall include, among others, the enforcement of the provisions included in this
section.
      ANIMAL SHELTER. The premises contracted with by the town for the purpose
of caring for animals which are at large, lost, or otherwise homeless.
      AT LARGE. Any animal shall be deemed AT LARGE when it is not under
restraint.
      ATTACK. Any behavior by an animal that constitutes an immediate and
serious physical threat to human beings or other animals, whether or not such
behavior results in injury to such human beings or other animals. This behavior
includes, but is not limited to, snapping at, lunging at, and/or attempting to
bite human beings or animals.
      HARBORING. The actions of any person which permit any animal habitually
to remain, lodge, or to be fed within his home, store, enclosure, yard, or
place of business or any premises on which a person resides or controls, shall
be considered HARBORING an animal. An animal shall be presumed HARBORED if it
is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days.
      LIVESTOCK. All horses, cows, goats, swine, fowl, and sheep, all related
types of animals and offspring, and any animals weighing 200 pounds or more.
LIVESTOCK shall not include any animals harbored for exhibition purposes for
less than two weeks during any six-month period.
      OWNER. Any person harboring any animal.
      PERSON. A person, as defined in I.C. 15-17-2-83.
      PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any animal(s) which:
         (a)   Interferes with passers-by or passing vehicles;
         (b)   Attacks other animals;
         (c)   Is repeatedly at large; or
         (d)   Damages public or private property.
      RESTRAINT. Any animal secured by a leash and lead within the real
property limits of its owner. Any animals not physically confined to the
owner’s property shall be presumed not to be under RESTRAINT.
      STRAY. Any animal which doesn’t appear, upon reasonable inquiry, to have
an owner.
      VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment maintained and operated by a
veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases and injuries of
animals.
      VICIOUS ANIMALS. Any animal that, by its behavior, constitutes an
immediate and serious physical threat to human beings or animals.
   (B)   Authorization of the Clerk-Treasurer to enter into agreements.
      (1)   The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed, on behalf of
the town, to negotiate and enter into a contract or agreement with one or more
organizations qualified to provide animal impoundment services, including, but
not limited to, the Animal Protection League (APL) or the Elwood Animal Shelter
(the “agreement”).
      (2)   Such agreement shall provide for the removal, collection, and care
of stray or abandoned cats, found within the corporate limits of the town. The
Agreement may include terms governing pickup procedures, sheltering, veterinary
care, spaying/neutering, and any other related services.
      (3)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall support payment for the agreement by a
fully itemized invoice or bill and certification.
      (4)   The Town Council shall review and allow the claim at the body’s
next regular or special meeting following the preapproved payment of the
expense.
      (5)   The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized to enter into the
agreement at an amount that shall not exceed $9,000 in any calendar year
without further approval from the town.
   (C)   Restraint of animals.
      (1)   All animals shall be kept under restraint. No owner shall fail to
exercise due care and control of his or her animals to prevent them from
becoming a public nuisance. Every female animal in heat shall be confined in a
building or secured enclosure in a manner that the female animals cannot come
into contact with another animal or the same species except for planned
breeding. Every vicious animal, as determined by the Animal Control Officer,
shall be confined by the owner within a building or secured enclosure and shall
be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of the owner.
      (2)   Any animal that is unrestrained or a public nuisance shall be taken
by the town police or Animal Control Officer and impounded in the Animal
Shelter, and there confined in a humane manner. If by a license tag or other
means, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the Animal Control
Officer shall immediately, upon impoundment, notify the owner by telephone or
mail. Upon identifying the dog owner, the town’s Police Department shall issue
a fine of $200 per incident, payable at the Frankton Town Hall, regardless of
whether a person has previously violated this section and regardless of whether
written notices or previous fines were issued. Any animal not re-claimed by its
owner within five working days shall become the property of the Animal Shelter
and shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home or humanely euthanized.
   (D)   Abandonment. It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly,
intentionally, or recklessly abandon a domestic animal or livestock as
described by this section.
(Ord. 103-25, passed - -2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of
§
91.04(A) and (C) shall, upon first offense, receive written notice from the
Council of failure to comply. A second offense will result in violation of
local ordinance and a fine of $25, with each offense thereafter to increase by
an additional $25. Fines will be payable to the Town of Frankton, 108 E. Sigler
Street.
      (2)   In cases described in §
91.04(C), upon identifying the dog owner or property owner, the Police
Department shall issue a fine of $200 per incident, payable at the Town Hall.
This fine is due regardless of whether a person has previously violated §
91.04(A) or (C) and regardless of whether written notices or previous fines
were issued.
(Prior Code, § 91.99)
   (C)   (1)   The owner of a domestic animal found to be roaming at large or
stray, per §
91.06, may be fined $50 for the first offense and $100 for each subsequent
offense involving the same animal occurring within one year.
      (2)   For any other violation of §
91.06, the owner may be fined up to $200.
      (3)   Fines will be payable to the “Town of Frankton, 108 E. Sigler
Street”.
(Ord. 104-08, passed 2-11-2008; Ord. 101-12, passed 4-9-2012; Ord. 103-25,
passed - -2025)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Fireworks   
Fires and Open Burning
   
92.15   Definitions
   
92.16   Burning of garbage prohibited
   
92.17   Hours restrictions
   
92.18   Safety
   
92.19   Fire pits, campfires, and the like
   
92.20   Enforcement
Outdoor Heaters
   
92.35   Definitions
   
92.36   Installation and use
   
92.37   Permits
   
92.38   Grandfather provisions
   
92.39   Enforcement
 
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Recitals. The recitals stated in the ordinance codified herein are
hereby incorporated by reference.
   (B)   Permitted hours of use. The use of consumer fireworks in the town is
hereby permitted only during the following dates and times as set forth below:
      (1)   Between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and two hours after sunset on June
29, June 30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6, July 7, July 8, and July
9;
      (2)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on July
4; and
      (3)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00 a.m. on
January 1.
   (C)   Locations. The igniting, discharging, or use of consumer fireworks in
the public right-of- way or street is strictly prohibited.
   (D)   Conflict with state law. No provision of this section is intended to
conflict with or supersede state law.
(Ord. 104-22, passed 8-8-2022)
FIRES AND OPEN BURNING
§ 92.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE, JUNK, and RUBBISH. Shall be defined as set forth in §
50.01 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 92.01) (Ord. 295-1973, passed 11-12-1973)
Statutory reference:
   Local burning restrictions, see I.C. 13-1-1-10
§ 92.16 BURNING OF GARBAGE PROHIBITED.
   The ordinance codified herein specifically prohibits the burning of any
trash or garbage at any time within the corporate limits of the town.
(Ord. 115-22, passed 9-12-2022) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.17 HOURS RESTRICTIONS.
   No person shall burn any junk, leaves, lumber, rubbish, or straw after 5:30
p.m. or before 6:00 a.m. or at any time on Sunday. Any fire burning at 5:30
p.m. shall be extinguished immediately.
(Prior Code, § 92.03) (Ord. 295-1973, passed 11-12-1973) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.18 SAFETY.
   No person shall burn any combustible material on any asphalt or tar street.
No person shall burn any combustible material in any location which endangers
life or property or in amounts which cause damage to others.
(Prior Code, § 92.04) (Ord. 295-1973, passed 11-12-1973) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.19 FIRE PITS, CAMPFIRES, AND THE LIKE.
   Residential fires such as fire pits and campfires are acceptable under the
following conditions.
   (A)   Burning shall be done during safe weather conditions.
   (B)   Fires must be supervised at all times until completely extinguished.
   (C)   Fires must be extinguished if they become a fire hazard, nuisance, or
threat to public health.
(Ord. 115-22, passed 9-12-2022) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.20 ENFORCEMENT.
   The open burning provisions are enforceable by the Fire Department, Police
Department, or at the request of the Council.
(Ord. 115-22, passed 9-12-2022) Penalty, see §
92.99
OUTDOOR HEATERS
§ 92.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLEAN NATURAL WOOD. Natural wood which:
      (1)   Has not been pressure treated, painted, varnished, or coated with a
similar material;
      (2)   Does not contain resins or glues, such as plywood or other
composite wood products; and
      (3)   Is not particle board, “refuse”, or “yard waste”.
   NUISANCE. The burning of any material of any kind which generates smoke or
odor from an outdoor hydronic heater so as to endanger the public or in a
matter that unreasonably disturbs the comfort of any person residing in the
vicinity.
   OUTDOOR HYDRONIC HEATER. Any fuel-burning device designed to burn wood or
other approved renewable solid fuels that is intended for outdoor installation
or installation in structures not normally occupied by humans and that heats
building space or water (or both) by the distribution of a fluid heated in the
device.
   REFUSE and YARD WASTE. Any waste material including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Leaves, grass, garbage, and other similar organic material;
      (2)   Construction and demolition waste material;
      (3)   Automobiles or parts thereof;
      (4)   Flammable (excluding clean natural wood), toxic, or explosive
material;
      (5)   Electrical wiring; and
      (6)   Rubber and plastic products.
(Ord. 100-18, passed 1-8-2018)
§ 92.36 INSTALLATION AND USE.
   An outdoor hydronic heater may be installed and used within the town only in
accordance with the following provisions.
   (A)   An outdoor hydronic heater may use as a fuel source only clean natural
wood; provided, however, that other fuel sources expressly recommended by the
manufacturer of a particular model of outdoor hydronic heater may be used with
that model if they are not specifically prohibited by this subchapter.
      (1)   Refuse and/or yard waste shall not be used as a fuel source for
outdoor hydronic heaters.
      (2)   No material shall be used as a fuel source that causes any
particulate matter that is detrimental to human beings or animals to be
released into the air.
   (B)   No outdoor hydronic heater shall be utilized in a manner that
endangers the public, threatens the safety or health of the public, or
constitutes a nuisance as defined in §
92.35 or otherwise defined by law.
   (C)   An outdoor hydronic heater shall be located to the rear or the side of
the structure for which it is intended to act as a heat source and shall be
located at least 20 feet from the nearest structure on the same property, 50
feet from any property line, 100 feet from the nearest non-residential
structure on an adjoining property, and 200 feet from the nearest residence
that is not located on the same property.
   (D)   An outdoor hydronic heater shall have an attached permanent chimney
that extends at least five feet higher than the height of the roofs of all
residences located within 150 feet of the unit and not located on the same
property as the unit. The town, by its authorized representative(s), may
approve in writing a lesser chimney height on a case-by-case basis if necessary
to comply with the manufacturer’s recommendations, provided the outdoor
hydronic heater does not or will not create a nuisance and provided that the
outdoor hydronic heater meets IDEM emissions requirements in 326 I.A.C. 4-3-3.
Such approval may be revoked by the town if it causes the outdoor hydronic
heater to create a nuisance.
   (E)   An outdoor hydronic heater shall be UL listed and have attached an
approved U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) label indicating the
model of the unit and that the unit meets all EPA rules and regulations in
force at the time of installation.
   (F)   An outdoor hydronic heater must be installed and operated at all times
in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and recommendations. In the
event of a conflict between this subchapter and the manufacturer’s
instructions, the requirements of this subchapter shall apply unless the
manufacturer’s instructions are stricter, in which case the manufacturer’s
instructions shall apply.
   (G)   No outdoor hydronic heater may be operated between the dates of May 1
and September 30 of each calendar year.
   (H)   An outdoor hydronic heater must meet IDEM’s emissions requirements in
326 I.A.C. 4-3-3 and 4-3-5(e), which are hereby incorporated as part of this
code of ordinances as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 100-18, passed 1-8-2018) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.37 PERMITS.
   (A)   Prior to the installation and operation of any outdoor hydronic
heater, a permit must be obtained from the town. The cost of such permit shall
be $50. Failure to obtain any permit before installation will subject an
individual to fines and penalties and a nuisance action as described herein.
   (B)   At the time of permit application, the applicant must provide the town
with a plot map showing all buildings and property lines within 200 feet of the
anticipated placement of the outdoor hydronic heater, as well as a copy of the
manufacturer’s specifications and recommendations.
(Ord. 100-18, passed 1-8-2018)
§ 92.38 GRANDFATHER PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The lawful use of a non-conforming outdoor hydronic heater existing at
the time of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified herein may be
continued, although the use of such outdoor hydronic heaters does not conform
to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a non-conforming outdoor hydronic
heater shall not be used or operated in such a manner as to constitute a
nuisance or cause a condition hazardous to human health or prohibited by any
applicable federal, state or local law, regulation, or ordinance. Additionally,
any such non-conforming outdoor hydronic heaters shall be used and maintained
in compliance with the provisions of subchapter to the maximum extent
reasonably possible.
   (C)   Outdoor hydronic heaters that are relocated shall be considered newly
installed units and shall be subject to all provisions and requirements of this
subchapter. All existing outdoor hydronic heaters must be registered with the
town within 90 days after the adoption of the ordinance codified herein.
Failure to do so will result in the loss of such outdoor hydronic heaters’
grandfathered status, and the same will be subject to all provisions and
requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 100-18, passed 1-8-2018)
§ 92.39 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any authorized officer, agent, employee, or representative of the town who
presents credentials may inspect any property for the purposes of ascertaining
compliance with this subchapter.
(Ord. 100-18, passed 1-8-2018)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any burning which violates any provision of this section
constitutes a public nuisance. Any person who violates any provision of the
sections mentioned above shall be fined not more than $2,500.
(Prior Code, § 92.99)
      (2)   The Fire or Police Department of the town shall issue a warning
notice to a first- time violator of §§
92.16,
92.19, and/or
92.20. The person must then correct the violation by immediately extinguishing
the fire. Failure or refusal to immediately extinguish the fire shall result in
a citation being issued. Issuance of a citation to the violator shall result in
the imposition of a $25 fine.
   (C)   Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of §§
92.36 through
92.38 shall have committed a civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine(s)
in accordance with the schedule below. Each day that a violation of §§
92.36 through
92.38 continues unabated constitutes a separate offense. In addition, any
violation of §§
92.36 through
92.38 shall be deemed a nuisance, and the town or its officers, agents, or
representatives may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to
abate said nuisance.
 
Violation                                        Fine Amount
Failure to obtain a permit for a new unit        $100
Failure to register an existing unit             $50
Failure to add a chimney extension (if required) $50
Operation not in compliance with §§
92.36 through                                    $100
92.38
 
(Ord. 295-1973, passed 11-12-1973; Ord. 100-18, passed 1-8-2018; Ord. 115-22,
passed 9-12-2022)
CHAPTER 93: STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
   
93.01   Streets to be clear
   
93.02   Sidewalk maintenance; repairs
   
93.03   Basketball goal placement
   
93.04   Right-of-way application fee
§ 93.01 STREETS TO BE CLEAR.
   Nothing is to be placed in a town street or alleyway which may even
temporarily impede traffic at any time through any street or alley.
(Prior Code, § 93.01) (Ord. 192-89, passed 9-11-1989) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.02 SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE; REPAIRS.
   (A)   The responsibility for the care, maintenance, and repairs of sidewalks
within the town is hereby deemed that of the property owners abutting any
sidewalk. Property owners abutting any sidewalk shall keep the sidewalk in
reasonably safe condition and shall maintain and repair the sidewalk at their
own expense as and when needed or within 30 days of being notified by the town
that the sidewalk is in need of repairs.
   (B)   The Council hereby establishes a sidewalk repair program whereby the
town shall provide assistance to owners of residential property within the town
to maintain and repair the sidewalks located upon their properties in
accordance with the following rules and requirements.
      (1)   Applications for sidewalk repair assistance shall be accepted by
the town during the months of April through September from residential property
owners within the town.
      (2)   The town shall provide sidewalk repair assistance in accordance
with this section on a first-come, first-served basis with respect to the
submission of applications for sidewalk repair assistance.
      (3)   Upon the depletion of funds appropriated for sidewalk-repair
assistance for the calendar year, any remaining applications shall be tabled
until the following calendar year.
      (4)   If the town receives more applications during a calendar year than
funds that are available, the town reserves the right to prioritize
applications on the basis of safety, volume of traffic, length of sidewalk
needing repaired, and aesthetics.
      (5)   Upon receipt of an application for sidewalk repair assistance, the
town shall inspect the sidewalk to be repaired and engage a contractor to
provide an estimate to the town and the property owner of the cost of labor and
materials to repair the sidewalk.
      (6)   Repairs on the sidewalk may be made under this sidewalk repair
program only after the following have been completed:
         (a)   Both the town and the property owner approve the estimate for
repairs provided by the contractor; and
         (b)   The property owner completes and files with the town a written
acknowledgment that the property owner is responsible for 50% of the actual
costs of the repairs and deposits with the town an amount equal to 50% of the
estimate for repairs provided by the contractor, such amount to be deposited in
the town’s Sidewalk Repair Fund.
      (7)   Following completion of the repairs and the town’s approval of the
repairs, the town shall pay the cost of the repairs to the contractor from the
Sidewalk Repair Fund.
   (C)   This sidewalk repair program in no way relieves the responsibility of
property owners to maintain and repair sidewalks abutting their property in
accordance with division (A) above and is intended only as a mechanism by which
property owners may request assistance of the town in fulfilling such
responsibility.
(Ord. 103-17, passed 7-10-2013)
§ 93.03 BASKETBALL GOAL PLACEMENT.
   (A)   A basketball goal, whether permanent or portable, shall be located in
the property owner’s driveway, backyard, garage, or lawn, provided that said
location is otherwise in accordance with the town’s ordinances and resolutions.
   (B)   If a basketball goal is placed on the resident’s driveway, the
following rules apply.
      (1)   No basketball goal is to extend out into the street, including the
hoop. A placement of the basketball goal in a driveway must be a minimum of
three feet from the roadway.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided herein, a basketball goal is not to be
placed on a sidewalk or public right-of-way.
      (3)   In the case of a dead-end street or cul-de-sac, a portable
basketball goal may be temporarily placed at the end of the street or cul-de-
sac within the public right-of-way, provided that such portable basketball goal
must be removed from the public right-of-way when not in use.
   (C)   If any basketball goal is located in violation of this section, the
town shall have the right to remove the basketball goal after providing the
owner with ten days’ written notice.
      (1)   Any basketball goal removed by the town shall be claimed within ten
days, otherwise the basketball goal will be disposed of.
      (2)   If the owner or person responsible for the basketball goal wishes
it returned prior to its disposal, a fee of $25 shall be charged for the town’s
removal and storage of the basketball goal.
(Ord. 103-22, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 93.04 RIGHT-OF-WAY APPLICATION FEE.
   A non-refundable application fee of $15 shall be submitted with each right-
of-way permit application. Applications received without the required fee shall
be deemed incomplete and shall not be processed until payment is received.
(Ord. 101-25, passed 6-18-2025)
CHAPTER 94: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
Weeds
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   State regulations adopted
   
94.03   Grass and weeds to be cut
   
94.04   Notice to remove or cut grass and weeds
   
94.05   Removal by town
   
94.06   Administration; appeals
 
   
94.99   Penalty
WEEDS
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (B)   For purposes of this subchapter, WEEDS and OTHER RANK VEGETATION shall
mean grass and other vegetation that is unkept and unmowed over a period of
time and left to grow to a height in excess of 18 inches. The term shall not
include:
      (1)   Agricultural and vegetable crops such as com, wheat, hay, and
pasture;
      (2)   Designated wetlands, parklands, and forest preserves; or
      (3)   River banks, creek banks, and drainage ditches from the centerline
of the waterway to the area within ten feet of the top edge of each bank.
(Ord. 106-12, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 94.02 STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The town adopts I.C. 36-7-10.1-3.
(Prior Code, § 94.01) (Ord. 14, passed 2-24-1891; Ord. 29, passed - -1898)
Statutory reference:
   For removal of vegetation, see I.C. 36-7-10-1
§ 94.03 GRASS AND WEEDS TO BE CUT.
   Every landowner shall cut and remove all weeds and grass on his or her
property at least twice a year. No landowner shall permit the grass or weeds on
any property to grow to a height of more than 12 inches.
(Prior Code, § 94.02) (Ord. 14, passed 2-24-1891; Ord. 29, passed - -1898)
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 NOTICE TO REMOVE OR CUT GRASS AND WEEDS.
   (A)   If any resident of the town files a written and signed complaint with
the Clerk-Treasurer concerning vegetation on any property, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall notify the landowner. The Clerk- Treasurer shall issue a written notice
stating that the landowner must remove the weeds and grass within five days.
The notice shall be served on the landowner by the Police Department if the
landowner is a resident. The notice shall be sent by registered mail to the
last known address of the landowner if that person is not a resident.
(Prior Code, § 94.03)
   (B)   Upon receipt of information from the Police Department that a
violation of this subchapter exists, the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue an initial
written notice to cut and remove the weeds and other rank vegetation, which
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or an equivalent
service permitted under I.C. 1-1-7-1, addressed to at least one of the owners
of the real property at the last address of the owner of the property as
indicated in the records of the County Auditor on the date of the notice.
      (1)   Such notice should indicate future notices of violations of the
ordinance codified herein during the same year for which the initial notice of
the violation was provided may be abated by the municipality and/or its
contractors, and notice of the same will be posted at the property at the time
of abatement.
      (2)   For each subsequent abatement in the same calendar year, a
continuous abatement notice shall be posted at the property at the time of the
abatement and shall serve as notice to the real property owner of a subsequent
violation.
(Ord. 14, passed 2-24-1891; Ord. 29, passed - -1898; Ord. 106-12, passed 8-13-
2012)
§ 94.05 REMOVAL BY TOWN.
   (A)   Removal by town. If the landowner fails to cut and remove the weeds
and other rank vegetation within the five-day time prescribed by the written
notice of violation, the town’s Street Department or a contractor of its hiring
may enter the real property to cut and remove weeds and other rank vegetation
and abate the ordinance of violation.
   (B)   Notice of costs to landowner. Following any abatement of the ordinance
violation by the town’s Street Department or its contractor, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall prepare a certified statement of the actual costs incurred by
the town in the cutting and removal of the weed and other rank vegetation,
including administrative costs and removal costs. The certified statement shall
be delivered to the landowner by the Police Department or by registered mail
addressed to his or her last known address if he or she is a non-resident of
the town. If the landowner fails to pay the certified amount within ten days
after notification, the Clerk-Treasurer shall certify to the County Auditor the
amount of the original certified statement plus any additional administrative
costs incurred in the certification process. The County Auditor shall place the
total amount certified on the tax duplicate for the property affected, and the
total amount (including any accrued interest) shall be collected as delinquent
taxes are collected and shall be disbursed to the general fund of the town.
(Ord. 106-12, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 94.06 ADMINISTRATION; APPEALS.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be administered by the respective town officers,
employees, and departments as directed and specified within the particular
terms and provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The landowner may appeal, in writing, a notice of violation or a
certified statement of costs issued under this subchapter to the Council. The
Council shall conduct an investigation of the appeal and make a written
determination which shall be forwarded to the landowner and to the Clerk-
Treasurer. The decision of the Council on all appeals shall be final.
(Ord. 106-12, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Weeds and other rank vegetation are prohibited in the town and the
existence of which shall constitute a violation of this §§
94.01 through
94.06, subjecting the landowner to a civil fine of $100. Each day a violation
continues after receipt of a notice of violation shall constitute a separate
offense. The civil fine shall be in addition to the cost collection procedures
set forth in I.C. 36-7-10.1-4 and payable at the Town Hall on 108 E. Sigler
Street.
(Ord. 106-12, passed 8-13-2012)
CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
Section
   
95.01   Applicability
   
95.02   Park signs; notices
   
95.03   Basic rules
   
95.04   Use of park facilities
   
95.05   Assembly
   
95.06   Closed area(s)
   
95.07   Disruptive behavior; ejection
   
95.08   Vending
   
95.09   Metal detectors
   
95.10   Abandoned/unattended property
   
95.11   Peace and quiet
   
95.12   Weapons; firearms
   
95.13   Wildlife; plant life; natural resources
   
95.14   Animals
   
95.15   Fires; smoking; firewood; fireworks
   
95.16   Camping; overnight use
   
95.17   Motor vehicles; parking
   
95.18   Trail use
   
95.19   Alcohol and glass containers
   
95.20   Performing artists
   
95.21   Cremation remains
   
95.22   Special rules for facilities
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The rules in this chapter are established as written guidelines for
the use of the town’s parks, wildlife preserves, and recreational facilities.
These rules are intended to secure and preserve the fullest enjoyment of parks
and recreational facilities to a wide range of park patrons. Failure to abide
by these rules shall be cause for removal. The commission of offenses under
local ordinances or state law shall be cause for arrest.
   (B)   The rules in this chapter apply to and in all parks, wildlife
preserves, and recreational facilities or areas belonging to the town or
managed by or under the authority of the town.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -)
§ 95.02 PARK SIGNS; NOTICES.
   (A)   General. All persons shall comply with the signs and markers installed
by the Department.
   (B)   Park entrance signs. These provide the name of the park and may be an
excellent place to post opening and closing times. They also can provide an
esthetic enhancement or set the theme for the park experience.
   (C)   Opening and closing hours. Hours of park operation should be posted if
the park closes during a 24-hour period. Operating hours may change from season
to season.
   (D)   General park rules and regulations. Signs listing general rules of
conduct and behavior should be posted in a spot that is easily visible to park
users. It is not necessary for this sign to be the largest or brightest sign in
the park.
   (E)   Bulletin boards/special event signs. These signs can provide a less
intrusive location for park rules, hours of operation, or information about
special events and scheduled activities.
   (F)   Playground use and supervision signs. Playground injuries and
liability concerns are more common for parks and park operators. Signs defining
rules for proper use and child supervision are available from recreational
equipment suppliers.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -)
§ 95.03 BASIC RULES.
   (A)   Parks are open to the public every day of the year from 7:00 a.m. to
11:00 p.m.
   (B)   Dogs and other pets must be on a leash and/or under control of the
owner. No pets are allowed on playgrounds at any time. Must pick-up after pet
at all times.
   (C)   Place trash in trash receptacles only. If trash receptacles are not
provided, take your refuse with you. Never dump or deposit trash on any park
land.
   (D)   Do not set fires except in designated cooking areas. Picnickers must
completely extinguish all fires before leaving the park. Never throw lighted
matches, burning cigarettes, or other flammable material in any park area. Open
fires are prohibited.
   (E)   Alcoholic beverages are prohibited in the parks.
   (F)   Never damage, pollute, disfigure, or remove any natural resource,
structures, or equipment in the parks.
   (G)   Do not hunt, kill, molest, frighten, or tease any animals, reptiles,
or birds in the park.
   (H)   Bottles, containers, or other items made of glass are prohibited from
the park.
   (I)   Motorized model airplanes are not allowed in the parks.
   (J)   Motorized vehicles of any kind including motorcycles, motorbikes,
mini-bikes, golf-carts and off-road four-wheelers are not allowed on park
grounds and/or trails and community walkways.
   (K)   No solicitation, vending, advertising, or sign posting is allowed in
the parks except by special permission of the Park Board.
   (L)   The use of offensive language and/or gestures, disorderly conduct, and
unreasonable noise is prohibited.
   (M)   The use of weapons and firearms, air guns, pellet or B.B. guns, bows
and arrows, or projectile devices capable of inflicting personal injury are
prohibited.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 USE OF PARK FACILITIES.
   (A)   Park facilities generally are available for public use on a first-
come, first-served basis except for areas that have previously been reserved.
There are no reservation fees; however, the park does accept donations.
   (B)   Shelter houses may be reserved for parties, reunions, picnics, and the
like by calling Town Hall and reserving your date, time, and shelter house.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -)
 § 95.05 ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   Organizers intending to conduct assemblies or public demonstrations on
parkland must provide a two-week notice to the Parks and Recreation Department
by calling the Town Hall at 765-754-7285.
   (B)   Assemblies or public demonstrations are permissible except where such
an activity will disrupt or interfere with scheduled events, or prevent or be
inconsistent with the intended use of park facilities at the proposed site of
assembly.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -)
§ 95.06 CLOSED AREA(S).
   (A)   The Council or the Park Board designee may close park areas, wildlife
preserves, or facilities to the public entry or otherwise restrict use until
such time as the area or facility can be made available for public use.
   (B)   Except in emergency circumstances, notice of closure shall be posted
and patrons shall not enter closed or restricted areas.
   (C)   Patrons shall not enter areas closed due to flooding or to areas that
are subject of a flood ban.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.07 DISRUPTIVE BEHAVIOR; EJECTION.
   Patrons engaged in disruptive, destructive, or hazardous conduct may be
warned and asked to stop such conduct immediately by any park attendant. Under
circumstances where a patron’s conduct is unlawful, poses an imminent threat of
injury, or prevents the public enjoyment of the park or wildlife preserve or
facility, park attendants may eject such patrons by any reasonable means,
including arrest.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.08 VENDING.
   Persons shall not conduct commercial sales or offer to sell any goods,
wares, drinks, food, or items nor render or offer to render any service for
hire at any park, wildlife preserve, or facility except as authorized by
contract or permit properly issued by the Parks and Recreation Department.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.09 METAL DETECTORS.
   The use of metal detectors in town parks and wildlife preserves without a
permit is prohibited.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.10 ABANDONED/UNATTENDED PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall abandon a vehicle or other personal property at any
park facility or wildlife preserves. Abandoned property shall be removed and/or
impounded as determined by the town.
   (B)   No person shall leave a vehicle of any type, boat, or other property
unattended at any park facility or wildlife preserve in such a manner as to
create a hazardous or unsafe condition or to be in violation of a park curfew.
Such property may be removed to a safe place or impounded.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.11 PEACE AND QUIET.
   (A)   Patrons shall preserve the peace and quiet enjoyment of the parks and/
or wildlife preserved by observing all ordinances and state laws governing
noise and amplified sound.
   (B)   Patrons shall not use offensive language, make unreasonable noise,
discharge weapons or fireworks, or engage in offensive gestures or conduct
constituting disorderly conduct.
   (C)   Patrons shall not operate noise-making devices in violation of local
or ordinances prohibiting unreasonable noise or requiring a sound amplification
permit.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.12 WEAPONS; FIREARMS.
   (A)   Patrons shall not carry or possess weapons or firearms while in park
facilities or wildlife preserves.
   (B)   The use of firearms, air guns, pellet or B.B. guns, bows and arrows,
or projectile devices capable of inflicting personal injury is prohibited.
   (C)   No patron may display a firearm or other weapon at any park facility
or wildlife preserve in a manner calculated to alarm or threaten anyone.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.13 WILDLIFE; PLANT LIFE; NATURAL RESOURCES.
   (A)   All wildlife within the boundaries of any Parks and Recreation
Department park facility and wildlife preserve is protected. No person may
harm, harass, hunt, trap, or remove any animal including fish, birds, reptiles,
or other living creatures from any park facility or wildlife preserve. This
division (A) shall not apply where fishing is permitted by an individual in
possession of a valid state fishing license.
   (B)   All plant life within the boundaries of any Parks and Recreation
Department park facility and wildlife preserve is protected. Patrons shall not
mutilate, injure, destroy, thrash, or remove any live tree, shrub, vine,
wildflowers, grass, sedge, fern, moss lichen, fungus or any other member of the
plant kingdom or portion thereof, and no person shall collect or harvest dead
wood or plants, or portions thereof, except upon written approval by the Parks
and Recreation Department.
   (C)   All sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of
historical, archaeological, geologic, scientific, or educational interest of
every character located in, on, or under the surface of any park facility and
wildlife preserve are protected. No person may remove, excavate, take, dig
into, or destroy any site, object, building, artifact, implement, or location
of archaeological, scientific or historical interest without having written
permission of the Parks and Recreation Department.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.14 ANIMALS.
   (A)   Persons bringing pets or other animals into outdoor park areas shall
keep them under confinement or direct control. Leads on leashes used to control
animals shall not be more than six feet long, except for an animal trained to
assist the disabled.
   (B)   Patrons shall not permit a pet or other animal to remain unattended or
create a disturbance or hazard.
   (C)   Patrons shall not ride, drive, lead, or keep a horse and/or bring
into, or permit to range at any park facility or wildlife preserve: domestic
fowl, swine, sheep, goat, or other livestock. Patrons shall not hitch a saddle
horse to a tree, shrub, or structure in any manner that causes damage.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.15 FIRES; SMOKING; FIREWOOD; FIREWORKS.
   (A)   No person may light, build, or maintain a fire on any of Parks and
Recreation Department pack facilities or wildlife preserves, except in a
facility or device provided, maintained, or designated for such purposes, such
as portable camp stoves or portable barbecue grills of metal construction may
be used in designated picnic areas.
   (B)   During periods of extreme fire hazard, the Council and/or Parks and
Recreation Department may prohibit or restrict fires and smoking within the
parks and wildlife preserves.
   (C)   No person may cut, gather, or collect wood or other combustible
material at any Parks and Recreation Department pack facility or wildlife
preserve for use as firewood or fuel.
   (D)   The possession or use of any kind of firework is prohibited in all
parks and wildlife preserves.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.16 CAMPING; OVERNIGHT USE.
   (A)   No person may camp at any Parks and Recreation Department park
facility or wildlife preserve, except as authorized by permit and only in areas
designated or marked for that purpose. Primitive camping only is permitted with
the purchase of a permit from the town.
      (1)   Primitive camping is permitted in authorized areas designated or
marked for that purpose, with a permit from the Council or authorized Park
Department Official.
      (2)   PRIMITIVE CAMPING is defined as erecting a tent, arranging bedding,
or both for the purpose of, or in such a manner as will permit, remaining
overnight.
      (3)   Use of a trailer, camper, or other vehicle for the purpose of
sleeping overnight is prohibited.
   (B)   To afford all the public a wider use of the Parks and Recreation
Department’s primitive camping facilities, continuous occupancy of primitive
camping facilities by the same person or persons in a park is limited to seven
consecutive calendar days. When a person has used the camping facilities in a
park for a period of time greater than seven consecutive days, he or she will
be fined and required to vacate the facilities and may not use the overnight
camping facilities until a time period has elapsed between his or her date of
departure and date of re-entry, which time period includes a minimum time from
2:00 p.m. Friday until 2:00 p.m. Sunday. A new permit and fees are required for
re-entry.
   (C)   Persons under the age of 18 years authorized to be in a park facility
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. shall be accompanied or
supervised by an adult. The ratio of adults to minors shall not be less than
one adult for every five minors.
   (D)   The cost of the primitive camping permit is payable to the town’s Park
Department at a cost of $5 per-day per-person for up to seven consecutive days.
A person or persons will be fined an additional $10 per-day per-person for
anyone not vacated by the date on the permit.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -; Ord. 112-12, passed 12-10-2012) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.17 MOTOR VEHICLES; PARKING.
   (A)   No person may operate a motor vehicle of any type including a
motorcycle, motorbike, mini-bike, golf-cart, or off-road four-wheeler at any
park facility or wildlife preserve except upon roads, driveways, parking areas,
and areas designated open to motor vehicles.
   (B)   No person shall park a motor vehicle on parkland or wildlife preserve
except in designated areas.
   (C)   No person may park, store, or leave a vehicle or trailer in areas
posted “Restricted” or with “No Parking” signs.
   (D)   A vehicle or trailer parked in such a manner as to create a hazardous
or unsafe condition may be towed or impounded.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.18 TRAIL USE.
   (A)   No person may operate or use a motor vehicle including a motorcycle,
motorbike, mini-bike, golf cart, or off-road four-wheeler on the Born Learning
Trail and/or the community walkway.
   (B)   On the community walkway, bicyclists shall yield to joggers and
joggers to walkers.
   (C)   Unless otherwise posted, all portions of the community walkway are
designed for joggers and walkers. Bicycles are allowed as long as the bicyclist
yields to joggers and walkers, and shall not travel faster than three mph on
the walkway.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.19 ALCOHOL AND GLASS CONTAINERS.
   (A)   The sale, possession with the intent to sell, or the consumption of
alcoholic beverages is prohibited in the Parks and Recreation Department and
wildlife preserves.
   (B)   All glass containers are prohibited with the exceptions of baby
bottles or baby jars containing products for consumption by a baby.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.20 PERFORMING ARTISTS.
   Individuals may perform as artists or entertainers in any Parks and
Recreation Department and wildlife preserve within the following guidelines.
   (A)   He or she may not block sidewalks or in any way impede pedestrians or
vehicular traffic circulation.
   (B)   Amplified sound is prohibited.
   (C)   Juggling of potentially hazardous materials or items such as knives or
fire is
   (D)   Any money exchange should be on a “tips” or donation basis only.
   (E)   He or she may set up at special events only with written permission of
the event. Entertainers should carry a copy of the letter of approval from the
Council and/or Parks and Recreation Department permitting his or her
performance art. The letter is to be available on request by any park attendant
or employee charged with patrolling or supervising park use.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.21 CREMATION REMAINS.
   No cremation remains shall be disposed of on any parkland in the town’s
Parks and Recreation Department and wildlife preserves.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.22 SPECIAL RULES FOR FACILITIES.
   Each park facility and wildlife preserve may develop rules and regulations
that address problems specific to that facility, which shall be in writing and
approved by the directors of the Parks and Recreation Department. Patrons shall
comply with all rules and regulations posted at individual facilities or
special events.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or persons violating any of the rules and regulations in this
chapter will be fined by the town and/or the Parks and Recreation Department
and may be banned from the park for the year or possibly life. Depending on the
severity of the violation of these rules and regulations, any person or persons
may be cited into court and prosecuted by state law along with any and all
fines. Fines will begin at $100 and go up to a $500 maximum, depending on the
violation.
(Ord. 104-12, passed - -)
CHAPTER 96: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
96.01   Policy statement
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   ...missing material...
   
96.04   ...missing material...
   
96.05   Discrimination in residential real-estate related transactions
   
96.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage service
   
96.07   Interference, coercion, or intimidation
   
96.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
   
96.09   Exemptions
   
96.10   Administrative enforcement
§ 96.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   It shall be the policy of the town to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 through
36019, as amended; the federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974,
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5301 et seq., as amended; and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 100-03, passed 2-10-2003)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The
definitions set forth in this section shall apply throughout this subchapter.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who (I.C. 22-9.5-2-2):
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
   COMMISSION. The state’s Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C. 22-
9-1-4 et seq.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)
   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint under
I.C. 22-9.5-6.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
96.04 through
96.08 or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that
is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a
residence by one or more families (I.C. 22-9.5-2-8).
   FAMILIAL STATUS.
      (1)   One or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years
being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody of such
individual or the written permission of such parent or other person.
      (2)   The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
FAMILIAL STATUS shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process
of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18
years.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9) with the status of
such family being further defined under “familial status” within this section.
   HANDICAP. 
      (1)   With respect to a person, means:
         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of such person’s major life activities;
         (b)   A record of having such an impairment;
         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;
         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; or
         (e)   Any other impairment defined under I.C. 22-9.5-2-10.
      (2)   The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use of or
addictions to a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802 (I.C. 22-
9.5-2-10(b)); nor does the term HANDICAP include an individual solely because
the individual is a transvestite (I.C. 22-9.5-2-10(c)).
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under U.S.C. Title 11, receivers, and fiduciaries.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for
a consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the occupant.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)
(Ord. 100-03, passed 2-10-2003)
§ 96.03 ...MISSING MATERIAL...
   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, §
96.09, and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale
or rental of housing set forth in I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in §
96.04 shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) and I.C. 22-9.5-3;
   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) below, nothing in §
96.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses
at any one time; provided that in the sale of such single-family house...
(Ord. 100-03, passed 2-10-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.04 ...MISSING MATERIAL...
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available.
   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induct any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
   (F)   (1) To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap
of:
         (a)   The buyer or renter;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of:
         (a)   The person;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (3)   For purposes of division (F), DISCRIMINATION includes:
         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by
such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a modification on
the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months after
September 13, 1998, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a
manner that:
            1.   The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
            3.   All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
               a.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
               b.   Lights, switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and
other environmental controls in accessible locations;
               c.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
      (4)   Compliance with the appropriate requirement Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard for Buildings
and Facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped
people (commonly cited as “ANSI Al 17.1”) suffices to satisfy the requirements
of division (3)(c)3. above.
      (5)   Nothing in this division requires that a dwelling be made available
to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health
or safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
(Ord. 100-03, passed 2-10-2003)
§ 96.05 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL-ESTATE RELATED
TRANSACTION means any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status.
(Ord. 100-03, passed 2-10-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICE.
   It shall be unlawful to:
   (A)   Deny any person access to, membership, or participation in any
multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’ organization or other service,
organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings; or
   (B)   Discriminate against him or her in the terms or conditions of such
access, membership, or participation on account of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin.
(Ord. 100-03, passed 2-10-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
96.03 through
96.06 of this chapter.
(Ord. 100-03, passed 2-10-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates, or interferes with; or attempts to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status, or national origin and because he or she is or has been
selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying; or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or occupation of any
dwelling; or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in division 15(A);
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate; or
      (3)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A) above, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate shall be fined according
to local, state, and federal law; and if bodily injury results, shall be fined
not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and if
death results, shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for
life.
(Ord. 100-03, passed 2-10-2003)
§ 96.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq. shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those activities or
organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised, controlled by, or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or
national origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not
in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or
purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to
its members or from giving preference to its members.
   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply
with respect to housing for older persons.
      (2)   As used in this section, HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS means housing:
         (a)   Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary
of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the state’s Civil
Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program) or;
         (b)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or
older; or
         (c)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55
years of age or older per unit.
(Ord. 100-03, passed 2-10-2003)
§ 96.10 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering the
ordinance codified herein and referral of complaints hereunder to the
Commissioner as set forth in division (B) below shall be vested in the chief
elected official of the town.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the town, because
of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully administer
enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this chapter, herein
elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the articles of this
chapter by complainants to the state’s Civil Rights Commission for
administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6, and the chief
elected official of the town shall refer all said complaints to the Commission
as provided for under division (A) above to said Commission for purposes of
investigation, resolution, and appropriate relief as provided for under I.C.
22-9.5-6.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the town shall administer
their departments, programs, and activities relating to housing and urban
development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter
and shall cooperate with the chief elected official and the Commission to
further such purposes.
   (D)   The chief elected official of the town or the chief elected official’s
designee shall provide information on remedies available to any aggrieved
person or complainant requesting such information.
(Ord. 100-03, passed 2-10-2003)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   CABLE TELEVISION
      
111.   TRANSIENT SALES, MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
CHAPTER 110: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
Cable Television
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Grant of authority
   
110.03   Pole use
   
110.04   Installation and maintenance of attachments
   
110.05   Pole erection and construction
   
110.06   Specifications
   
110.07   Relocation of facilities
   
110.08   Tree trimming
   
110.09   Damages
   
110.10   Insurance
   
110.11   Minimum CATV system service
   
110.12   Rates to be reasonable
   
110.13   Unauthorized use of service
   
110.14   Police power
   
110.15   Installation of facilities
   
110.16   Payment
   
110.17   Purpose of payment
   
110.18   Underground facilities
   
110.19   Approval of construction
   
110.20   Complaint procedures
   
110.21   Service and system maintenance
   
110.22   Compliance with state and federal law
   
110.23   Transfer of franchise
   
110.24   Term of franchise
   
110.25   Renewal of franchise
   
110.26   Final termination of the franchise
   
110.27   Failure to enforce
   
110.28   Notices
Cable Rates
   
110.40   Federal regulations adopted by reference
   
110.41   Definition
   
110.42   Public hearing
   
110.43   Review of rates
   
110.44   Review of service tier
   
110.45   Decision of Council
   
110.46   Nondisclosure
   
110.47   Order of refund
 
   
110.99   Penalty
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM or CATV SYSTEM. The system of coaxial
cables, wave guides, or other conductors and equipment for providing
television, radio, or other closed- circuit electronic signals, hereinafter
collectively called signals, by cable, or other restricted means or to its
facilities, all as herein contemplated.
   COMPANY. The grantee of the rights under this section.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or
organization of any kind.
   TELEVISION. A system for transmission of audio and video signals by means of
electrical impulses.
(Prior Code, § 110.01) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982)
§ 110.02 GRANT OF AUTHORITY.
   In consideration of the faithful performance and observance of the
conditions and reservations hereinafter specified, and the right is granted by
the town to the company and its successors and assigns to erect, maintain, and
operate a CATV system for the interception, sale, and distribution of
television, radio, and other signals from the company’s antenna or studios to
its subscribers, all in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United
States of America, the state, and the codes, ordinances, and regulations of the
town. For this purpose, the company shall have the right to erect, maintain,
and operate its equipment in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under the
streets, alleys, public ways, and public places now laid out or dedicated, and
all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the town.
(Prior Code, § 110.02) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982)
§ 110.03 POLE USE.
   Where the use of poles owned by public utilities is not practicable and
rental agreement cannot be entered into with the public utilities, the company
shall have the right to erect and maintain its own poles as such may be
necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the CATV system;
provided, however, that the company shall obtain prior approval from the town
as to the necessity for, and location of, any new poles to be erected. Nothing
in this section shall preclude the company from contracting with the town or
other utility now or hereafter having pole lines in the town to provide and
maintain the transmission system of the company.
(Prior Code, § 110.03) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982)
§ 110.04 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF ATTACHMENTS.
   (A)   The company shall, at its own expense, make and maintain its
attachments in safe condition, in good repair, and in a manner suitable to the
utility companies and the town.
   (B)   In the maintenance and operation of its CATV distribution system in
the streets, alleys, and other public places, and in the course of any new
construction or additions to its facilities, the company shall proceed so as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public. Any streets,
alleys, sidewalks, or other public places disturbed or damaged in the
construction or maintenance of the CATV system shall be promptly repaired to
the satisfaction of the town by, and at the expense of, the company.
(Prior Code, § 110.04) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 POLE ERECTION AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The company’s transmission and distribution system poles, wires, and
appurtenances thereon shall be located, erected, and maintained so as not to:
      (1)   Endanger or interfere with the lives of persons;
      (2)   Interfere with new improvements the town may deem proper to make;
or
      (3)   Hinder unnecessarily or obstruct the free use of streets, alleys,
bridges, or other public property.
   (B)   Removal of poles or rearrangement of its facilities to avoid such
interference will be at the company’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 110.05) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The company’s poles, cables, wires, and appliances, in each and every
location, shall be erected and maintained in accordance with:
      (1)   Such requirements and specifications as the town shall from time to
time prescribe;
      (2)   Requirements and specifications of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters;
      (3)   Any amendments or revisions of the code or practices; and
      (4)   In compliance with any rules or orders now in effect or that may be
hereafter issued by any regulatory agency or other authority having
jurisdiction in the state.
   (B)   All installation of equipment shall be of a permanent nature in
accordance with good engineering practice. The company’s service drops shall be
installed in a neat and workmanlike manner, including house attachments, so as
to preserve the best overall appearance of power, telephone, and CATV drops
through the air and attached to the buildings. CATV service drops are to be
installed where practicable from the cable away from a pole so as to preserve
climbing space on the pole.
   (C)   If a customer discontinues community antenna television service and
requests removal of the company’s service drop, such removal shall be
accomplished in a neat and workmanlike manner at the company’s expense.
   (D)   The company shall grant to the town, free of expense, joint use of any
and all poles owned by it for any proper municipal purpose acceptable to the
company, insofar as such use may be accomplished without interfering with the
free use and enjoyment of the company’s own wires and fixtures; and the town
shall hold the company harmless from any and all actions, causes, or actions or
damage caused by replacing of the town’s wires or appurtenances upon poles of
the company.
   (E)   Proper regard shall be given to all existing safety rules governing
construction and maintenance in affect at the time of construction.
(Prior Code, § 110.06) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   If at any time during the period of the section, the town shall elect to
alter or change the grade of any streets, alleys, or other public ways; the
company, upon reasonable notice by the town, shall remove, release, and
relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other
fixtures.
(Prior Code, § 110.07) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.08 TREE TRIMMING.
   The company shall have the authority and is required to trim trees upon and
overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places of the town to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires,
cables, and distribution system components of the company, all trimming to be
done at the sole expense of the company.
(Prior Code, § 110.08) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.09 DAMAGES.
   The company shall exercise special precaution to avoid damage to facilities
of the town and of others supported on the poles; and assume all responsibility
for, and agrees to indemnify the town from and against, any and all loss or
damage, or claims therefor, resulting from any and all acts or omissions of the
company in connection therewith. The company shall make an immediate report to
the town of the occurrence of any loss or damage and agrees to pay the cost
incurred in making repairs to such facilities of the town or others.
(Prior Code, § 110.09) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.10 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The company shall indemnify, protect, and save harmless the town from
and against losses and physical damage to property, and bodily injury or death
to persons, including payments made under any worker’s compensation law, which
may arise out of (or be caused by) the erection, maintenance, presence, use, or
removal of all CATV equipment of any kind or nature whatsoever within the town,
or by any act of the company, its agents, or employees, or in any way arising
out of the granting of this franchise.
   (B)   The company shall carry insurance to protect itself, the utility
companies, and the town from and against all claims, demands, actions,
judgements, costs, expenses, and liabilities which may arise or result,
directly or indirectly, from (or by reason of) such loss, injury, or damage.
The insurance policy shall specifically provide that the town and the utility
companies shall be named insureds.
   (C)   The amounts of such insurance against liability due to physical damage
to property shall be no less than $50,000 as to any one claim and not less than
$200,000 aggregate in any single policy year; and against liability due to
bodily injury or to death of persons, not less than $100,000 as to any one
person and not less than $300,000 as to all such claims arising from any one
accident.
   (D)   The company shall also carry such insurance as it deems necessary to
protect it, the utility companies, and the town from all claims under the
worker’s compensation laws in effect which may be applicable to the company.
   (E)   All insurance required by this section shall be (and remain in) full
force and effect for the entire period of this section. The policies of
insurance or a certified copy of copies thereof shall be deposited with, and
kept on file by, the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 110.10) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.11 MINIMUM CATV SYSTEM SERVICE.
   Subject to, and in accordance with, the rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission, the company’s CATV system shall make available to
all subscribers FM radio signals and cable television service on at least ten
channels, including the special access channels required by the rules and
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.
(Prior Code, § 110.11) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.12 RATES TO BE REASONABLE.
   The company agrees that all rates charged to subscribers to its CATV system
service shall be standard, uniform, and reasonable. A copy of the company’s
schedule of charges for installation and furnishing of service shall be filed
with the Clerk-Treasurer not less than 60 days prior to the effective date of
such charges.
(Prior Code, § 110.12) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.13 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF SERVICE.
   Persons receiving CATV service may not alter, extend, or otherwise tamper
with the company’s facilities to serve more equipment than is being contracted
for.
(Prior Code, § 110.13) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982)
§ 110.14 POLICE POWER.
   The company shall at all times during the life of this permit be subject to
all lawful exercise of the police power of the town and to such reasonable
regulation as the town shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide.
(Prior Code, § 110.14) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.15 INSTALLATION OF FACILITIES.
   The grantee will proceed as follows pursuant to Federal Communications
Commission’s regulations:
   (A)   Apply for pole attachment agreements with the appropriate companies
within 60 days after issuance of the franchise;
   (B)   Submit to the town detailed system layout plans within 90 days after
obtaining the necessary pole attachment agreements;
   (C)   Begin construction within four months after written approval by town
on system layout plans and receipt of a certificate of compliance from the
Federal Communications Commission;
   (D)   Have completed and operational not less than 20% of the total system
within six months after commencement of construction; and
   (E)   Have completed and operational not less than 90% of the total system
within 12 months after commencement of construction.
(Prior Code, § 110.15) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982)
§ 110.16 PAYMENT.
   (A)   In consideration of the rights, privileges, and permit granted in
compensation to the town for the use of its public places, the grantee agrees
to pay to the town, no later than March 1 for the preceding calendar year, 3%
of the annual gross basic service receipts from the sale of services to the
CATV system.
   (B)   The term ANNUAL GROSS BASIC SERVICE RECEIPTS shall mean the total
amount of money received during the applicable calendar year by the company
from its subscribers as a monthly basic service fee.
   (C)   The company shall file with the town an annual report of all revenues
at the time of making the annual report, and the town shall have access to the
company’s books and records for audit purposes.
(Prior Code, § 110.16) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.17 PURPOSE OF PAYMENT.
   The payments provided for in §
110.16 to be made to the town are in payment by the company to the town for the
use of the streets and alleys and additional supervision, maintenance,
inspection, regulation, burdens, and costs to the town occasioned by reason of
the granting of the rights hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 110.17) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982)
§ 110.18 UNDERGROUND FACILITIES.
   The company at its own expense shall place its facilities underground in
those areas of the town where all of the utilities are underground.
(Prior Code, § 110.18) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.19 APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTION.
   Wherever this section provision is made for approval of the company’s
construction of facilities, such approval shall be given by the person
designated by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 110.19) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982)
§ 110.20 COMPLAINT PROCEDURES.
   The company shall maintain a local business office or agent easily
accessible to the citizens of the town for the purpose of receiving subscriber
complaints expeditiously and normally within 48 hours. The Council may appoint
a commission or may designate any officer of the town with the responsibility
of monitoring the company’s operations, and in cases where customer complaints
are unsatisfied by the company’s response to the complaints, such commission or
person shall have the power, and the company shall accept and give recognition
to recommended changes in the company’s complaint procedures.
(Prior Code, § 110.20) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.21 SERVICE AND SYSTEM MAINTENANCE.
   The company shall, at its own expense, at all times maintain and furnish
telephone answering service and system maintenance service to subscribers
during reasonable regular business hours. The company, in addition to having
its telephone listed in the local telephone directory, shall advise each of its
subscribers in writing of such telephone numbers.
(Prior Code, § 110.21) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.22 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAW.
   (A)   The company shall conform to all laws, rules, and regulations of the
United States and the state in the construction and operation of its CATV
system; and all rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission
relating to cable television franchises, as now enacted or subsequently
amended, are incorporated herein by reference.
   (B)   The company shall take such additional action as is necessary to
incorporate formally in the terms of this franchise any modifications required
by amendments of applicable federal and state laws, rules, and regulations
governing the contents of cable television franchises within one year of their
adoption.
   (C)   This subchapter is in full compliance with the rules and regulations
of the Federal Communications Commission relating to cable television
franchises as now enacted.
   (D)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the company from
requesting a waiver of any state or federal rule or regulation, provided that a
copy of such request shall be served upon the town.
(Prior Code, § 110.22) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.23 TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
   The franchise and rights granted herein shall be a privilege to be held in
personal trust by the company and shall not be assigned, transferred, sold, or
disposed of, without the prior consent of the Council expressed by resolution.
Such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld provided that the proposed
assignee agrees to comply with all the provisions of this subchapter and is
able to provide proof of financial responsibility and other qualifications
satisfactory to the Council. No consent by the Council shall be required for a
transfer in trust, mortgage, or other instrument of hypothecation to secure an
indebtedness of the company. The consent of the Council to any sale or other
transfer shall not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the
town under this section.
(Prior Code, § 110.23) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.24 TERM OF FRANCHISE.
   The franchise and rights herein granted shall take effect and be in force
from and after the final passage hereof, as required by law, and upon filing of
acceptance by the company with the Clerk-Treasurer, and shall continue in force
and effect for a term of 15 years after the effective date of this franchise.
(Prior Code, § 110.24) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982)
§ 110.25 RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE.
   Upon the expiration of the original term of the franchise, the company or
its successors and assigns shall be entitled to a renewal of this franchise for
an additional term of ten years if, after a public hearing affording due
process to all interested parties and conducted in accordance with all
applicable federal and state laws and regulations, the Council shall find that
the company or its successors and assigns remain qualified to operate the CATV
system and have provided past service to the town and subscribers of the system
in substantial compliance with the terms and conditions of the franchise.
(Prior Code, § 110.25) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982)
§ 110.26 FINAL TERMINATION OF THE FRANCHISE.
   Upon final termination of the franchise, the company shall remove its
cables, wires, and equipment from all poles of the town and all space reserved
for the town’s use on poles belonging to others. If not so removed, the town
shall have the right to remove or have its contractor remove them at the risk,
cost, and expense of the company and without any liability therefor.
(Prior Code, § 110.26) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982)
§ 110.27 FAILURE TO ENFORCE.
   Failure to enforce or insist upon compliance with any of the terms or
conditions of this subchapter shall not constitute a waiver or relinquishment
of any such terms or conditions, but the same shall be and remain at all times
in full force and effect.
(Prior Code, § 110.27) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982)
§ 110.28 NOTICES.
   Notices under this subchapter, exceptions otherwise indicated, shall be
addressed to the company at its regular business address, and for the town to
the Clerk-Treasurer, Town Hall.
(Prior Code, § 110.28) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982)
CABLE RATES
§ 110.40 FEDERAL REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The Council adopts the rules and regulations set forth by the Federal
Communications Commission pursuant to § 623(b) of the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47 U.S.C. § 543(b)) for the review of
the basic service tier of cable television services and equipment necessary for
the provision of such service tier.
   (B)   Such rules and regulations promulgated by the Federal Communications
Commission are found at 47 U.S.C. § 623(b) and which are incorporated herein
and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 110.40) (Ord. 216-93, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 110.41 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASIC SERVICE TIER OF CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES. A separately available
service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier of
service, including as a minimum (but not limited to):
      (1)   All signals of domestic television broadcast stations provided to
any subscriber (except a signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier
beyond the local service area of such station, regardless of how such signals
is ultimately received by the cable system);
      (2)   Any public, educational, and governmental programming required by
the franchise to be carried on the basic tier; and
      (3)   Any additional video programming signals or service added to the
basic tier by the cable operator.
   EQUIPMENT NECESSARY TO PROVIDE THE BASIC TIER OF SERVICE. Items of
associated equipment necessary for the reception of basic cable service by a
subscriber, including (but not limited to) converter boxes, remote control
units, additional outlets, and installations.
(Prior Code, § 110.41) (Ord. 216-93, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 110.42 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   The town shall provide the grantee of the cable television franchise,
the public, and interested parties with an opportunity to be heard at a public
hearing before the town upon 14 days’ written notice to the grantee of the
cable television franchise of the time and place of the public hearing provided
further that:
      (1)   The notice shall indicate that the purpose of the public hearing is
to receive the views of the grantee and interested parties on issues pertaining
to regulation of the basic service tier of cable television services and
equipment necessary to provide the basic tier of service;
      (2)   Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a local
newspaper of general circulation at least ten days before the date of this
hearing; and
      (3)   An agenda for the public hearing shall be posted in a public place
at least seven days prior to the public hearing.
   (B)   Upon the adoption of this subchapter and the certification of the town
by the Federal Communications Commission, the town shall immediately notify the
cable operator by certified mail (return receipt requested) that the town
intends to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and
associated equipment as authorized by the Cable Television Consumer Protection
and Competition Act of 1992, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq. Upon receipt of the
notice by the town, the cable operator shall (within 30 days) file with the
town its current rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment
along with any additional documentation justifying the reasonableness of its
rates.
(Prior Code, § 110.42) (Ord. 216-93, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 110.43 REVIEW OF RATES.
   (A)   The town shall establish that the period for review of rates of the
basic service tier of cable television services and the equipment necessary to
provide the basic tier of service shall be 30 days from the submission by the
grantee of the cable television franchise of Federal Communications Commission
Form 393. If the Council takes no action within 30 days from the date the cable
operator files its basic cable rates with the town, the proposed rates will
continue in effect.
   (B)   In the event that additional time for review of the Federal
Communications Commission Form 393 submitted by grantee is necessary, the
Council or its designee shall issue a brief written order prior to the end of
the 30-day review period, with a copy of the order to be sent by certified U.S.
mail to the grantee, providing for an additional 90-day period for review of
rates of the basic service tier and the equipment necessary to provide the
basic tier of service. During the extended review period and before taking
action on the proposed rate, the Council shall hold at least one public hearing
in which interested citizens may express their views and record objections.
(Prior Code, § 110.43) (Ord. 216-93, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 110.44 REVIEW OF SERVICE TIER.
   (A)   The town shall establish that the period for review of the basic
service tier of cable television services and the equipment necessary to
provide the basic tier of service shall be 90 days from the submission by the
grantee of information and forms prescribed by the Federal Communications
Commission for a showing of cost-of-service, as defined by the Federal
Communications Commission.
   (B)   In the event that additional time for review of the cost-of-service
showing submitted by the grantee is necessary, the Council or its designee
shall issue a brief written order prior to the end of the 90-day review period
with a copy of the order to be sent by certified U.S. mail to the grantee,
providing for an additional 150-day period for review of rates of the basic
service tier and the equipment necessary to provide the basic tier of service.
During the extended review period and before taking action on the proposed
rate, the Council shall hold at least one public hearing in which interested
citizens may express their views and record objections.
(Prior Code, § 110.44) (Ord. 216-93, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 110.45 DECISION OF COUNCIL.
   (A)   Upon completion of its review of the proposed rates for the basic
service tier of cable television services and the equipment necessary to
provide the basic tier of service, the Council shall adopt its decision by
formal resolution. The resolution shall indicate the reasons for the decision.
Upon passage of the resolution, the town shall make available copies of the
resolution to the public.
   (B)   In the event that the cable operator’s proposed rates exceed the
reasonable rates standard as established by the Federal Communications
Commission in its rules and regulations, the Council shall order the rates
reduced by rollbacks or refunds to subscribers in the manner so prescribed by
the Federal Communications Commission.
(Prior Code, § 110.45) (Ord. 216-93, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 110.46 NONDISCLOSURE.
   In considering information provided by the grantee as a part of review of
rates for the basic service tier of cable television services and the equipment
necessary to provide the basic tier of service, the town shall not disclose to
the public the content of any records, forms, reports, calculations, or other
documents as provided, which the grantee has indicated as being of a
proprietary interest or constituting a trade secret in nature. The municipal
officer responsible for administration of the State Freedom of Information Act
shall retain the right to determine the validity of the grantee’s claim of
proprietary interest or trade secrecy in accordance with the provisions of the
State Freedom of Information Act, being I.C. 5-14-3.
(Prior Code, § 110.46) (Ord. 216-93, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 110.47 ORDER OF REFUND.
   The town may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of
previously paid rates under the following circumstances:
   (A)   A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in
excess of the permitted basic cable service tier charge or above the actual
cost of equipment; or
   (B)   The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued
by the town.
(Prior Code, § 110.47) (Ord. 216-93, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation by the company, its vendee, lessee, or successor of the
material provisions of §§
110.01 through
110.28 shall be cause for the forfeiture of the franchise and all rights
hereunder, provided that the town shall first notify the company in writing of
the condition or act upon which the violation is charged, and the company shall
have 30 days within which to remedy such condition or act; and provided
further, that should it be impossible to correct the violation within 30 days,
then the company shall have a reasonable time to make the corrections. Failure
to pay all monies due from the company to the town hereunder after 30-day
written notice by the town to the company shall be grounds for revocation of
the franchise.
(Prior Code, § 110.99) (Ord. 111-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 118-82, passed 9-
13-1982)
CHAPTER 111: TRANSIENT SALES, MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Authority to regulate
   
111.02   Definition
   
111.03   Prohibitions
   
111.04   Application
   
111.05   Permit
   
111.06   Revocation
Festivals, Personal Sales, and the Like
   
111.20   Special events
   
111.21   Definitions
   
111.22   Application; license
   
111.23   Special events
   
111.24   Garage or yard sales
   
111.25   Exemptions
 
   
111.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 AUTHORITY TO REGULATE.
   The town may tax, license, and regulate transient merchants and charge a fee
for the transaction of business in the town and provide for the punishment of
violators.
(Prior Code, § 111.01) (Ord. 26, passed 2-22-1897)
Statutory reference:
   Transient merchant tax, see I.C. 25-37-1-11
§ 111.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANTS. All persons designated TRANSIENT MERCHANTS under I.C.
25-37-1-2 et seq., as amended, but does not include solicitors.
(Prior Code, § 111.02) (Ord. 26, passed 2-22-1897)
§ 111.03 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No transient merchant shall remain upon any premises after being
requested to leave by any resident of the premises.
   (B)   No transient merchant shall conduct business or attempt to do so on
any property where a notice reading “no solicitors” (or words to that effect)
is posted.
   (C)   No transient merchant shall conduct business on Sunday or from one-
half hour before sunset until 8:00 a.m. A transient merchant may conduct
business at any time if he or she has a specific appointment with, or
invitation from, the prospective customer.
   (D)   No transient merchant shall engage in business without first obtaining
a permit to do so.
   (E)   No transient merchant shall refuse to display his or her permit upon
the request of any person.
(Prior Code, § 111.03) (Ord. 26, passed 2-22-1897) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Each applicant for a transient merchant permit shall complete and sign
an application stating the following information:
      (1)   The length of time for which he or she desires to conduct business;
      (2)   The local residence and mailing address of the applicant;
      (3)   The permanent residence and mailing address of the applicant;
      (4)   The name and the local and permanent mailing address of the person,
firm, corporation, or partnership (if any) which the applicant represents;
      (5)   The kind of business proposed to be conducted and the nature of the
goods, wares, merchandise, or services to be sold;
      (6)   If the applicant holds a driver’s license, any information
concerning that license deemed necessary by the Town Marshal; and
      (7)   Any other information deemed necessary by the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   No applicant for a transient merchant permit shall give any false or
misleading information in the application.
(Prior Code, § 111.04) (Ord. 26, passed 2-22-1897) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.05 PERMIT.
   (A)   No transient merchant permit shall be issued by the Clerk-Treasurer
until the applicant has paid the fee set forth in the following schedule:
Duration of License Fee
Duration of License Fee
1 day               $1
2 days              $1.90
3 days              $2.75
4 days              $3.50
5 days              $4.25
1 week              $5
2 weeks             $10
3 weeks             $15
1 month             $20
2 months            $35
3 months            $50
6 months            $75
 
   (B)   No transient merchant permit shall be issued to a corporation,
partnership, or any entity except an individual person. Each individual
operating as a transient merchant shall obtain a permit, whether acting for
himself or herself or as an agent or representative of another.
   (C)   Every transient merchant permit shall:
      (1)   Be signed by the Clerk-Treasurer;
      (2)   State the date of its issuance; and
      (3)   State the date of its expiration.
   (D)   Any permit not stating the information in division (C) above or issued
in violation of any provision of this section is void.
(Prior Code, § 111.05) (Ord. 26, passed 2-22-1897)
§ 111.06 REVOCATION.
   Any transient merchant permit may be revoked if the permittee violates any
provision of the State Transient Merchant Law, being I.C. 25-36-1-2, or this
section. The permit holder shall immediately surrender any revoked permit to
the Town Marshal.
(Prior Code, § 111.06) (Ord. 26, passed 2-22-1897) Penalty, see §
111.99
FESTIVALS, PERSONAL SALES, AND THE LIKE
§ 111.20 AUTHORITY TO REGULATE.
   The town may tax, license, and regulate transient merchants, solicitors, and
peddlers (hereafter known as “applicants”) and charge a fee for the transaction
of business in the town and provide for punishment of violators.
(Ord. 105-22, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 111.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. Any person who travels from place to place by any means carrying
goods for sale, or making sales, or making deliveries; or any person who,
without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for sale from any
public place within the town.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a SOLICITOR is not
a “peddler”.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANTS. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the town and who, in
the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure, vehicle, or any
place within the town.
(Ord. 105-22, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 111.22 APPLICATION; LICENSE.
   (A)   All applicants must file an application for a license with the Clerk-
Treasurer. The application shall state:
      (1)   The applicant’s name;
      (2)   Permanent address;
      (3)   Business name
      (4)   Proposed location within the town;
      (5)   Structure or vehicle from which products/merchandise are to be
sold;
      (6)   Type of business and/or products sold;
      (7)   Length of time for which the applicant desires to do business in
the town; and
      (8)   Any additional information the Clerk-Treasurer deems necessary.
   (B)   Businesses that propose to handle foodstuffs must attach with their
application the appropriate license from the County Health Department.
   (C)   The applicant must pay a licensing fee of $15 to the Clerk-Treasurer,
completing the application at least 30 days prior to the applicant’s intended
activities in the town.
   (D)   The Police Department shall conduct an investigation with a fee of $5.
If the application is not approved, the Clerk-Treasurer shall refund the $15.
The application shall be denied if the following are discovered during the
investigation.
      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude.
      (2)   The applicant has committed prior fraudulent acts.
      (3)   The applicant has made willful misstatements in the application.
      (4)   The applicant has committed prior violations of ordinances
pertaining to transient merchants, peddlers, solicitors and the like.
   (E)   The license will be good for 90 days after approval of the
application, and regardless of whether the applicant conducts business in the
town, the $15 license fee will not be refunded.
   (F)   The license issued shall be posted conspicuously in or at the place
named therein. If there is more than one location within the town, a separate
license will be issued for each location.
   (G)   The applicant may extend the license for an additional 90 days by
paying $5 to the Clerk- Treasurer to cover the additional administrative costs
associated with the extended license.
   (H)   If the applicant conducts door-to-door sales, the license must be
displayed on the outermost layer of clothing worn or displayed on the vehicle
and identifying the name of the company or organization represented.
(Ord. 105-22, passed 6-13-2022) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.23 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   The Heritage Days Festival, Town Market, and specified other events
that may occur during the course of the year will be managed by a board or
committee that sets the rules and regulations for such event and will not be
sponsored by the town.
   (B)   Each festival or event will be held in a designated area under the
board or committee’s control. All rules and regulations of these festivals and
events must be within the existing laws of the state and regulations of the
town.
   (C)   To promote any festival or event, the Council strongly recommends that
all vendors work with the committee in charge of the festival or event for a
unified fundraiser and set up within the designated area.
   (D)   The Police Department may, with the approval of the Council, close off
a street or alley as required or necessary during any event or festival
described in this section.
(Ord. 105-22, passed 6-13-2022) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.24 GARAGE OR YARD SALES.
   (A)   A GARAGE SALE or YARD SALE is defined as a public or private sale
conducted by the owner or occupier of a premise, and conducted within a
residence, garage, or other accessory buildings or outside thereof, which sale
is of six or more items of personal property owned or in the possession of the
owner or occupier of the premises, which personal property was not acquired by
the owner or occupier for the purpose of resale.
   (B)   A garage or yard sale may be conducted no more than three times in any
one calendar year on any premises located in any R1, R2, or R3 zones, but no
such sale shall be conducted for more than three consecutive days.
   (C)   Such garage or yard sale shall only be conducted during the hours from
sunrise to sunset.
   (D)   All personal property exhibited for sale outside any structure during
such garage or yard sale shall be removed from the outside and placed within a
structure immediately following the last day of such sale. All signs erected
for such garage or yard sale shall likewise be removed.
   (E)   Garage or yard sales sponsored by the town or the Heritage Days
Festival will not count toward the maximum allowed in one calendar year.
(Ord. 105-22, passed 6-13-2022) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.25 EXEMPTIONS.
   Situations that are exempt from these regulations set forth in this
subchapter include:
   (A)   An individual while (and to the extent) he or she is engaged in a
protected political speech or activity;
   (B)   An individual while (and to the extend) he or she is engaged in a
protected religious speech or activity;
   (C)   An individual engaged in the solicitation of funds and/or the sale of
items on behalf of a not-for-profit or nonprofit organization or association
that is exempt from the state’s Gross Retail Tax;
   (D)   An individual who, due to pre-exemption or applicable federal or state
law, is exempt from local licensing requirements;
   (E)   An individual who has been invited by the lawful owner or occupant of
a residence or business to solicit his or her particular goods or services to
that property owner or resident; and
   (F)   Any person engaged in sales or offers to sell during any event that is
pre-approved by the Council.
(Ord. 105-22, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§
111.03 through
111.06 shall be fined not more than $25 for each offense. Every day a violation
continues constitutes a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person or business, either as principal or agent, who engages in
business in violation of §§
111.22 through
111.24 will be fined an amount not to exceed $40 but no less than $5 per day
that such violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 111.99) (Ord. 26, passed 2-22-1897; Ord. 105-22, passed 6-13-
2022)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   PROHIBITED BEHAVIOR
CHAPTER 130: PROHIBITED BEHAVIOR
Section
   
130.01   Curfews
   
130.02   Firearms
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 CURFEWS.
   (A)   The Council determines that the curfew time established by I.C. 31-6-
4-2 is later than reasonable for public safety under the conditions existing in
the town and advances the curfew time within its jurisdiction by one hour
during the Halloween period designated by the Council each year.
(Prior Code, § 130.01)
   (B)   (1)   No parent, guardian, or other person having the legal custody
and control of any minor person shall permit the minor to be or remain in or
upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places within the town
during curfew hours.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) above shall not apply if any minor is accompanied
by his or her parents or guardian or by any other person having the legal
custody and control of the minor; or if he or she is engaged in the performance
of a lawful errand, employment, or duly authorized and directed by the parent,
guardian, or other person having the legal care and custody of the minor, and
if the minor has in his or her possession a written permit from the person or
employer showing the reason and necessity to be upon or in the street, alley,
park, or other public place during curfew hours.
(Prior Code, § 130.02)
(Ord. 4, passed 4-8-1886; Ord. 316, passed 10-11-1976) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Curfew at local option, see I.C. 31-6-4-2
§ 130.02 FIREARMS.
   No person shall discharge a firearm, pellet gun, or B.B. gun within or into
the town except:
   (A)   By any authorized law enforcement officer in pursuit of his or her
duty;
   (B)   By any person who has reason to believe that he or she shall suffer an
imminent injury to his or her person or property and as a consequence
discharges the firearm, pellet gun, or B.B. gun in self-defense; or
   (C)   By any person exterminating rodents and reptiles generally considered
dangerous or offensive to public health and safety.
(Prior Code, § 130.20) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Firearms, see I.C. 35-47
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care and
custody of the minor or minors who violate any provision of §
130.01 shall be fined not more than $2,500 for each offense.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §
130.02 shall be fined not more than $2,500.
(Prior Code, § 130.99) (Ord. 4, passed 4-8-1886; Ord. 316, passed 10-11-1976)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   PLANNING AND ZONING
CHAPTER 150: PLANNING AND ZONING
Section
   
150.01   House numbers; posting
   
150.02   Unified Development Code
 
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 HOUSE NUMBERS; POSTING.
   (A)   Property addressing. All residences and commercial, industrial, and
public structures located in the town shall be assigned a permanent city-type
street address. The assigned numbers shall be placed on the front of the
structure. In all situations, the Council shall make the final determination of
which street/road will be used for an address. The criteria for this
determination will be based on the layout of the property, layout of the
structure, and other factors that may affect emergency services and mail
delivery.
   (B)   Place and size of address numbers. It shall be the responsibility of
the property owner to provide visible and current address numbers on the
dwelling. The house numbers shall be at least three inches in height. The color
of the numbering shall be in contrast to its background. The letters or numbers
shall be placed on the main level in a location which faces, and is visible
from, the street upon which it is addressed, near a main entryway of the
dwelling, and placed higher than the height of the entryway.
   (C)   Enforcement. All properties within the jurisdiction of the town shall
be required to be in full compliance of this section within 90 days of the
passage date of the ordinance codified herein. It is the duty of the owner or
occupant of each house, business structure, or other structure within the town,
now existing or hereafter erected, which has been assigned a mailing address
for the receipt of mail through the United States Postal Service, to place on
such structure letters or numerals (not Roman numerals or written words) not
less than three inches high showing the number of the mailing address of each
such structure in the manner and location described in division (B) above. This
section is not intended to conflict with the United States Postal Service
requirements for mail delivery.
(Ord. 103-15, passed 4-13-2015) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.02 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE.
   The Unified Development Code is adopted and incorporated as a part of this
code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Res. 20-104, passed 7-6-2020; Ord. 107-20, passed 8-10-2020; Ord. 108-20,
passed 8-10-2020; Ord. 100-21, passed 2-8-2021; Ord. 102-23, passed 5-8-2023;
Res. 23-101, passed 5-8-2023; Res. 23-102, passed 5-8-2023; Ord. 101-23, passed
6-12-2023; Ord. 106-25, passed 10-13-2025)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   In the event that the owner or occupant of any such structure as
described in §
150.01(A) fails to comply with the terms and conditions of §
150.01, said owner or occupant, upon conviction, shall be guilty of an
infraction and subject to a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $50.
(Ord. 103-15, passed 4-13-2015)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
      
II.   PROPERTY TRANSFERS
      
III.   FINANCES; FUNDS; TAXATION
      
IV.   LAND VACATIONS AND ANNEXATIONS
      
V.   IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS; PLANS
      
VI.   COVID-19
TABLE I: FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Granting permission to the County Board of
Res. 85-62    9-9-1985    Commissioners to include the town in its jurisdiction
                          and provide transportation service.
Ord. 166-87   6-22-1987   Granting consent to the assignment of the cable
                          television franchise from Quality CATV.
                          Authorizing the first amendatory agreement to the
Ord. 103-01   7-9-2001    power sales contract with the Indiana Municipal Power
                          Agency.
Res. 05-101   3-14-2005   Adopting Keystone Consulting Services, Inc. financial
                          software.
                          Authorizing second amendatory agreement to the power
Ord. 109-07   8-13-2007   sales contract with the Indiana Municipal Power
                          Agency.
Res. 2009-101 2-9-2009    Supporting the independence of the North Madison
                          County Public Library System.
Ord. 2316     3-11-2019   Interlocal agreement with Elwood for the hearing and
                          disposal of traffic and parking violations.
                          Authorizing a third amendatory agreement of the power
Ord. 106-21   5-10-2021   sales contract with the Indiana Municipal Power
                          Agency.
                         
 
TABLE II: PROPERTY TRANSFERS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. 91-129   2-11-1991   Exchange of two parcels of real estate between Union
                          Federal Savings Bank and the town.
Ord. 201-91   9-9-1991    Determination of sale and/or disposal of certain real
                          estate owned by the town.
Res. 12-106   7-9-2012    Purchase of property formerly known as MainSource
                          Bank for the use of Town Hall.
-             1-14-2021   Adding another grantee to a quitclaim deed for the
                          purchase of real estate.
                         
 
TABLE III: FINANCES; FUNDS; TAXATION
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. 105-06   5-8-2006    Establishing a 30-day loan from the Food and Beverage
                          Fund for the 128 Main Street project.
Ord. 102-07   3-14-2007   Establishing a rainy day fund for unencumbered funds.
Res. 12-110   8-13-2012   Creation of appropriations for the Food & Beverage
                          Fund and the Cemetery Care Fund.
Res. 12-111   8-13-2012   Obtaining a loan from MainSource Bank for the project
                          of paving the Jefferson Oaks Park Community Walkway.
Res. 12-115   11-9-2012   Creating appropriations for the park and recreation
                          bonds, interest, and depreciation.
Res. 13-102   3-11-2013   Obtaining a loan from MainSource Bank to pay off the
                          loan from PNC Bank.
Res. 13-105   8-12-2013   Creation of a debt service levy for paving the
                          Jefferson Oaks Park Community Walkway.
Ord. 106-18   1-14-2018   Establishing home- ruled funds for fireworks,
                          Christmas decorations, and sidewalk donations.
Ord. 114-20   11-9-2020   Authorizing tax- exempt lease/purchase agreement for
                          AMI electric meters.
Ord. 114-21   9-13-2021   Creating a non- reverting fund for building
                          inspections.
Res. 21-107   11-8-2021   Adopting a fixed asset inventory for assets valued at
                          $5,000 or more.
                         
 
TABLE IV: LAND VACATIONS AND ANNEXATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Establishing a fiscal plan for the annexation of one
Res. 04-102   - -         acre in the fractional northwest quarter of section
                          five.
Ord. 147-1985 10-14-1985  Vacating a certain portion of Woodworth Avenue.
Ord. 163-87   1-26-1987   Vacating an alley running west from the intersection
                          of Factory and Delaware Streets.
                          Vacating a public way running from north to south and
Ord. 180-88   12-12-1988  located between Lot 8 and Lot 127 in Hillside
                          Addition.
Ord. 193-90   5-14-1990   Vacating a portion of Seventh Street.
Ord. 198-91   5-13-1991   Vacating a portion of an unimproved street commonly
                          known as Tenth Street.
Ord. 205-92   4-13-1992   Vacating a portion of an alley running west from
                          Eleventh street.
Ord. 100-98   4-13-1998   Annexing 56.368 acres in the northwest fractional
                          quarter of section five.
Ord. 108-02   12-9-2002   Annexing 5.729 acres in the southwest quarter of
                          section five.
Ord. 109-02   12-9-2002   Annexing 16.667 acres in the north-half of section
                          six.
Res. 03-101   2-10-2003   Establishing a fiscal plan for the annexation of
                          16.667 acres in the north-half of section six.
Res. 03-102   2-10-2003   Establishing a fiscal plan for the annexation of
                          5.729 acres in the southwest quarter of section five.
Ord. 103-04   4-12-2004   Annexing one acre in the fractional northwest quarter
                          of section five.
Ord. 101-04   4-12-2004   Annexing adjacent real estate located at 409 South
                          Washington Street.
Ord. 104-A-06 5-8-2006    Vacating platted lots and alleys in the Commercial
                          Addition to the town.
Ord. 104-B-06 5-8-2006    Vacating lots, alley, and a street in Hillside
                          Addition.
Ord. 111-07   10-8-2007   Vacating a portion of an alley at an iron found at
                          the southeast corner of Lot 75.
                          Establishing a fiscal plan for proposed annexation of
Res. 09-105   9-14-2009   5.833 acres owned by Matthew W. and Nannette
                          Rastetter.
Ord. 101-09   9-14-2009   Annexing 5.833 acres at the southeast quarter of
                          section six.
Ord. 100-16   3-14-2016   Vacating a part of Fifth Street and an alley bordered
                          by Jefferson Street and Madison Street.
Ord. 110-22   7-11-2022   Vacating an alley running south from Clyde Street to
                          Harrison Street.
                         
 
TABLE V: IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS; PLANS
 
Ord./Res.   Date         Description
No.         Passed   
Res. 13-109 12-9-2013    Designating 0.3676 acres in the east-half of section
                         six as an economic revitalization area.
Res. 18-101 5-14-2018    Adopting the “Imagine Frankton” 2018 comprehensive
                         plan.
Res. 22-101 3-14-2022    Approving the 2022 plans to improve and maintain the
                         storm water system.
                        
 
TABLE VI: COVID-19
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. 20-101   3-30-2020   Declaring a local disaster due to the outbreak of
                          COVID-19.
Res. 20-108   11-9-2020   Reimbursement of public health and safety payroll
                          with CARES Act funding.
                          Appropriating additional funds from the CARES Act
Ord. 102-21   4-12-2021   funds to other CARES Act funds established for public
                          safety.
Ord. 105-21   4-12-2021   Establishing the ARPA Coronavirus Local Fiscal
                          Recovery Grant Fund.
Ord. 112-21   8-9-2021    Designating the projects/uses of local fiscal
                          recovery grant funds.
                          Declaring additional uses of fiscal recovery funds to
Ord. 100-23   1-9-2023    purchase public safety equipment and to repair the
                          storm water system on Church Street.
                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Cite Code Section
I.C. Cite          Code Section
1-1-1-5            10.04
1-1-1-7            10.12
1-1-1-8            10.06
1-1-4-5            10.05
1-1-5-1            10.11
1-1-6-1            10.08
1-1-7-1            94.04
1-1-9-1            35.14
1-1-10-1           35.03
3-10-7-22          35.01
5-2                31.086
                   31.086;
5-2-1-9            31.100;
                   31.101
5-2-1-9(f)         31.102
5-3-1              90.03
5-11-1-27          35.09
5-11-10            35.19
5-14-1.5-1 et seq. 35.17
5-14-3             110.46
5-14-3-3(d)        35.25
5-22               35.18
5-22-2             32.04
5-22-4             32.04
5-22-7             32.04
5-22-8             32.04
5-22-9             32.04
5-22-10            32.04
5-22-10-4          32.04
5-22-10-5          32.04
5-22-15            32.04
5-22-16            32.04
5-22-17            32.04
5-22-18            32.04
8-1.5-5            51.05
8-1.5-5-4          51.05
8-1.5-5-5          51.05
8-23-4             90.02
                   70.15;
9-13-1-1 et seq.   70.16;
                   70.17;
                   71.04
9-13-2             70.01
9-13-2 et seq.     90.01
9-13-2-1           90.01
9-13-2-110         70.99
9-18.1-5-5         90.01
9-20-3             71.21
9-20-4             71.21
9-21               73.03
9-21-1-8(b)        71.05
9-21-1-3(a)(1)     72.01
9-21-1-3(a)(3)     71.35
9-21-1-3(a)(5)     Ch. 74, Sched. I
9-21-1-3(a)(7)     Ch. 74, Sched. II
9-21-1-3(a)(9)     73.01
9-21-1-3(a)(11)    Ch. 74, Sched. I
9-21-5-6           Ch. 74, Sched. I
9-21-11            73.03
9-22-1-4           90.03
9-22-1-13          90.03
9-22-1-13(b)       90.03
9-22-1-19          90.03
9-22-1-24          90.03
9-22-1-30          90.05
9-24-6             70.99
9-26-1-7           70.18
9-26-2-3           70.18
9-26-3-4           70.18
10-14-3-12         35.17
10-14-3-29         35.17
13-1-1-10          92.15
15-2.1-1-1         91.01
15-2.1-2-15        91.01
15-2.1-2-39        91.01
15-2.1-6-5         91.02
15-2.1-6-13        91.03
15-2.1-21-8        91.04
15-17-2-83         91.06
16-31-1 et seq.    70.01
22-9-1-4 et seq.   96.01
22-9.5-1 et seq.   96.01
22-9.5-2-2         96.01
22-9.5-2-3         96.01
22-9.5-2-4         96.01
22-9.5-2-8         96.01
22-9.5-2-9         96.01
22-9.5-2-10        96.01
22-9.5-2-10(b)     96.01
22-9.5-2-10(c)     96.01
22-9.5-2-11        96.01
22-9.5-2-13        96.01
22-9.5-3           96.02;
                   96.03
22-9.5-3 et seq.   96.09
22-9.5-4-8         96.10
22-9.5-5           96.01
22-9.5-5-1         96.02
22-9.5-6           96.01;
                   96.10
25-36-1-2          111.06
25-37-1-2 et seq.  111.02
25-37-1-11         111.01
31-6-4-2           130.01
33-36-2-3          34.01
33-37-4-2          70.99
34-28-5 et seq.    70.99
34-28-5-1          70.99
35-45-3-2          50.01
35-47              130.02
36-1-3-8(a)(10)    10.99
36-1-10-3-4.1      30.15
36-1-20.2          35.07
36-1-20.2 et al.   35.07;
                   35.08
36-1-21 et al.     35.07;
                   35.08
36-4-6-21          31.103
36-4-8-14          30.02
36-5-2-5           35.01
36-5-2-9           35.02
36-5-2-9.4         35.08
36-5-3-2           35.16
36-5-4-12          30.02
36-5-7-1           30.01
36-5-7-4           31.116
36-5-7-6           31.002;
                   31.101
36-7-10-1          94.02
36-7-10.1-3        94.02
36-7-10.1-4        94.99
                   31.100;
36-8               31.101;
                   31.102
36-8-3-4           31.103
36-8-3-20          31.002;
                   31.102
36-8-12            30.30
36-9-16-2          32.18
36-9-16-3          32.18
36-9-16.5          32.18
36-9-23-26         53.19
36-9-27-100        32.18
36-10-3            30.15
36-10-3-1 et seq.  30.16
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2025 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2025 Code Section
11.01              11.01
30.01              35.01
30.02              35.02
30.03              35.12
30.04              35.13
30.05              35.14
30.06              35.15
30.07              35.16
31.01              33.081
31.02              33.080
31.03              35.20
31.04              35.21
31.05              35.22
31.20              30.01
31.21              30.01
31.22              30.01
31.40              30.02
31.41              30.02
31.60              30.03
31.70              30.04
32.10              30.30
32.11              30.31
32.12              30.32
34.01              32.01
34.02              32.02
34.03              32.03
34.30              32.15
34.31              32.16
34.32              32.17
34.33              32.18
34.34              32.19
35.001             33.001
35.002             33.002
35.010             33.015
35.011             33.016
35.012             33.017
35.013             33.018
35.014             33.019
35.030             33.030
35.031             33.031
35.032             33.032
35.033             33.033
35.034             33.034
35.035             33.035
35.036             33.036
35.037             33.037
35.038             33.038
35.039             33.039
35.040             33.040
35.041             33.042
35.042             33.043
35.043             33.044
35.044             33.045
35.045             33.046
35.046             33.047
35.047             33.050
35.060             33.065
35.061             33.066
35.062             33.067
35.063             33.068
35.064             33.069
35.065             33.070
35.066             33.071
35.067             33.072
35.068             33.073
35.069             33.074
35.070             33.075
35.071             33.076
35.072             33.077
35.073             33.078
35.074             33.079
35.075             33.080
35.105             33.049
35.106             33.049
35.107             33.049
36.01              35.03
36.02              35.04
36.03              35.05
50.01              50.01
50.02              50.02
50.03              50.03
50.05              50.04
50.06              50.05
50.07              50.06
50.08              50.07
50.09              50.08
50.99              50.99
51.01              51.01
51.02              51.02
51.03              51.03
51.15              51.20
51.16              51.21
51.17              51.22
51.18              51.23
51.19              51.21
51.20              51.24
52.01              52.01
52.02              52.02
52.22              52.24
53.01              53.01
53.13              53.18
53.16              53.21
53.17              53.22
53.18              53.23
54.001             54.001
54.002             54.002
54.003             54.003
54.004             54.004
54.005             54.005
54.020             54.020
54.021             54.021
54.022             54.022
54.023             54.023
54.024             54.024
54.035             54.035
54.036             54.036
54.037             54.037
54.038             54.038
54.039             54.039
54.040             54.040
54.041             54.041
54.042             54.042
54.055             54.055
54.056             54.056
54.057             54.057
54.058             54.058
54.059             54.059
54.060             54.060
54.061             54.061
54.062             54.062
54.063             54.063
54.064             54.064
54.065             54.065
54.075             54.080
54.076             54.081
54.077             54.082
54.078             54.083
54.079             54.084
54.080             54.085
54.081             54.086
54.082             54.087
54.083             54.088
54.084             54.089
54.085             54.090
54.086             54.091
54.087             54.092
54.089             54.093
54.090             54.094
54.100             54.110
54.101             54.111
54.102             54.112
54.998             54.999
54.999             54.999
70.01              70.01
70.20              70.02
70.21              70.02
70.35              70.15
70.36              70.16
70.37              70.17
70.38              70.18
70.40              70.20
71.01              71.01
71.02              71.02
71.03              71.03
71.04              71.04
71.05              71.05
71.20              71.20
71.21              71.21
71.22              71.35
71.23              71.36
71.39              70.19
72.01              72.01
72.02              72.02
72.03              72.03
72.04              72.04
72.05              72.05
72.06              72.06
72.07              72.07
72.08              72.08
72.09              72.09
73.01              73.01
73.02              73.02
73.03              73.03
73.04              73.04
73.05              73.05
73.06              73.06
73.07              73.07
73.20              73.20
73.21              73.21
73.22              73.22
73.23              73.23
73.24              73.24
73.99              91.01
Ch. 74, Sched. I   Ch. 74, Sched. I
Ch. 74, Sched. II  Ch. 74, Sched. I
Ch. 74, Sched. III Ch. 74, Sched. I
Ch. 74, Sched. IV  Ch. 74, Sched. I
Ch. 75, Sched. I   Ch. 75, Sched. I
Ch. 75, Sched. II  Ch. 75, Sched. I
91.01              91.01
91.02              91.02
91.03              91.03
91.04              91.04
91.05              91.05
91.99              91.99
92.01              92.15
92.03              92.17
92.04              92.18
92.99              92.99
93.01              93.01
94.01              94.02
94.02              94.03
94.03              94.04
110.01             110.01
110.02             110.02
110.03             110.03
110.04             110.04
110.05             110.05
110.06             110.06
110.07             110.07
110.08             110.08
110.09             110.09
110.10             110.10
110.11             110.11
110.12             110.12
110.13             110.13
110.14             110.14
110.15             110.15
110.16             110.16
110.17             110.17
110.18             110.18
110.19             110.19
110.20             110.20
110.21             110.21
110.22             110.22
110.23             110.23
110.24             110.24
110.25             110.25
110.26             110.26
110.27             110.27
110.28             110.28
110.40             110.40
110.41             110.41
110.42             110.42
110.43             110.43
110.44             110.44
110.45             110.45
110.46             110.46
110.47             110.47
110.99             110.99
111.01             111.01
111.02             111.02
111.03             111.03
111.04             111.04
111.05             111.05
111.06             111.06
111.99             111.99
130.01             130.01
130.02             130.01
130.20             130.02
130.99             130.99
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
04-102   - -         TSO Table IV
88-96    - -         51.01
88-100   - -         32.02
88-102   - -         51.03
84-48    7-9-1984    30.02
85-62    9-9-1985    TSO Table I
85-64    10-14-1985  35.04
88-103   5-9-1988    35.22
89-121   2-13-1989   51.01
87-89    12-14-1989  53.01
91-129   2-11-1991   TSO Table II
92-132   2-10-1992   35.21
92-134   7-13-1992   53.23
93-139   3-8-1993    32.03
00-102   8-14-2000   Ch. 74, Sched. I
00-103   12-11-2000  33.082
02-106   12-9-2002   32.01
03-101   2-10-2003   TSO Table IV
03-102   2-10-2003   TSO Table IV
04-103   7-12-2004   53.03
05-101   3-14-2005   TSO Table I
07-102   7-9-2007    35.01
08-103   10-13-2008  35.10
2009-101 2-9-2009    TSO Table I
09-105   9-14-2009   TSO Table IV
12-103   6-11-2012   35.08
12-105   6-11-2012   35.24
12-106   7-9-2012    TSO Table II
12-110   8-13-2012   TSO Table III
12-111   8-13-2012   TSO Table III
12-115   11-9-2012   TSO Table III
12-116   11-19-2012  33.082
13-101   2-11-2013   35.07
13-102   3-11-2013   TSO Table III
13-103   5-13-2013   53.19
13-105   8-12-2013   TSO Table III
                     31.001-
                     31.004;
                     31.015-
                     31.028;
                     31.040-
                     31.047;
13-107   8-12-2013   31.060-
                     31.069;
                     31.080-
                     31.087;
                     31.100-
                     31.103;
                     31.115-
                     31.122
13-109   12-9-2013   TSO Table V
14-100   3-10-2014   33.037
15-103   12-14-2015  33.048
16-100   5-9-2016    31.028
17-100   2-13-2017   31.080
17-102   6-12-2017   33.099
17-104   6-12-2017   33.048
17-103   6-12-2017   33.041
18-100   4-9-2018    35.09
18-101   5-14-2018   TSO Table V
19-100   3-11-2019   TSO Table I
20-101   3-30-2020   TSO Table VI
20-102   4-13-2020   35.06
20-104   7-6-2020    150.02
20-108   11-9-2020   TSO Table VI
21-100   2-8-2021    54.088
21-102   6-14-2021   35.17
2021-104 10-25-2021  52.25
21-105   11-8-2021   35.23
21-107   11-8-2021   TSO Table III
22-101   3-14-2022   TSO Table V
23-101   5-8-2023    150.02
23-102   5-8-2023    150.02
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
103-13   - -         30.33
104-12   - -         34.03
                     95.01-
104-12   - -         95.22;
                     95.99
113-12   - -         35.07
172-87   - -         51.20-
                     51.23
174-88   - -         51.20-
                     51.23
179-88-A - -         51.20-
                     51.23
295      - -         34.03
4        4-8-1886    130.01;
                     130.99
                     50.01;
                     50.07-
14       2-24-1891   50.08;
                     50.99;
                     94.02-
                     94.04
                     111.01-
26       2-22-1897   111.06;
                     111.99
                     50.01;
                     50.07-
29       - -1898     50.08;
                     50.99;
                     94.02-
                     94.04
                     50.01-
200      1-18-1960   50.08;
                     50.99
10       5-13-1960   10.15
227      5-4-1964    91.04
242      10-18-1965  50.02-
                     50.06
15       1-1-1970    10.15
                     53.18;
286      6-12-1972   53.21-
                     53.22
                     34.03;
295-1973 11-12-1973  92.15-
                     92.18;
                     92.99
                     34.03;
316      10-11-1976  130.01;
                     130.99
325      2-21-1978   52.01
                     53.18;
335      10-8-1979   53.21-
                     53.22
                     53.18;
336      11-26-1979  53.21-
                     53.22
                     73.20-
337-1979 11-26-1979  73.24;
                     73.99;
                     Ch. 74, Sched. III
20       1-1-1980    10.15
342      5-12-1980   50.02-
                     50.06
100-81   2-9-1981    30.30-
                     30.32
                     70.02;
                     70.15-
                     70.20;
                     71.01-
                     71.05;
                     71.20-
                     71.21;
                     71.35-
104-81   5-21-1981   71.36;
                     72.01-
                     72.09;
                     73.01-
                     73.07;
                     73.99;
                     Ch. 74, Sched. I;
                     Ch. 74, Sched. II;
                     Ch. 75, Sched. I;
                     Ch. 75, Sched. II
                     110.01-
111-81   12-28-1981  110.28;
                     110.99;
                     TSO Table I
                     110.01-
118-82   9-13-1982   110.28;
                     110.99
                     35.16;
122-82   11-22-1982  71.21;
                     Ch. 74, Sched. IV
124-83   1-10-1983   52.24
125-83   1-10-1983   35.15
126-83   1-24-1983   52.24
135-84   9-10-1984   53.18
25       1-1-1985    10.15
147-1985 10-14-1985  TSO Table IV
159-86   11-10-1986  Ch. 75, Sched. I
163-87   1-26-1987   TSO Table IV
166-87   6-22-1987   TSO Table I
177-88   8-8-1988    Ch. 74, Sched. I
180-88   12-12-1988  TSO Table IV
192-89   9-11-1989   93.01;
                     72.02
                     54.001;
                     54.003;
                     54.080-
181-89   2-27-1989   54.092;
                     54.094-
                     54.095;
                     54.110-51.111
                     54.001-
                     54.002;
                     54.004;
                     54.020-
182-89   2-27-1989   54.024;
                     54.035-
                     54.042;
                     54.055-
                     54.065;
                     54.112
187-89   10- -1989   32.01
186-89   10-9-1989   54.005
193-90   5-14-1990   TSO Table IV
198-91   5-13-1991   TSO Table IV
201-91   9-9-1991    TSO Table II
182-89   2-27-1992   54.999
205-92   4-13-1992   TSO Table IV
                     33.001-
                     33.002;
                     33.015-
                     33.019;
                     33.030-
                     33.040;
                     33.042-
                     33.047;
207-92   7-13-1992   33.050;
                     33.065-
                     33.066;
                     33.068-
                     33.070;
                     33.072-
                     33.080;
                     33.095-
                     33.098;
                     33.100
210-92   10-12-1992  51.02
212-1992 12-14-1992  30.02
216-93   11-8-1993   110.40-
                     110.47
                     30.01;
219-94   8-8-1994    33.065;
                     33.080;
                     35.20
221-94   8-8-1994    32.15-
                     32.19
                     30.01;
227-1-95 - -1995     30.03;
                     33.080;
                     35.20
223-95   1-9-1995    Ch. 75, Sched. I
224-95   3-13-1995   52.02
221-95   5-8-1995    32.15-
                     32.19
227-2-95 7-18-1995   33.065
228-95   7-18-1995   Ch. 74, Sched. II
230-95   9-11-1995   Ch. 75, Sched. I
223-96   2-12-1996   35.05
232-96   2-12-1996   33.049
                     32.15-
234-96   5-13-1996   32.19;
                     33.065
                     30.01;
                     30.03;
236-1-96 8-19-1996   30.04;
                     33.080;
                     35.20
23       8-24-1996   91.05
238-96   10-16-1996  Ch. 74, Sched. II
100-97   3-10-1997   51.24
101-97   7-14-1997   Ch. 74, Sched. II
102-97   8-11-1997   33.081
97-101   9-8-1997    Ch. 74, Sched. II
100-98   4-13-1998   TSO Table IV
101-98   6-8-1998    35.18
102-98   7-27-1998   33.081
102-99   9-13-1999   33.081
104-99   9-13-1999   Ch. 75, Sched. I
105-99   9-13-1999   51.04
101-00   8-14-2000   33.081
102-21   6-11-2001   54.024;
                     54.036
101-01   7-9-2001    51.06
103-01   7-9-2001    TSO Table I
104-01   8-13-2001   33.081
102-02   5-13-2002   33.081
103-02   6-10-2002   51.21
104-02   8-12-2002   33.081
106-02   9-9-2002    Ch. 74, Sched. I
107-02   10-14-2002  51.08
108-02   12-9-2002   TSO Table IV
109-02   12-9-2002   TSO Table IV
100-03   2-10-2003   96.01-
                     96.10
101-03   5-12-2003   51.26
103-03   7-14-2003   51.07
104-13   12-8-2003   33.081
                     33.065;
100-04   1-12-2004   33.067;
                     33.082
102-04   3-8-2004    33.081
101-04   4-12-2004   TSO Table IV
103-04   4-12-2004   TSO Table IV
105-04   9-13-2004   33.082
105-05   10-10-2005  33.082
107-06   - -2006     33.082
100-06   1-9-2006    33.082
102-06   4-10-2006   50.04;
                     50.99
103-06   4-10-2006   51.26
104-A-06 5-8-2006    TSO Table IV
104-B-06 5-8-2006    TSO Table IV
105-06   5-8-2006    TSO Table III
107-07   - -2007     33.082
101-07   3-12-2007   Ch. 75, Sched. I
102-07   3-14-2007   TSO Table III
103-07   7-9-2007    52.23
105-07   8-13-2007   51.27
109-07   8-13-2007   TSO Table I
111-07   10-8-2007   TSO Table IV
103-08   2-11-2008   Ch. 74, Sched. V
                     34.03;
104-08   2-11-2008   91.04-
                     91.05
                     34.03;
102-08   3-10-2008   73.35-
                     73.41;
                     73.99
105-08   8-11-2008   33.082
107-08   9-8-2008    53.02;
                     53.99
109-08   11-10-2008  52.05
101-09   9-14-2009   TSO Table IV
102-09   9-14-2009   33.082
104-09   9-14-2009   73.35-
                     73.37
105-09   9-14-2009   33.082
102-10   1-11-2010   33.082
103-10   5-10-2010   51.21
106-10   10-11-2010  33.082
109-10   11-8-2010   Ch. 75, Sched. I
110-10   12-13-2010  33.082
101-11   3-14-2011   33.082
103-11   10-10-2011  33.082
100-12   1-9-2012    33.082
                     34.03;
101-12   4-9-2012    91.04-
                     91.05
102-12   4-9-2012    54.006;
                     54.093
103-12   6-11-2012   33.082
                     94.01;
106-12   8-13-2012   94.03-
                     94.06;
                     94.99
109-12   9-10-2012   33.082
111-12   12-10-2012  33.082
112-12   12-10-2012  95.16
100-13   3-8-2013    73.39
103-17   7-10-2013   93.02
101-13   8-12-2013   31.101;
                     31.102
104-13   9-9-2013    90.01-
                     90.05
108-13   12-23-2013  33.082
103-14   11-10-2014  33.082
101-15   2-9-2015    70.99
102-15   2-9-2015    34.01-
                     34.06
-        3-16-2015   TSO Table I
103-15   4-13-2015   150.01
104-15   6-8-2015    70.99
105-15   7-13-2015   32.16
107-15   11-9-2015   33.082
101-16   3-9-2016    33.082
100-16   3-14-2016   TSO Table IV
103-16   6-13-2016   35.11
107-16   11-14-2016  33.082
100-17   6-12-2017   52.06
106-17   9-11-2017   33.082
109-17   10-9-2017   Ch. 75, Sched. I
108-17   11-13-2017  72.02;
                     72.99
                     92.35-
100-18   1-8-2018    92.39;
                     92.99
106-18   1-14-2018   TSO Table III
                     52.40-
101-18   7-9-2018    52.44;
                     52.99
104-18   10-8-2018   33.082
100-19   1-14-2019   33.082
2316     3-11-2019   TSO Table I
104-19   5-12-2019   Ch. 74, Sched. I
103-19   7-8-2019    33.082
106-19   8-12-2019   33.082
100-20   4-13-2020   30.15-
                     30.16
104-10   5-10-2020   33.082
101-20   5-11-2020   33.082
103-20   5-11-2020   Ch. 74, Sched. II
105-20   5-21-2020   33.082
106-20   6-8-2020    Ch. 75, Sched. I
107-20   8-10-2020   150.02
108-20   8-10-2020   150.02
109-20   8-10-2020   33.082
114-20   11-9-2020   TSO Table III
-        1-14-2021   TSO Table II
100-21   2-8-2021    150.02
101-21   3-8-2021    33.082
102-21   4-12-2021   TSO Table VI
105-21   4-12-2021   TSO Table VI
106-21   5-10-2021   TSO Table I
112-21   8-9-2021    TSO Table VI
107-21   9-13-2021   51.25
                     51.04;
108-21   9-13-2021   51.21;
                     52.03;
                     53.20
109-21   9-13-2021   52.24;
                     53.19
110-21   9-13-2021   51.09
111-21   9-13-2021   33.082
114-21   9-13-2021   TSO Table III
115-21   12-13-2021  51.05
102-22   3-14-2022   33.082
103-22   6-13-2022   93.03
                     111.20-
105-22   6-13-2022   111.25;
                     111.99
                     52.04;
106-22   6-13-2022   52.20-
                     52.22
110-22   7-11-2022   TSO Table IV
104-22   8-8-2022    92.01
112-22   9-12-2022   33.082
                     92.16;
115-22   9-12-2022   92.19;
                     92.20;
                     92.99
116-22   10-10-2022  35.19
118-22   12-12-2022  11.02
100-23   1-9-2023    TSO Table VI
102-23   5-8-2023    150.02
101-23   6-12-2023   150.02
105-24   5-13-2024   33.082
101-24   6-10-2024   54.081
                     53.15-
102-24   6-10-2024   53.17;
                     53.23
                     33.065-
                     33.068;
106-24   11-12-2024  33.071;
                     33.080-
                     33.082
100-25   6-18-2025   Ch. 74, Sched. II
101-25   6-18-2025   93.04
102-25   8-11-2025   32.04
103-25   - -2025     91.06;
                     91.99
104-25   - -2025     35.25
105-25   - -2025     33.082
106-25   10-13-2025  150.02
 
 
 
