CITY OF GAS CITY, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-1 Supplement contains local legislation
current through Ord. 7-2025 passed 5-6-2025
State legislation current through Indiana Legislative Service, 2025 Acts,
Pamphlet #3
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 04-2024
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF GAS CITY, INDIANA,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
WHEREAS the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Indiana empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify, and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
WHEREAS the legislative authority of the political subdivision has authorized a
general compilation, revision, and codification of the ordinances of the
political subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance takes
effect at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF GAS CITY, INDIANA:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the political subdivision as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Gas City."
Section 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following Titles:
   GAS CITY, INDIANA
   TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISION
      10. General Provision
      11. City Standards
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      30. City Legislative Body
      31. City Organizations
      32. Personnel Policies
      33. Finances
      34. Internal Control Standards
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      50. Utilities Generally
      51. Water
      52. Solid Waste
      53. Electric and Renewable Energy
      54. Sewers
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      70. General Regulations
      71. Parking Regulations
      72. Recreational Vehicles
      73. Traffic Schedules
      74. Parking Schedules
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      90. Parks and Recreation
      91. Nuisances
      92. Animals
      93. Fire Prevention
      94. Fair Housing
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      110. Peddlers and Itinerant Merchants
      111. Alcohol, Tobacco, and Other Drugs
   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      130. General Offenses
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      150. Subdivisions
      151. Zoning
      152. Buildings
      153. Public Ways
      154. Flood Hazard Areas
      155. Storm Water Management
   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      I. Annexations
      II. Rezoning
      III. Vacations
      IV. Street Adoptions and Closings
      V. Subdivision Plat Approvals
      VI. Economic Development Target Areas
      VII. Contracts and Agreements
      VIII. Creation of Funds
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
      References to Indiana Code
      References to Prior Code
      References to Resolutions
      References to Ordinances
Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code
of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance except as they are included and preordained in whole or in part
in such code; provided, such repeal shall not affect an offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the code.
Section 4. Such code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the legislative authority and the Clerk of the political
subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code or
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 5. Such code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections penalties, and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for
the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and general welfare of
the people of this municipality and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the legislative authority of the political subdivision on
this 19th day of March, 2024.
ATTEST:
Karen S. Wood /s/       Russ Corbin /s/
KAREN S. WOOD, CLERK TREASURER          RUSS CORBIN
Larry Terwillegar /s/       Brandon Eckstein /s/
LARRY TERWILLEGAR, PRESIDENT            BRANDON ECKSTEIN
Jay Mason /s/
JAY MASON
Troy Richards /s/
TROY RICHARDS
                                                   
APPROVED AND SIGNED BY ME THE MAYOR OF GAS CITY, INDIANA THIS 19TH DAY OF
MARCH, 2024.
                                                   
                                          William Rock Jr. /s/
                                          WILLIAM ROCK JR., MAYOR
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component codes,
titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the “Gas City
Code,” for which designation “Code of Ordinances,” “Codified Ordinances,” or
“Code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto, and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or subsection.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters, or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning,
application, or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary, and
usual sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY. The City of Gas City, Indiana.
      CLERK TREASURER. The Clerk Treasurer of the City Council.
      COUNCIL. The City Council.
      COUNTY. Grant County, Indiana.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads, and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver, and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      STATE. The State of Indiana.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing, or other modes
of representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or the person’s
mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(I.C. 1-1-4-5)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable.
If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
   (D)   The repeal of a section or amendment stating that the provisions of a
chapter, subchapter, or section are severable as provided in division (B) of
this section does not affect the operation of division (B) with respect to that
chapter, subchapter, or section.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority, or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; on the effective date of that ordinance or following the
effective date, the rights, powers, duties, or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority, or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers, and rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday, or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall
not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under
the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture, or
liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings, and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
   (C)   When the city adopts an ordinance, it should be incorporated into the
City Code to ensure continuity and compliance with I.C. 36-1-5-1. The following
forms may be used:
      (1)   If a new subject is to be added:
 
GENERAL ORDINANCE NO. _______
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE BY
[Regulating Satellite Dishes, for example]
   WHEREAS, [here insert purpose or reasons for adopting ordinance, date of any
public hearing.]
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, BY THE MAYOR AND COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
GAS CITY, STATE OF INDIANA:
   SECTION 1:
   The Gas City Code is amended by adding a new ordinance reading as follows:
[Here insert text of ordinance]
   SECTION 2:
   This Ordinance shall become effective on [insert date].
 
      (2)   If an existing ordinance is to be amended:
GENERAL ORDINANCE NO. ________
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE GAS CITY CODE
BY [ALTERING A SPEED LIMIT, for example]
   WHEREAS, [here insert purpose or reason for amendment, date of any public
hearing]
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
GAS CITY, STATE OF INDIANA:
   SECTION 1.
   The Gas City Code is amended as follows:
   Section [9-4-1-58, for example] is amended by inserting the following entry
into the list of speed limits on City streets:
   [Baker Avenue   40 mph]
and by striking the following language and inserting new language in its place:
   [Abel Avenue   40 mph]
   SECTION 2:
   This ordinance shall be become effective on [insert date].
 
(Prior Code, Appendix V)
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(I.C. 36-5-2-2)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
   Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1986 and subsequently amended, the previous
code section number shall be indicated in the history by “(Prior Code, §
     ).”
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-
way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent violations,
except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and parking.
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   City seal
   
11.02   Gas City Day
§ 11.01 CITY SEAL.
   The Council adopts a common seal bearing the words “City of Gas City; Grant
County, Indiana - Seal.”
(Prior Code, § 36-4-6-6(b))
§ 11.02 GAS CITY DAY.
   March 22 is designated as Gas City Day.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-10-1)
Statutory reference:
   Indiana Day, see I.C. 1-1-10-1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY LEGISLATIVE BODY
      
31.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
33.   FINANCES
      
34.   INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS
CHAPTER 30: CITY LEGISLATIVE BODY
Section
   
30.01   Home rule
   
30.02   City Council districts
   
30.03   City Council meetings
   
30.04   Legal holidays
§ 30.01 HOME RULE.
   (A)   There city hereby adopts the city “home rule” ordinance pursuant to
I.C. 36-1-3-1 et seq.
   (B)   The city may exercise any power or perform any function necessary to
the public interest in the conduct of its internal affairs, which is not
prohibited by the State Constitution or the United States Constitution, or
denied or preempted by any other law or is not vested by any other law in any
other city, county, or state entity, special purpose district, or municipal or
school corporation.
   (C)   The city shall support all actions, projects, and programs in the
public interest of its citizens, if those action, projects, and programs are
authorized under “home rule” powers or the performance of those functions, are
reasonable and practical under the circumstances, and if the financial support
for them is forthcoming from the Council.
   (D)   The Council may budget and appropriate funds to provide for city
membership and the membership of city elected and appointed officials and
members of its boards, councils, departments, or agencies in local, regional,
state, and national associations of a civic, educational, or governmental
nature, which have as their purpose the betterment and improvement of city
operations.
   (E)   The Council may budget and appropriate funds to pay the expenses of
duly authorized representatives to attend the meetings and functions of
organizations to which the city belongs.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-3-1) (Ord. 2-1983, passed 4-5-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Application of home rule chapter, see I.C. 36-1-3-1
§ 30.02 CITY COUNCIL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The Council shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be
elected at large. However, four members shall reside within the district for
which they are elected and one member shall be an at large representative. The
Mayor shall be elected at large.
   (B)   The city is hereby divided into election districts for the purposes of
establishing representation on the Council.
      (1)   District One. Ward One shall consist of all that real estate within
the city limits, which lies north of Main Street from North Fifth Street to
west side of 500 East and east of a line created by the intersection of North
Fifth Street and Main Street, thence running north on North Fifth Street to its
intersection with North D Street, at which time, North Fifth Street becomes Ash
Lane, thence running north along Ash Lane to its intersection with Chestnut
Drive extending north along Colony Way, thence north along Colony Way to the
city limits (Mill 1 and Mill 9).
      (2)   District Two. Ward Two shall consist of all that real estate within
the city, which lies north of Main Street and west of a line created by the
intersection of North Fifth Street and Main Street, thence running north on
North Fifth Street to its intersection with North D Street, at which time,
North Fifth Street becomes Ash Lane, thence running north along Ash Lane to its
intersection with Chestnut Drive extending north along Colony Way to the city
limits (Mill 6).
      (3)   District Three. Ward Three shall consist of all that real estate
within the city being south of Main Street and west of South Fifth Street (Mill
7).
      (4)   District Four. Ward Four shall consist of all that real estate
within the city being south of Main Street and east of South Fifth Street and
north of Main Street from 500 East to the east city limits (Mill 2 and Mill 3
that is in the city limits).
      (5)   District map.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5845d03809c2b13194ec9ac2486edd9aec822e0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1283.png]
 
   (C)   Any part of the city which has not been described as included in one
of the districts described in this section shall be included within the
district that is contiguous to that part and contains the least population of
the districts contiguous to that part according to the most recent U.S.
decennial census.
   (D)   If any part of the city is described in this section as being in more
than one district, it shall be included within the district that is contiguous
to that part and contains the least population, according to the U.S. decennial
census.
(Prior Code, § 36-4-6-3) (Ord. 6-2012, passed 11-20-2012; Ord. 7-2025, passed
5-6-2025)
Statutory reference:
   City Council districts, see I.C. 36-4-6-3
§ 30.03 CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The Council shall conduct its regular meetings on the first and third
Tuesday of each month at 7:30 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 36-4-6-6(a))
Statutory reference:
   Power to expel member or declare seat vacant; rules, see I.C. 36-4-6-6
§ 30.04 LEGAL HOLIDAYS.
   The designation of any legal holiday by the Council and Mayor for city
employees shall not affect any action taken by the Council while in regular or
special session. Any action taken by the Mayor on any holiday shall be valid
for all purposes.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-9-1)
Statutory reference:
   Legal holidays, see I.C. 1-1-9-1
CHAPTER 31: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
31.01   Plan Commission
   
31.02   City Redevelopment Commission
   
31.03   Department of Redevelopment
   
31.04   Department of Economic Development
   
31.05   Parks Department; Board
   
31.06   Police Department; Auxiliary Unit
   
31.07   City Court
   
31.08   Probation Department
§ 31.01 PLAN COMMISSION.
   The City Advisory Plan Commission is hereby established. The Commission
shall act in compliance with the requirements concerning its membership, terms,
meetings, expenses, offices, secretary, duties, offices, powers, and gifts as
set forth in I.C. 36-7-4-200 et seq., as amended.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-200) (Ord. 1964-4, passed 7-21-1964)
Statutory reference:
   Plan Commission, see I.C. 36-7-4-200
§ 31.02 CITY REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.
   (A)   The City Redevelopment Commission is established.
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of five members, who shall be nominated
and serve the terms as provided in I.C. 36-7-14-6.1.
   (C)   The Commission shall meet at the call of the Mayor, and shall notify
the State Department of Commerce of the formation of the Commission within 30
days following its organizational meeting.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-14-1) (Ord. 2, 1985, passed 3-5-1985)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal redevelopment commissions, see I.C. 36-7-14-1
§ 31.03 DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The City Council now deems it to be in the best interest of the city
and its citizens to afford a maximum opportunity for rehabilitation,
redevelopment, or economic development of areas by private enterprise by
establishing a Department of Redevelopment.
   (B)   The City Council hereby establishes the Department of Redevelopment of
the city. The Department will be controlled by a board of five members known as
the City Redevelopment Commission.
   (C)   Pursuant to the Act, all of the territory within the corporate
boundaries of the city will be a taxing district to be known as the
Redevelopment District of the city for the purpose of levying and collecting
special benefit taxes for redevelopment purposes as provided in the Act. The
City Council finds and determines that all of the taxable property within this
special taxing district will be considered to be benefitted by the
redevelopment projects and economic development projects carried out under the
Act to the extent of the special taxes levied under the Act.
   (D)   The City Council hereby appoints two members of the City Redevelopment
Commission to be appointed by the City Council with terms expiring on January
1, 1993. The remaining three members shall be appointed by the Mayor as the
municipal executive.
(Ord. 8, 1991, passed 9-3-1991)
§ 31.04 DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The Department, controlled by the Commission, be and are hereby
created and granted all powers and duties of such Department and such
Commission as set forth in the Act, which Commission shall consist of three
members.
   (B)   Pursuant to the provisions of the Act, the City Council hereby
nominates its nominee for membership on such Commission.
(Ord. 1-A-2010, passed 5-4-2010)
§ 31.05 PARKS DEPARTMENT; BOARD.
   (A)   The Council hereby creates the Department of Parks and Recreation,
which shall be composed of the Board of Parks and Recreation, a Superintendent,
and such personnel as the Board may determine.
   (B)   The Park Board shall be composed of four members. The members of the
Board shall be appointed in the manner set forth in I.C. 36-10-3, and shall
serve the terms provided in that state law.
   (C)   The Park Board shall choose its officers in the manner provided by
I.C. 36-10-3.
   (D)   The Park Board shall have all the powers set forth in I.C. 36-10-3.
   (E)   The Park Board may create an advisory council and special committees
composed of citizens interested in the problems of parks and recreation, in
accordance with I.C. 36-10-3, as amended.
   (F)   The Park Board shall prepare and submit an annual budget in the same
manner as other city government departments as prescribed by the State Board of
Accounts. The Park Board may accept gifts, donations, and subsidies for park
and recreation purposes.
(Prior Code, 36-1-3-1(a)) (Ord. 1965-12, passed 8-17-1965; Ord. 1979-2, passed
8-7-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Park boards, see I.C. 36-10-3-1
§ 31.06 POLICE DEPARTMENT; AUXILIARY UNIT.
   (A)   (1)   The city hereby establishes the Mississinewa Auxiliary Police
Unit.
      (2)   No person shall be a member of the Unit without first submitting an
application to the City Police Chief and receiving the approval of the Chief.
      (3)   The City Police Chief may promulgate rules governing the activities
of the Unit.
(Prior Code, § 36-8-3-7)
   (B)   (1)   The City Police Reserves is hereby established.
      (2)   No more than nine persons shall serve on the Reserves at any one
time.
(Prior Code, § 36-8-3-20)
   (C)   The following fees are hereby made part hereof and are hereby adopted
by the City Council.
 
City Police Department Fee Schedule
Local Continuing Education Fund
Accident reports                      $8
Copies of cases/incidents             $5
Photos-video from cases and accidents $15
VIN check                             $5
Body camera footage                   $150
 
(Res. 1980-3, passed 9-6-1980; Ord. 11-2022, passed 12-6-2022; Ord. 03-2024,
passed 3-19-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Police officers and firefighters; special duty; school security police, see
I.C. 36-8-3-7
   Police reserves; appointment; powers; qualifications, see I.C. 36-8-3-20
§ 31.07 CITY COURT.
   The City Court is hereby established under I.C. 33-35-1-1, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 33-10.1-1-3) (Ord. 10-1978, passed 9-5-1978)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish or abolish; election of judge; notice, see I.C. 33-
35-1-1
§ 31.08 PROBATION DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   A Probation Department is hereby established for the City Court.
   (B)   The Probation Officer and any other employees within the Probation
Department of the City Court shall be appointed by the Judge of the City Court,
subject to the approval of their wages by the City Council.
   (C)   The Probation Department shall charge probation user fees in
accordance with state statute, together with home detention fees as determined
by the City Judge and as allowed by state statute. All such fees shall be paid
to the City Clerk Treasurer to be deposited in the appropriate fund each month.
   (D)   The salary or income of any employee of the Probation Department shall
be set out in the annual budget of the City Court and approved by the City
Council.
(Ord. 2, 1998, passed 4-21-1998)
CHAPTER 32: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Reimbursement of travel expenses and related allowances
   
32.02   Social Security contributions
   
32.03   Nondiscrimination policy
Employee’s Work Policy
   
32.15   Hours of work
   
32.16   Holidays
   
32.17   Funerals
   
32.18   Jury duty
   
32.19   Vacations
   
32.20   Bonus time
   
32.21   Illness or injury
   
32.22   Disability pay
Alcohol and Controlled Substances
   
32.35   Prohibited conduct
   
32.36   Rules of conduct
   
32.37   Violation
   
32.38   Testing requirements
   
32.39   Testing procedures
   
32.40   Employees testing positive
   
32.41   Employee acknowledgment
Drug and Alcohol Policy for City Drivers
   
32.55   Purpose
   
32.56   Types of tests
   
32.57   Refusal to test
   
32.58   Consequences of policy violation
   
32.59   Pre-employment testing
   
32.60   Random testing
   
32.61   Post-accident testing
   
32.62   Reasonable suspicion testing
   
32.63   Prohibited conduct
   
32.64   Substance abuse evaluation
   
32.65   Authorization for previous test records
   
32.66   Drug urinalysis
   
32.67   Alcohol tests
   
32.68   Training
   
32.69   Forms
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 REIMBURSEMENT OF TRAVEL EXPENSES AND RELATED ALLOWANCES.
   (A)   The mileage reimbursement is set at the standard IRS reimbursement
rate per mile. Upon completion of an official business trip, when a city
official or employee returns to the city, he or she must complete and file a
General Form 101 with the Clerk Treasurer, who will, after the next City
Council meeting, reimburse the employee for such expenses.
   (B)   Other related and reasonable expenses, not to exceed $200 per day,
related to an official business trip, such as room, meals, and the like, must
be supported fully by receipts in order to be reimbursed, unless otherwise set
out by law. Original receipts must be submitted to the Clerk Treasurer, who
will, after the next City Council meeting, reimburse the employee for such
expenses.
(Ord. 2-2004, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 32.02 SOCIAL SECURITY CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   The Council hereby elects coverage under the Old Age and Survivor’s
Insurance Program provided under I.C. 5-10.1-2.
   (B)   All city employees shall be covered except those covered by a
retirement plan existing on February 1, 1952.
   (C)   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the Social Security
Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended, the agreement entered into
between the stage agency and the Social Security Administrator, with the
approval of the Governor, is incorporated by reference into this section and
shall be deemed an agreement between the city and the state agency, and shall
become a part of the agreement or any modification of the agreement between the
state and the Social Security Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 5-10.1-2-1) (Res. 2, passed 2-1-1952)
Statutory reference:
   Social Security coverage for municipal employees, see I.C. 5-10.1-2-1
§ 32.03 NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city not to discriminate against any employee
or applicant for employment due to the race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, age, or handicap of that individual.
   (B)   This policy extends to all phases of employment and shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Employment, upgrading, demotion, or transfer;
      (2)   Recruitment or recruitment advertising;
      (3)   Lay-off or termination;
      (4)   Rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and
      (5)   Selection for training, including apprenticeship.
(Prior Code, § 22-9-1-12.1)
Statutory reference:
   Local commissions authorized; powers; exclusivity of remedy; appeal, see
I.C. 22-9-1-12.1
EMPLOYEE’S WORK POLICY
§ 32.15 HOURS OF WORK.
   (A)   The normal workweek is Sunday through Saturday beginning and ending at
midnight on Saturday, and consisting of 40 hours. The normal workday will
consist of eight consecutive hours of work with an unpaid meal period.
   (B)   The schedule of hours for employees will be determined by each
department head. The department head will inform employees of their daily
schedule of hours of work.
   (C)   All nonexempt employees are required to complete an individual time
record showing daily hours worked. Time records cover one workweek and must be
completed daily. Employees should record starting time, time out for lunch,
time in from lunch, and quitting time. Employees are not permitted to sign in
or begin work before their normal starting time or to sign out or stop work
after their normal quitting time without the prior approval of their
supervisor. Employees are required to take a scheduled lunch or meal break.
Employee time records should be checked and signed by the supervisor involved.
Time not worked for which an employee is entitled to be paid (paid absences,
paid holidays, or paid vacation time) should be entered by the supervisor on
the time record. The supervisor should also identify authorized overtime. The
falsifying of any time record is prohibited and may be grounds for disciplinary
action, up to and including termination.
   (D)   An employee may clock in no more than seven minutes before their
scheduled work time. Any employee clocking in between one and seven minutes
after their starting time will be counted as tardy for disciplinary purposes
with no reduction in pay. Employees more than seven minutes late, in addition
to being charged as tardy, will have pay reduced according to the following
schedule.
Time Tardy (in minutes)                        Penalty
8-22                                           One quarter-hour
23-37                                          One half-hour
38-52                                          Three quarter-hours
53-67                                          One hour
Number of Violations (within a 365-day period)
12                                             Verbal reprimand
13                                             Written reprimand
14                                             One-day suspension without pay
15                                             Three-day suspension without pay
16                                             Termination
 
   (B)   All employees scheduled to work on a given holiday will be paid at a
rate of time and a half for all hours worked in addition to normal holiday pay.
Employee must work the scheduled day before and after the holiday to receive
holiday pay. If the holiday falls on Saturday, holiday will be observed on
Friday. If holiday falls on Sunday, holiday will be observed on Monday. In the
event that the employee’s normal work schedule dictates that he or she works
the Saturday and/or Sunday, those days will be considered his or her holiday
(s), and they will be paid at one and a half times their normal rate of pay in
addition to the holiday pay.
(Ord. 6-2002, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 32.16 HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   Eligible employees will be given a day off with pay for each holiday
observed.
Holidays Observed
Holidays Observed
Christmas Day
Christmas Eve Day
City General Election Day
City Primary Election Day
Day after Thanksgiving
Good Friday
January 1
July 4
Labor Day
Memorial Day
One floating day
Thanksgiving Day
 
   (B)   All employees scheduled to work on a given holiday will be paid at a
rate of time and a half for all hours worked in addition to normal holiday pay.
Employee must work the scheduled day before and after the holiday to receive
holiday pay. If the holiday falls on Saturday, holiday will be observed on
Friday. If holiday falls on Sunday, holiday will be observed on Monday. In the
event that the employee’s normal work schedule dictates that he or she works
the Saturday and/or Sunday, those days will be considered his or her holiday
(s), and they will be paid at one and a half times their normal rate of pay in
addition to the holiday pay.
(Ord. 6-2002, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 32.17 FUNERALS.
   (A)   Employees will receive three days off, with pay, in the event of death
of employee’s spouse, parent, step-parent, child, step-child, brother, step-
brother, sister, step-sister, mother-in-law, father-in-law, or grandparent.
Employees will receive one day off, with pay, in the event of death of
employee’s step-grandparent, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, aunt, uncle, spouse’s
aunt, or spouse’s uncle.
   (B)   If the employee’s vacation is interrupted by such death, the days will
be added to the employee’s vacation.
   (C)   Funeral leave must be used immediately and not saved to be used at a
later date.
(Ord. 6-2002, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 32.18 JURY DUTY.
   Any employee required to serve jury duty will be paid the difference between
his or her jury pay and his or her normal base pay for the same period of time.
Employee must provide city with subpoena and documentation of pay for the given
period. The jury duty check must be endorsed and turned over to Clerk Treasurer
per written agreement between the employee and the city.
(Ord. 6-2002, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 32.19 VACATIONS.
   (A)   Vacations will be awarded to employees by the following schedule.
 
Years Employed (After) Hours of Vacation
1                      40
2                      80
10                     120
18                     160
25                     200
 
   (B)   Vacation can be taken in no less than four-hour increments and only
with immediate supervisor’s approval.
   (C)   Employees may not receive additional pay in lieu of time off for
vacation. In addition, vacations are not cumulative and normally must be taken
in the vacation year immediately following the year in which they are earned.
Employees will not be paid for unused vacation at the end of the year. When
employment is terminated, employee will receive vacation pay for any unused
vacation accrued at the time of termination. If a holiday falls within an
employee’s vacation period, an additional day of vacation will be granted.
   (D)   Any employee who has left employment with the city and is rehired will
receive credit for vacation for prior years of service after he or she has been
back for a period of time equal to the time of absence between terms of
employment.
(Ord. 6-2002, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 32.20 BONUS TIME.
   Each employee will receive 40 hours per year that may be used as sick,
personal, or vacation days. To be used as personal or vacation time, employee
must have previous approval of immediate supervisor. New employee’s bonus time
will be determined by hire date. Any bonus time not used by the end of the
calendar year may be compensated for by one of the following methods.
   (A)   Employees may opt to receive pay at his or her current normal rate of
pay for all or any part of his or her bonus time not used. Bonus hours will be
paid in December. In the event that employee selects payment for only part of
accumulated time, the remaining time will be carried over into the next year
and can only be cashed in on termination of employment or the following
December.
   (B)   Bonus time may be accumulated indefinitely. Maximum of 80 hours may be
accumulated and used as standard bonus time. All hours in excess of 80 hours
that are carried over must be used for long-term disability or illness, or will
be paid at retirement or termination of employment.
   (C)   Upon termination, bonus hours that have been carried over from the
previous year(s) will be paid. Current year bonus time will be pro-rated to
termination date and paid.
(Ord. 6-2002, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 32.21 ILLNESS OR INJURY.
   (A)   Any employee who misses three consecutive scheduled work days due to
an illness or injury must have a doctor’s release before returning to work.
   (B)   The city insurance program shall insure and cover each employee of the
city commencing the day following 30 days of continuous employment. Part-time
or seasonal help are not eligible for city insurance. In the event of
employee’s death, city will pay insurance premium for surviving spouse and/or
dependent children who were covered under employee’s policy at the time of
death for a period of 12 months.
(Ord. 6-2002, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 32.22 DISABILITY PAY.
   (A)   Non-work related illness or accident. In the event an employee becomes
disabled due to a non-work related accident of illness, his or her pay will be
determined by the following.
      (1)   The employee will receive 50% of his or her normal base wage for a
maximum of 26 weeks, payable first day of accident, eighth day of illness.
Bonus time must be exhausted entirely before 50% benefit begins.
      (2)   Police officers must immediately apply through their Pension Board
for disability payments. The city will pay the difference between the amount
granted and 50% of the officers’ base pay for the 26-week period. Subject to a
90-day review by the city administration. In accordance with PERF rules, all
vacation and bonus time must be used before 50% pay is given. The city will
continue pay, uninterrupted, after employee signs agreement to sign over all
compensation from PERF to the city.
   (B)   Work related injuries. In the event an employee becomes disabled due
to a work related injury or illness, which is covered by worker’s compensation
insurance, the following will apply.
      (1)   Employees covered by workers compensation will file workers
compensation claim, and the city will pay the difference between the amount
granted by worker’s compensation and 100% of the employee’s full pay for a
period of 90 days. At the end of 90 days, the city administration will review
the employee’s case and, at the discretion of the city administration, the 100%
coverage will be extended or terminated.
      (2)   Police officer must, immediately upon accident or injury, apply to
PERF through the local Pension Board for disability benefits. The city will pay
the difference between the amount granted by PERF and 100% of the officers base
wage, subject to a 90-day review by the Board of Works and Safety. At the time
of review, the Board may extend or terminate the 100% coverage.
      (3)   The city will continue to pay all employees, uninterrupted, after
employee signs agreement to sign over all compensation checks to the city.
(Ord. 6-2002, passed 8-6-2002)
ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
§ 32.35 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   The following shall be considered prohibited conduct by the employees of the
city.
   (A)   (1)   No employee shall report for duty or remain on duty under the
influence of alcohol or having consumed illegal drugs. For purposes of this
subchapter, a blood alcohol concentration of 0.02% by weight or greater shall
constitute UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL.
      (2)   For purposes of this subchapter, any discernable presence of a
controlled substance as listed in Schedule I, Schedule II, and Schedule III of
I.C. 35-48-2, and as detected by any test performed in accordance with this
subchapter shall constitute under the influence or consumption of illegal drugs
within the meaning of this subchapter, except as found in division (D) below.
   (B)   No employee shall use alcohol while on duty or performing any duty or
service on behalf of the city.
   (C)   No employee shall possess, use, transfer, or purchase alcohol or a
controlled substance while on duty or during the course of the exercise of the
performance of any duty for or on behalf of the city, except as possession of
such substances may be required by and in the course of the exercise of his or
her duties, in which case, all departmental procedures for handling and
accounting for such alcohol or controlled substances shall be strictly
followed.
   (D)   Prescription drugs are excepted from the prohibitions herein, provided
however, such drugs may not be utilized by anyone who is on duty or in the
performance of city business by anyone other than the person for whom such drug
is prescribed. Such drugs may be used only in the manner or in combination and
quantity prescribed.
(Ord. 1, 1996, passed 3-19-1996) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.36 RULES OF CONDUCT.
   All employees of the city shall follow the following rules.
   (A)   All city employees who are referred to undergo testing procedures
herein are required to do so, and the refusal to undertake such testing
procedures may result in immediate discharge.
   (B)   The off-duty abuse of alcohol or illegal use of controlled substances
which results in or is a factor in excessive absenteeism, tardiness, poor
workmanship or performance of duty, or is a factor in an accident, may subject
the employee to a mandatory assistance program for rehabilitation, and should
such an employee so referred reject such reference or fail to fully participate
in and fulfill all the requirements thereof, such employee may be subject to
discharge.
   (C)   As a condition of employment, all employees of the city will abide by
the terms of this subchapter and will notify his or her immediate supervisor of
any conviction or a violation of any statute or ordinance, whether felony,
misdemeanor, or infraction relating to any alcohol or controlled substance,
whether or not such conduct occurs during work hours or in the performance of a
duty on behalf of the city. Such notification must occur not more than five
days after any such conviction.
(Ord. 1, 1996, passed 3-19-1996) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.37 VIOLATION.
   The violation of any of the prohibited conduct as set forth in §§
32.35 or
32.36 may be cause for disciplinary action, including discharge.
(Ord. 1, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.38 TESTING REQUIREMENTS.
   To assure effective compliance with the policy of the city to provide a
drug-free workplace, and to enforce and carry out that policy, all employees
shall be subject to testing procedures as follows.
   (A)   Pre-employment testing. All applicants for employment by the city must
submit to an alcohol and drug screen test.
   (B)   Work related accident. An employee who is involved in an accident
while on duty or in the course of carrying out any business for or on behalf of
the city will be tested for drugs and alcohol.
   (C)   Random testing. The city may, at its discretion, conduct random drug
testing of employees at any time with or without cause or suspicion.
   (D)   Reasonable suspicion testing. A drug/alcohol test may be required upon
reasonable suspicion of violation of the conduct herein set forth. Reasonable
suspicion for requiring an employee to submit to drug and/or alcohol test shall
be deemed to exist when an employee manifests physical or behavioral symptoms
commonly attributed to the use of controlled substances or alcohol.
   (E)   Return from leave of absence. An employee returning from a leave of
absence of more than 30 days may be required to undergo testing.
(Ord. 1, 1996, passed 3-19-1996) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 32.39 TESTING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   All testing shall be conducted by an independent laboratory which
shall be selected by the City Board of Works.
   (B)   Testing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures and
requirements of the designated independent laboratory, and such tests may
include, but shall not be limited to, a blood drug/alcohol screen and/or
urinalysis to detect the presence of a controlled substance.
   (C)   The city will pay for the cost of all negative drug/alcohol tests
performed.
   (D)   The cost of a test shall be borne by any employee who shall test
positive.
   (E)   If an employee requests a split specimen to enable testing by another
laboratory other than as designated by the Board of Works, the cost of such
test shall be borne by the employee.
   (F)   The costs of tests to be paid by the employee as provided herein shall
be withheld from the employee’s pay effective with the salary following the
receipt of the invoice from the testing laboratory.
(Ord. 1, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.40 EMPLOYEES TESTING POSITIVE.
   Employees who test positive may be subject to immediate discipline up to and
including discharge but, subject to the following terms and conditions, may be
allowed to continue employment on a probational basis:
   (A)   A recommendation of continued employment by a department head of the
city department to which the employee is assigned;
   (B)   The employee agrees to participate in counseling in a certified
rehabilitation program and successfully completes the program and all the
requirements thereof;
   (C)   The employee remains drug and alcohol free during the probationary
employment period;
   (D)   The employee agrees to routine periodic unscheduled drug and alcohol
screen test to ensure that the employee remains drug and alcohol free, which
routine or unscheduled test may continue for a period of up to 60 months; and
   (E)   The probationary period of employment may continue as determined by
the Board of Works for a period of up to one year following the report of drug
and alcohol test.
(Ord. 1, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.41 EMPLOYEE ACKNOWLEDGMENT.
   All employees shall be required to read and understand the subchapter and
acknowledge in writing that a copy of the subchapter has been provided to them,
which acknowledgment will be in the form as prescribed on the attachment to the
ordinance from which this subchapter is derived, which shall be kept on file in
the personnel record of the employee.
(Ord. 1, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY FOR CITY DRIVERS
§ 32.55 PURPOSE.
   It is the policy of the city that its drivers be free of substance abuse and
alcohol abuse. Consequently, the use of illegal drugs by drivers is prohibited.
Further, drivers shall not use alcohol or engage in prohibited conduct as
defined herein. The overall goal of this policy is to ensure a drug and alcohol
free transportation environment and to reduce accidents, injuries, and
fatalities.
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.56 TYPES OF TESTS.
   Pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Department of Transportation
(DOT), the city has implemented six circumstances for drug and alcohol tests:
   (A)   Pre-employment testing;
   (B)   Post-accident testing;
   (C)   Random testing;
   (D)   Reasonable suspicion testing;
   (E)   Return-to-duty testing; and
   (F)   Follow-up testing.
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.57 REFUSAL TO TEST.
   Refusal to submit to the types of drug and alcohol tests employed by the
city will be grounds for refusal to hire driver/applicants and to terminate
employment of existing drivers. A REFUSAL TO TEST is defined to be conduct
which would obstruct the proper administration of a test. A delay in providing
a urine or breath specimen could be considered a refusal. If a driver cannot
provide a sufficient urine specimen or adequate breath, he or she will be
evaluated by a physician of the city’s choice. If the physician cannot find a
legitimate medical explanation for the inability to provide a specimen (either
urine or breath), it will be considered a refusal to test. In that
circumstance, the driver has violated one of the prohibitions of the
regulations.
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.58 CONSEQUENCES OF POLICY VIOLATION.
   Any driver who becomes unqualified or engages in prohibited conduct as set
forth herein may be subject to termination of employment.
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.59 PRE-EMPLOYMENT TESTING.
   (A)   All applicants for driving positions must submit to urine drug tests.
A driver/applicant is not required to submit to urine drug tests if the city
can verify that the driver has participated in a valid drug testing program
within the preceding 30 days and, while participating in that program, was
either tested within the past six months or participated in a random selection
program for the previous 12 months.
   (B)   The city must also ensure that no prior employer of the driver has
knowledge or records of a violation of the DOT alcohol rules within the
previous six months.
   (C)   If the driver/applicant has an alcohol test result between 0.02 and
0.0399, he or she shall not be allowed to drive for 24 hours. The driver shall
be removed from safety-sensitive functions, and the applicant is not allowed to
operate a commercial motor vehicle for 24 hours.
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.60 RANDOM TESTING.
   (A)   The city conducts random drug and alcohol testing. The city or its
agents will submit all drivers to a random selection system. The random
selection system provides an equal chance for each driver to be selected each
time random selection occurs. Random selections will be reasonably spread
throughout the year. The city will drug test, at a minimum, 50% of the average
number of driver positions in each calendar year. The city will select, at a
minimum, 25% of the average number of driver positions for random alcohol
testing. Random selection, by its very nature, may result in drivers being
selected in successive selections or more than once a calendar year.
Alternatively, some drivers may not be selected in a calendar year.
   (B)   If a driver is selected at random, for either drug or alcohol testing,
a city official will notify the driver. Once notified, every action the driver
takes must lead to a collection. If the driver engages in conduct which does
not lead to a collection as soon as possible after notification, such conduct
may be considered a refusal to test.
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.61 POST-ACCIDENT TESTING.
   (A)   When a driver is involved in an accident where a fatality is involved,
the driver shall submit to post-accident drug and alcohol testing. When a
driver is involved in a recordable accident and receives a citation for a
moving violation arising from the accident, the driver also must submit to a
drug and alcohol test. Following any accident, the driver must contact the city
as soon as possible.
   (B)   The DOT requires that any time a post-accident drug or alcohol test is
required, that it be performed as soon as possible following the accident. If
no alcohol collection can be made within eight hours, attempts to collect a
breath sample shall cease. If no urine collection can be obtained for purposes
of post-accident drug testing within 32 hours, attempts to make such collection
shall cease.
   (C)   In the event that federal, state, or local officials conduct breath or
blood tests for the use of alcohol and/or urine tests for the use of controlled
substances following an accident, these tests shall be considered to meet the
requirements of this section, provided the tests conform to applicable federal,
state, or local requirements. The employee will sign a release allowing the
city to obtain the test results from federal, state, or local officials.
   (D)   In the event a driver is so seriously injured that the driver cannot
provide a urine or breath specimen at the time of the accident, the driver must
provide necessary authorization for the city to obtain hospital records or
other documents that would indicate whether there were controlled substances or
alcohol in the driver’s system at the time of the accident.
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.62 REASONABLE SUSPICION TESTING.
   Reasonable suspicion for requiring a driver to submit to drug and/or alcohol
testing shall be deemed to exist when a driver manifests physical or behavioral
symptoms or reactions commonly attributed to the use of controlled substances
or alcohol. Such driver conduct must be witnessed by at least one supervisor
trained in compliance with 49 CFR § 382.603.
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.63 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   The following shall be considered PROHIBITED CONDUCT for purposes of
this subchapter.
      (1)   No driver shall report for duty or remain on duty while having an
alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater.
      (2)   No driver shall be on duty or operate a commercial motor vehicle
while the driver possesses alcohol unless the alcohol is manifested and
transported as part of a shipment.
      (3)   No driver shall use alcohol while performing safety-sensitive
functions.
      (4)   No driver shall perform safety-sensitive functions within four
hours after using alcohol.
      (5)   No driver required to take a post-accident alcohol test shall use
alcohol for eight hours following the accident or until he or she undergoes a
post-accident alcohol test, whichever occurs first.
      (6)   No driver shall refuse to submit to a post-accident, a random, a
reasonable suspicion, return-to-duty, or a follow-up breath alcohol or urine
drug test.
      (7)   No driver shall report for duty or remain on duty when the driver
uses any controlled substance, except when use is pursuant to the instructions
of a physician who has advised the driver that the substances does not
adversely affect the driver’s ability to operate a commercial motor vehicle.
   (B)   If the city has actual knowledge or has reason to believe that a
driver has engaged in prohibited conduct, the city may require the driver to
submit to drug and/or alcohol testing.
   (C)   If a driver engages in prohibited conduct, the driver is not qualified
to drive a commercial motor vehicle and shall be immediately removed from
service. The city may, in its discretion, at the request of the driver, keep
the driver’s position open while such driver attempts to become requalified.
The city may also take action against the employee, up to and including
termination.
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.64 SUBSTANCE ABUSE EVALUATION.
   Any driver who engages in prohibited conduct shall be provided with the
names, addresses, and telephone numbers of qualified substance abuse
professionals. If the driver desires to become requalified, the driver must be
evaluated by a substance abuse professional (SAP) and submit to any treatment
prescribed by the SAP. Following evaluation and treatment, if any, in order to
become requalified, the driver must submit to and successfully complete a
return-to-duty drug and/or alcohol test. Such driver
is also subject to follow-up testing. Follow-up testing is separate from and in
addition to the city’s reasonable suspicion, post-accident, and random testing
procedures. Follow-up testing shall be on a random basis and be in accordance
with the instructions of the substance abuse professional. Follow-up testing
may continue for a period of up to 60 months following the driver’s return to
duty. No fewer than six tests shall be performed in the first 12 months of a
follow-up testing. The costs of any SAP evaluation or prescribed treatment
shall be borne by the driver. The city does not guarantee or promise a position
to the driver should he or she regain qualified status.
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.65 AUTHORIZATION FOR PREVIOUS TEST RECORDS.
   Within 14 days of performing a safety-sensitive function, federal
regulations require that the city obtain certain drug and alcohol testing
records from driver’s previous employers for the previous two years. As a
condition to employment, the driver shall provide the city with a written
authorization for all previous employers within the past two years to release
such drug and alcohol testing records as are required under federal regulation.
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.66 DRUG URINALYSIS.
   (A)   Drug testing will be performed through urinalysis. Urinalysis will
test for the presence of drugs and/or metabolites of the following controlled
substances:
      (1)   Marijuana;
      (2)   Cocaine;
      (3)   Opiates;
      (4)   Amphetamines; and
      (5)   Phencyclidine (PCP).
   (B)   The urinalysis procedure starts with the collection or a urine
specimen. Urine specimens will be submitted to a SAMHSA-certified laboratory
for testing. As part of the collection process, the specimen provided will be
split into two vials; a primary vial and a secondary vial. The SAMHSA-certified
laboratory will perform initial screenings on all primary vials. In the event
that the primary specimen tests positive, a confirmation test of the specimen
will be performed before being reported by the laboratory to the MRO as a
positive.
   (C)   All laboratory results will be reported by the laboratory to a medical
review officer (MRO) designated by the city. Negative test results shall be
reported by the MRO to the city. Before reporting a positive test result to the
city, the MRO will attempt to contact the driver to discuss the test result. If
the MRO is unable to contact the driver directly, the MRO will contact the city
management official designated in advance by the city, who shall in turn
contact the driver and direct the driver to contact the MRO. Upon being so
directed, the driver shall contact the MRO immediately or, if after the MRO’s
business hours and the MRO is unavailable, at the start of the MRO’s next
business day. In the MRO’s sole discretion, a determination will be made as to
whether a result is positive or negative.
   (D)   Pursuant to DOT regulations, individual test results for driver/
applicants and drivers will be released to the city and will be kept strictly
confidential unless consent for the release of the test results has been
obtained. Any individual who has submitted to drug testing in compliance with
this policy is entitled to receive the results of such testing upon timely
written request.
   (E)   An individual testing positive may make a request of the MRO to have
the secondary vial tested. The driver may request that the secondary vial be
tested by a different SAMHSA-certified lab than tested the primary specimen.
The individual making the request for a test of the second specimen must pre-
pay all costs associated with the test. The request for testing of a second
specimen is timely if it is made to the MRO within 72 hours of the individual
being notified by the city of a positive test result.
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.67 ALCOHOL TESTS.
   The city will perform alcohol tests using an evidential breath testing
device. The city may provide use of an evidential breath testing device through
a vendor or agent. The driver shall report to the site of an evidential breath
testing device as notified by the city. The evidential breath testing device
will be operated by a breath alcohol technician. The driver shall follow all
instructions given by the breath alcohol technician. In the event that a
driver, on the basis of the evidential breath test, has a blood alcohol content
of 0.02 to 0.0399, the driver shall be removed from duty for 24 hours or until
his or her next scheduled on-duty time, whichever is longer. Applicants are not
medically qualified until after the 24-hour time frame expires. Drivers with
tests indicating a blood alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater are
considered to have prohibited conduct which may result in disciplinary action
up to and including termination. All alcohol tests shall be performed just
prior to, during, or just after duty.
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.68 TRAINING.
   (A)   The city shall ensure supervisors designated to determine whether
reasonable suspicion exists to require a driver to undergo testing under 49 CFR
§ 382.307 receive at least 60 minutes of training on alcohol misuse and receive
at least an additional 60 minutes of training on controlled substances use. The
training shall cover the physical, behavioral, speech, and performance
indicators of probable alcohol misuse and use of controlled substances.
   (B)   The city shall provide educational materials that explain the
requirements of 49 CFR § 382.601, consequences of violating the regulations and
the employer’s policies and procedures with the respect to meeting these
requirements. The materials supplied to drivers may include information on
additional employer policies with respect to the use or possession of alcohol
or controlled substances, for example, the consequences for a driver found to
have a specified alcohol or controlled substances level based on the employer’s
authority independent of 49 CFR § 382.601. City shall ensure each driver is
required to sign a statement certifying that he or she has received a copy of
these materials described in 49 CFR § 382.601.
   (C)   This policy is not intended, nor should it be construed, as a contract
between the city and employee. This policy may be changed at any time at the
sole discretion of the city.
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
§ 32.69 FORMS.
   (A)   Employee acknowledgment form.
 
   EMPLOYEE ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I have carefully and thoroughly read the CITY OF GAS CITY’s drug and alcohol
policy packet information for Commercial Driver’s License (CDL).
Date: ________________ ____________________________
                       Employee Signature
 
   (B)   Drug alcohol addendum.
 
DRUG ALCOHOL ADDENDUM
All employees of the CITY OF GAS CITY who test positive for drug/alcohol tests
which include pre-employment, probable cause, random, and post accident will
pay for the tests, including (G.C.M.S.) Confirmation Tests.
All employees who request split specimens to be forwarded to another lab will
pay for cost.
Cost of the tests will be withheld from employees’ paycheck effective next
paycheck. The CITY OF GAS CITY will pay for all negative drug/alcohol tests.
CITY OF GAS CITY         
By ____________________ Dated: _______________________
______________________  Dated: _______________________
Employee Signature
 
(Ord. 2, 1996, passed 3-19-1996)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCES
Section
   
33.01   Payment of claims prior to Council allowance
   
33.02   Materiality and process for reporting material items
§ 33.01 PAYMENT OF CLAIMS PRIOR TO COUNCIL ALLOWANCE.
   For the said expenses of the city, the following types of claims be
permitted to be paid by the city fiscal officer prior to Council approval:
   (A)   Property or services purchased from the U.S. government;
   (B)   License or permit fees;
   (C)   Insurance premiums;
   (D)   Utility payments or connection charges;
   (E)   General grant programs;
   (F)   Grants or state funds;
   (G)   Maintenance or service agreements;
   (H)   Leases or rental agreements;
   (I)   Bond or coupon payments;
   (J)   Payroll; and
   (K)   State, federal, or county taxes.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 3-2-1993)
§ 33.02 MATERIALITY AND PROCESS FOR REPORTING MATERIAL ITEMS.
   (A)   All erroneous or irregular variances, losses, shortages, or thefts of
the city funds or property, or funds or property the city holds in trust, shall
be reported to the fiscal officer or designee promptly.
   (B)   It will be the policy of the fiscal officer to report to the State
Board of Accounts any erroneous or irregular variances, losses, shortages, in
excess of $999, except for inadvertent clerical errors that are identified
timely and promptly corrected with no loss to the city.
   (C)   It will be the policy of the fiscal officer to report promptly to the
State Board of Accounts any erroneous or irregular variances, losses, or
shortages of non-cash items in excess of $1,000, estimated market value, except
for those resulting from inadvertent clerical errors or misplacements that are
identified timely and promptly corrected with no loss to the city, and except
for losses from genuine accidents.
   (D)   It will be the policy of the city to report promptly to the State
Board of Accounts any incidents of fraud in excess of $0.
   (E)   All elected officials, employees, and agents are directed to comply
with this section.
(Ord. 11-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
CHAPTER 34: INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Internal control policy adopted
   
34.02   Personnel training
   
34.03   Materiality threshold
Internal Control Policy
   
34.15   Purpose
   
34.16   Commitment to integrity and ethical values
   
34.17   Oversight body
   
34.18   Delegation of authority
   
34.19   City employees
   
34.20   Individual accountability
   
34.21   Objectives
   
34.22   Identification of risks
   
34.23   Potential for fraud
   
34.24   Response to significant change
   
34.25   Control activities
   
34.26   Information system
   
34.27   Policy communication
   
34.28   Financial transparency
   
34.29   Internal communications
   
34.30   External communications
   
34.31   Monitoring activities
   
34.32   Remediation of deficiencies
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 INTERNAL CONTROL POLICY ADOPTED.
   The city hereby adopts the internal control policy incorporated herein as §§
34.15 through
34.32.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.02 PERSONNEL TRAINING.
   The Controller is directed to ensure that all personnel receive training
concerning the internal control procedures adopted and approved herein prior to
June 30, 2016.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.03 MATERIALITY THRESHOLD.
   The city hereby adopts a materiality threshold of $500 for purposes of the
internal control procedures adopted and approved herein.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
INTERNAL CONTROL POLICY
§ 34.15 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this policy is to communicate the City Council’s internal
control objectives to all employees and elected officials of the city and to
firmly commit the city to the 17 key principles of internal controls as
established by the State Board of Accounts.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.16 COMMITMENT TO INTEGRITY AND ETHICAL VALUES.
   (A)   The city has the responsibility to establish and maintain an adequate
system of internal control and to furnish to the City Council, various boards
and commissions, governmental agencies, creditors, and others reliable
financial information on a timely basis. An adequate system of internal control
is necessary for the city to discharge these responsibilities.
   (B)   Controls help ensure that assets are not exposed to unauthorized
access and use, transactions are properly recorded in the financial records,
and the resultant financial information is reliable. External organizations and
stakeholders of the city rely on financial information to make decisions toward
appropriations, loans, and other debt, grants, and other contractual
relationships. City resources are dependent upon the system of internal
control. Auditors are required annually to report upon the adequacy of the
city’s systems for control over financial reporting and compliance per I.C. 5-
11-1-27(e). The safeguarding of city assets and the reliability which the city
and others can place upon its financial records is dependent upon the
effectiveness of the internal control process.
   (C)   As the fiscal body, the City Council expects the city administration
to effect an internal control
environment with policies and procedures necessary to provide reasonable
assurance that practices cause
effective and efficient operations, reliable financial reporting, and
compliance with applicable laws and
regulations.
   (D)   The system of internal control is meant to keep the city on course
toward its mission and to minimize surprises. The system promotes efficiency,
minimizes risks of asset loss, helps ensure the reliability of financial
information, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
   (E)   Internal control is a process; a means to an end, and not an end unto
itself. The control environment is the foundation upon which all components of
internal control are based. It sets the tone for city operations. Internal
control is about people, operations, communications, and the work environment.
It is not about policies and forms though it takes shape through the
implementation of relevant policies, procedures, and practices. Internal
control can provide reasonable assurance, but no system of control can provide
absolute assurance to the City Council and other users of financial
information.
   (F)   The Finance Department shall be charged with:
      (1)   Conveying periodic messages of the city’s internal control
philosophy and expectations to all employees;
      (2)   Evaluating the city’s internal control system for weaknesses on a
periodic (but no less frequently than annual) basis, providing solutions to any
discovered weaknesses, and informing employees of necessary changes in
procedures;
      (3)   Working with the Human Resources Department to establish a
confidential reporting system for individuals to report suspected fraud and
abuse of internal control policies; and
      (4)   Working with the Human Resources Department to institute procedures
to address violations of policies and consequences for violations.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.17 OVERSIGHT BODY.
   As the fiscal body for the city, the City Council is responsible for setting
the institutional expectations for internal control, ensuring management is
aware of those expectations, requiring the upward communications channels are
open through all levels of management, and evaluating management’s
effectiveness toward monitoring the control environment and implementing sound
control policies and procedures. As the city’s chief fiscal officer, the
Controller will be the City Council’s chief agent in implementing and managing
the internal control policies and procedures.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.18 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Individuals with delegated approval authority, e.g. elected officials
and department heads, are responsible for establishing, maintaining, and
supporting a system of internal controls within their areas of responsibility
and for creating the control environment that encourages compliance with city
policies and procedures.
   (B)   Adequate supervision is necessary to monitor that internal controls
are operating as intended, and to help ensure the reliability of accounting and
operational controls by pointing out errors, omissions, exceptions, and
inconsistencies in procedures. Staff in leadership roles are responsible for
the application of this policy and the design, development, implementation, and
maintenance of systems of internal controls focusing on the effectiveness of
operations and the safeguarding of assets within their respective areas of
responsibility. All levels of management and supervision are responsible for
strengthening internal controls when weaknesses are detected. Department
managers should periodically review departmental procedures to ensure that the
general principles of internal control are being followed.
   (C)   The Finance Department has the primary responsibility for internal
control over financial reporting and compliance with applicable laws, rules,
and regulations. The Controller is the city’s chief source for information and
assistance to staff and department heads on this topic and will make resources
available to assist in administering this policy.
   (D)   The Human Resources Department is responsible for internal controls
over employee recruitment, hiring, separation, promotion, job classification,
employee rights, and salary administration. The Benefits Coordinator and
Corporation Counsel are the city sources for information and assistance on this
topic and will make resources available to assist in administering this policy.
   (E)   All levels of internal control are subject to examination by external
auditors who are required to report on the adequacy of internal controls over
finance and compliance.
   (F)   Department heads are responsible for prompt corrective action on all
internal control findings and recommendations made by internal and external
auditors. The audit process is completed only after Department heads receive
the audit results and take action to correct internal control weaknesses,
improve systems, or demonstrate that management action is not warranted.
Department heads have the responsibility to ensure that those who report to
them have adequate knowledge, skills, and abilities to function within, and
contribute to, an effective internal control environment. This includes
providing access to appropriate training on topics relevant to their job
responsibilities.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.19 CITY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The City Employee Handbook provides a roadmap for recruiting and
maintaining quality employees. Prior to employment, individuals may be subject
to pre-employment background screening and/or a credit history check. While
employed, city employees are entitled to a benefits package, including health
and disability insurance and certain other post-employment benefits. The city
will continue to assess the best recruitment pools and tools for the different
skill sets of skills necessary to adequately implement and maintain quality
internal controls.
   (B)   Job descriptions will be updated where necessary to reflect internal
control responsibilities and duties. Employees will be regularly trained in
internal control methods and all training will be documented in employees’
personnel files. Employees will be regularly evaluated by their supervisors on
internal control duties and receive feedback on possible improvements.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.20 INDIVIDUAL ACCOUNTABILITY.
   Individuals are held accountable for their internal control responsibilities
through a recognized structure which includes relevant job descriptions,
operating procedures, periodic reviews, regular feedback, and a progressive
disciplinary policy. Additionally, city administration seeks to address issues
in specific departments and positions through regular one-on-ones with
department heads.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.21 OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   Through the creation of standard operating procedures and accurate
organizational reporting charts management conveys and identifies objectives,
missions, policies, and risk tolerances to employees. The Finance Department
will lead a risk analysis of three major areas:
      (1)   The effectiveness and efficiency of operations;
      (2)   The reliability of reporting for internal and external use; and
      (3)   Compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
   (B)   For each category, the Finance Department will define objectives in
specific measurable terms in order to enable the design of internal control for
related risk, increase understanding at all levels, assess performance,
identify what is to be achieved, who is to achieve it, how it will be achieved,
when it will be achieved and incorporate external requirements.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.22 IDENTIFICATION OF RISKS.
   (A)   The Finance Department will identify, analyze, and respond to the
risks identified in §
34.21 by determining:
      (1)   How likely the risk is to occur;
      (2)   How it will impact the objective;
      (3)   If the risk is based on complex or unusual transactions; and
      (4)   If the risk is based on fraud.
   (B)   Once each risk has been identified and analyzed, the Finance
Department will work with department heads to determine how to respond to each
risk with a specific solution and action.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.23 POTENTIAL FOR FRAUD.
   Management is committed to fraud prevention by utilizing a “trust but
verify” approach. The potential for fraud, misappropriation, and outright theft
are contemplated as controls are designed for various city divisions. Fraud
responses will include statutorily required responses to fraud, including, but
not limited to, I.C. 5-11-1-27(l) relating to the report of misappropriation of
funds to State Board of Accounts and prosecuting attorney and I.C. 5-11-1-27(j)
relating to the report of material variances, losses, shortages, or thefts to
the State Board of Accounts. The city shall utilize a materiality threshold of
$500.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.24 RESPONSE TO SIGNIFICANT CHANGE.
   The Finance Department, in coordination with department heads, will
regularly evaluate and adjust internal control policies in order to accommodate
for the impact of future changes, including, but not limited to, personnel
changes, newly elected officials, new programs, new technology, new laws and
regulations, and financial fluctuations.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.25 CONTROL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   The Finance Department will establish and maintain a system of
internal controls that satisfies the city’s objectives in the following
categories:
      (1)   Risks are identified and effectively manages;
      (2)   Safeguarding of city assets;
      (3)   Reliability and integrity of financial information;
      (4)   Compliance with city policy, plans, procedures, laws, and
regulations;
      (5)   Economical and efficient use of city resources; and
      (6)   Meeting established objectives and goals for city operations and
programs.
   (B)   General internal control principles for departments are:
      (1)   Separation of duties:
         (a)   Duties are separated so that one person’s work routinely serves
as a check on another’s work; and
         (b)   No one person has complete control over more than one key
function or activity (e.g., authorizing, approving, certifying, disbursing,
receiving, or reconciling).
      (2)   Authorization and approval:
         (a)   Proposed transactions are authorized when proper and consistent
with city policy and the department’s plans; and
         (b)   Transactions are approved by the person who has delegated
approval authority, which is usually delegated on the basis of special
competency or knowledge.
      (3)   Custodial and security arrangements:
         (a)   Responsibility for physical security/custody of city assets is
separated from record keeping/accounting for those assets; and
         (b)   Unauthorized access to city assets and institutional data is
prevented.
      (4)   Timely and accurate review and reconciliation:
         (a)   Departmental accounting records and documents are examined by
employees who have sufficient understanding of the city accounting and
financial systems to verify that recorded transactions actually took place and
were made in accordance with city policies and procedures; and
         (b)   Departmental accounting records and documentation are compared
with city accounting system reports and financial statements to verify their
reasonableness, accuracy, and completeness.
      (5)   The general internal control principles should be applied to all
departmental operations, especially accounting records and reports, payroll,
purchasing/receiving/disbursement approval, equipment and supply inventories,
cash receipts, petty cash and change funds, billing, and accounts receivable.
   (C)   All city systems, processes, operations, functions, and activities are
subject to evaluations of
internal control systems. The results of these evaluations provide information
regarding the city’s overall system of control.
   (D)   Information must be timely and communicated in a manner that enables
people to carry out their responsibilities.
      (1)   (a)   All covered employees must be trained on internal controls
according to I.C. 5-11-1-27(g).
         (b)   All personnel must receive a clear message from the city’s
administration that control
responsibilities are to be taken seriously. Failure to comply with established
practices will subject individuals to the terms of disciplinary action or
dismissal.
      (2)   Employees must understand their own roles in the internal control
system, as well as how
individual activities relate to the work of others. To this end, whenever a new
budgetary unit, financial activity, and the like is set up, the Controller will
provide notification to the appropriate parties of the responsibilities
incumbent on them for good business practices and sound financial management,
including reference to the principles within this policy.
      (3)   Employees must have a means of communicating significant
information to the city’s administration.
      (4)   The city must communicate effectively with external parties, such
as auditors, creditors, contractors, suppliers, regulators, and other
stakeholders.
   (E)   Internal control is meant to keep the city focused on achieving its
mission while avoiding surprises. There is a balance between effective controls
and mission accomplishment. Costs associated with internal controls should not
exceed their benefit, nor should controls be allowed to stifle mission
effectiveness and timely action. All levels of management must assess the
costs, benefits, and risks when designing controls to develop a positive
control environment and compensate for the risks of noncompliance, loss of
assets, or unreliable reporting while accomplishing the city mission.
   (F)   The following specific internal control policies are adopted for use
by city departments.
      (1)   Payroll activities.
         (a)   Salaries and wage rates are verified by the Human Resources
Department.
         (b)   The responsibilities for hiring, terminating, and approving
promotions are segregated from those preparing payroll transactions or
inputting data.
         (c)   The responsibilities for approving time sheets are segregated
from those for preparing payroll transactions or inputting data.
         (d)   Payroll adjustment reports are submitted by someone outside of
the payroll process.
         (e)   Employees’ time and attendance records are approved by their
supervisors.
         (f)   Corrections to recorded time and attendance records are approved
by the employee and employee’s supervisor.
         (g)   Procedures are in place to ensure that changes in employment
status are promptly reported to the payroll processing unit.
         (h)   Payroll disbursements are reviewed and approved by an authorized
individual prior to payment.
         (i)   Access to payroll applications is appropriately controlled by
user logins and passwords.
         (j)   Changes to a payroll disbursement are approved by an individual
other than the ones authorized to process the changes.
         (k)   Payroll checks are accounted for in numerical order and
reconciled to the payroll check register.
         (l)   Access to the signature stamp used to sign payroll checks is
adequately controlled.
         (m)   Payroll checks are mailed or distributed by someone outside the
normal payroll distribution function.
         (n)   Unclaimed payroll checks are returned to Finance Department via
the department head.
         (o)   Employees are cross-trained on the payroll process; those
assigned to payroll take regular vacations.
      (2)   Disbursement activities.
         (a)   The responsibility for approving claims is segregated from those
preparing the claims.
         (b)   Checks are written by an individual other than the one approving
the claim.
         (c)   Checks are signed by an individual other than the one preparing
them.
         (d)   Claims for payment are reviewed and approved by the governing
body prior to payment.
         (e)   A reconcilement is completed between the claims for payment
approved by the Council and the actual disbursements posted to the ledger.
         (f)   The responsibility for acknowledging the receipt of goods or
services is segregated from those preparing claims and writing checks.
         (g)   Vendor checks are accounted for in numerical order and
reconciled to the disbursement ledger.
         (h)   Invoices or other receipts are attached to each claim to support
the disbursement.
         (i)   A review is completed by an individual outside the disbursement
process in which the claim amount is compared to the supporting documentation
attached to the claim and the amount of the check.
         (j)   Access to disbursement applications is appropriately controlled
by user logins and passwords.
      (3)   Receipting activities.
         (a)   The responsibility for collecting money and issuing receipts is
segregated from those preparing the bank deposit.
         (b)   The responsibility for making bank deposits is segregated from
those preparing the monthly bank reconcilement.
         (c)   Pre-numbered receipts are issued for all money collected, and
the receipt is retained with supporting documentation.
         (d)   Receipts are reconciled to the cash receipts ledger by an
individual other than the one collecting money and issuing receipts.
         (e)   Posting of receipts to the ledger is completed by an individual
other than the one who collects money and makes the deposit.
         (f)   Receipts indicate the type of payment received (cash, check, and
the like), and this is reconciled to the make-up of the bank deposit.
         (g)   Accounts receivable records are maintained by an individual
other than the one(s) involved in the billing process.
         (h)   The billing process is completed by an individual other than the
one who collects cash payments from customers.
         (i)   Adjustments to customer accounts above our managerial threshold
are approved by the governing body only after review.
      (4)   Cash activities.
         (a)   A reconcilement between the recorded cash balance and the bank
balance is completed monthly by an individual separate from the receipting and
disbursing processes.
         (b)   A reconcilement between the receipts ledger and the credits to
the bank account is completed periodically by an individual separate of the
receipting process.
         (c)   A reconcilement between the disbursement ledger and the debits
to the bank account is completed periodically by an individual separate of the
disbursement process.
         (d)   The monthly reconcilement between the cash balance and the bank
balance is thoroughly reviewed and approved by the governing body.
         (e)   Disbursements from and reimbursements to petty cash funds are
periodically reviewed by an individual other than the one responsible for
maintaining the Petty Cash Fund.
      (5)   Credit cards transactions.
         (a)   A designated official or employee oversees the issuance and use
of the credit cards.
         (b)   An ordinance or resolution specifically states the purposes for
which the credit card may be used.
         (c)   A designated person separate from disbursement process reviews
transactions listed on the credit card statements for sufficient documentation
and inclusion in claim to the Council.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.26 INFORMATION SYSTEM.
   (A)   The Finance Department and department heads will work with the
Information Technology Department to ensure that information technology is used
as an integral part of the internal control system.
   (B)   This may include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Setting permission such that only certain users may perform certain
tasks;
      (2)   Using technology to accomplish segregation of duties by forcing
duties to be completed by different users;
      (3)   Automating certain processes and calculations;
      (4)   Limiting the authority to access different components of various
softwares to employees with duties specifically related to that component;
      (5)   Prohibiting user ID and password sharing among employees;
      (6)   Restricting the authority to correct or make adjustments to records
to key employees; and
      (7)   Requiring the use of prescribed forms or the approval of
alternative forms.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.27 POLICY COMMUNICATION.
   The city has an employee handbook that is regularly updated to communicate
policies to employees. Additionally, the Finance Department regularly works
with departments and employees who handle financial transactions to recommend
and ensure best practices. All procedures are in writing and communicated
frequently to all relevant employees. Policies are available both
electronically and in hard copy form.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.28 FINANCIAL TRANSPARENCY.
   The city strives to lead in the areas of financial transparency and
accountability. By adopting standards and investing in systems that exceed
state mandated minimums, city management provides employees and stakeholders
with high quality information and informatics systems. The City Finance
Department and Legal Department attend training and industry seminars to stay
abreast of changes and developments in requirements and communicate that
information effectively to impacted employees.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.29 INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS.
   Internal communications on internal controls are communicated through
adoption of formal policies by relevant boards and commissions and/or the
legislative body or documented through memos from the Finance, Legal, or
relevant department head. Internal memos and reports are maintained to document
communication.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.30 EXTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS.
   Communications with the State Board of Accounts, other state agencies,
grantor agencies, and regulatory agencies are documented by email, memos,
letters, and other forms of written correspondence. Logs are kept for
information provided verbally. All documents are maintained in accordance with
the city and state’s record retention policies. Reports and policies are cross
checked for accuracy, relevancy, and timeliness of information.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.31 MONITORING ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   City administration monitors and evaluates compliance with internal
control policies via multiple vectors. Separation of duties, redundancy
polices, layered approval systems, monthly reports, and physical controls such
as video monitoring allow management to both review and evaluate control
systems.
   (B)   The Finance Department shall implement a system of monitoring that
includes:
      (1)   Periodic checks to determine if controls are in place and working
effectively;
      (2)   Reviewing control activities to determine if the actual activities
are in compliance with established procedures; and
      (3)   Documenting deficiencies in the internal control processes and
remediating them quickly.
   (C)   Monitoring activities will be documented by signatures, initials, or
other appropriate methods.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 34.32 REMEDIATION OF DEFICIENCIES.
   Breaches of internal controls are subject to significant levels of internal
scrutiny. If informed of a material breach of internal controls, the Finance
Department and Mayor’s office actively investigate and address said breach and
adjust policies and procedures to prevent such breaches in the future. Once
breaches are identified and investigated, a formal or informal corrective
action plan will be developed.
(Ord. 12-2016, passed 12-20-2016)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SOLID WASTE
      
53.   ELECTRIC AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
      
54.   SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Governing of the water and electric utilities
   
50.02   Basic cable service rates and charges
Responsible Bidding Practices for Construction on Public Works Projects
   
50.15   Bid submission requirements
   
50.16   Post-bid submissions from subcontractors
   
50.17   Validity of pre-qualification classification
   
50.18   Incomplete submissions by bidders
   
50.19   Responsive and responsible bidder determination
   
50.20   Certified payroll
   
50.21   Public records
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 GOVERNING OF THE WATER AND ELECTRIC UTILITIES.
   The operation and administration of the water and electric utilities of the
city now presently owned and/or operated by the city, be governed by and under
the direction and control of the Municipal Board of Public Works and Safety of
the city; including the operation and administration of all plants and
equipment used for the production, transmission, delivery, or furnishing of
heat, light, water, or power, either directly or indirectly, to the public.
(Ord. 9, 1991, passed 12-3-1991)
§ 50.02 BASIC CABLE SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   The city will follow the FCC rate regulations in its regulation of the
basic service rates and charges of the company and any other cable television
system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent
provisions in the franchise.
   (B)   In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a reasonable
opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties.
   (C)   The Mayor and/or President of the City Council, or their designee, is
authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such
certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be
required by the FCC rate regulations in order to enable the city to regulate
basic service rates and charges.
(Ord. 14, 1993, passed 10-17-1993)
RESPONSIBLE BIDDING PRACTICES FOR CONSTRUCTION ON PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS
§ 50.15 BID SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Contractors proposing to submit bids on any city project estimated to
be at least $150,000 or more must, prior to the opening of bids, submit a
statement made under oath and subject to perjury laws, on a form designated by
the city and must include:
      (1)   A copy of a print-out of the Indiana Secretary of State’s online
records for the bidder dated within 60 days of the submission of said document
showing that the bidder is in existence, current with the Indiana Secretary of
State’s business entity reports, and eligible for a certificate of good
standing. If the bidder is an individual, sole proprietor, or partnership, this
division (A)(1) shall not apply;
      (2)   A list identifying all former business names;
      (3)   Any determinations by a court or governmental agency for violations
of federal, state, or local laws, including, but not limited to, violations of
contracting or antitrust laws, tax or licensing laws, environmental laws, the
Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) being 29 U.S.C. §§ 251 through 278,
or federal Davis-Bacon being 40 U.S.C. §§ 3141 et seq. and related acts;
      (4)   A statement on staffing capabilities, including labor sources;
      (5)   Evidence of participation in apprenticeship and training programs,
applicable to the work to be performed on the project, which are approved by
and registered with the United States Department of Labor’s Office of
Apprenticeship, or its successor organization. The required evidence includes a
copy of all applicable apprenticeship certificates or standards for these
training programs;
      (6)   A copy of a written plan for employee drug testing that:
         (a)   Covers all employees of the bidder who will perform work on the
public works project; and
         (b)   Meets or exceeds the requirements set forth in I.C. 4-13-18-5 or
I.C. 4-13-18-6.
      (7)   The name and description of the management experience of each of
the bidder’s project managers and superintendents that bidder intends to assign
to work on the project;
      (8)   Proof of any professional or trade license required by law for any
trade or specialty area in which the bidder is seeking a contract award; and,
disclosure of any suspension or revocation within the previous five years of
any professional or trade license held by the company, or of any director,
office, or manager employed by the bidder;
      (9)   Evidence that the contractor is utilizing a surety company which is
on the United States Department of Treasury’s listing of approved sureties; and
      (10)   A written statement of any federal, state, or local tax liens or
tax delinquencies owed to any federal, state, or local taxing body in the last
five years.
   (B)   The city reserves the right to demand supplemental information, from
the bidder, (additional) verification any of the information provided by the
bidder and may also conduct random inquiries of the bidder’s current and prior
customers.
(Ord. 9-2021, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 50.16 POST-BID SUBMISSIONS FROM SUBCONTRACTORS.
   (A)   All bidders shall provide a written list that discloses the name,
address, and type of work for each first-tier subcontractor from whom the
bidder has accepted a bid and/or intends to hire on any part of the public work
project, including individuals performing work as independent contractors,
within five business days after the date the bids are due.
   (B)   In addition, each such first-tier subcontractor shall be required to
adhere to the requirements of §
50.15 as though it were bidding directly to the city, except that first-tier
subcontractors shall submit the required information (including the name,
address, and type of work for each of their first-tier subcontractors) to the
successful bidder no later than five business days prior to the subcontractor’s
first day of work on the public work project, and the bidder shall then forward
said information to the city.
   (C)   Upon request, the city may require any second and lower-tier
subcontractors to provide the required information (including name, address,
type of work on the project, and the name of the higher-tier subcontractor).
The city may require the successful bidder and relevant subcontractor to remove
the second or lower-tier subcontractor from the project and replace it with a
responsive and responsible contractor.
   (D)   Failure of a subcontractor to submit the required information shall
not disqualify the successful bidder from performing work on the project and
shall not constitute a contractual default and/or breach by the successful
bidder. The city may also require that successful bidder to remove the
subcontractor from the project and replace it with a responsive and responsible
subcontractor.
   (E)   The disclosure of a subcontractor (disclosed subcontractor) by a
bidder or a subcontractor shall not create any rights in the disclosed
subcontractor. Thus, a bidder and/or subcontractor may substitute another
subcontractor (substitute subcontractor) for a disclosed subcontractor by
giving the city written notice of the name, address, and type of work of the
substitute subcontractor. The substitute subcontractor is subject to all the
obligations of a subcontractor under this subchapter.
(Ord. 9-2021, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 50.17 VALIDITY OF PRE-QUALIFICATION CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   Upon designation by the city that a contractor’s or subcontractor’s
submission in anticipation of a bid is complete and timely, and upon any
further consideration deemed necessary by the city, the contractor or
subcontractor may be pre-qualified for future city public works projects. A
contractor’s classification as “qualified” shall exempt the contractor or
subcontractor from the comprehensive submission requirements contained herein
for a period of 12 months.
   (B)   Thereafter, contractors or subcontractors who are pre-qualified must
submit a complete application for continuation of “pre-qualified” standing, on
a form provided by the city, (also referred to as the “short form”) by December
31 for the upcoming calendar year. Failure by any pre-qualified contractor or
subcontractor to timely submit its complete application for continuation of
“pre-qualified” standing shall result in automatic removal of the designation,
effective January 1 of the upcoming year. However, the “removed” contractor or
subcontractor shall still be permitted to bid on city public works projects.
   (C)   Any material changes to the contractor’s status, at any time, must be
reported in writing within ten days of its occurrence to the city. The pre-
qualification designation is solely within the discretion of the city, and the
city specifically reserves the right to change or revoke the designation for a
stated written reason(s).
   (D)   Denial of pre-qualification shall be in writing and shall be forwarded
to the contractor within seven working days of such decision. Any contractor
denied or losing pre-qualification status may request reconsideration of the
decision by submitting such request in writing to the city within five business
days of receipt of notice of denial.
(Ord. 9-2021, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 50.18 INCOMPLETE SUBMISSIONS BY BIDDERS.
   It is the sole responsibility of the potential bidder to comply with all
submission requirements applicable to the bidder in §
50.15 by no later than the public bid opening. Post-bid submissions must be
submitted in accordance with §
50.16 above. Submissions deemed inadequate, incomplete, or untimely by the city
may result in the automatic disqualification of the bid.
(Ord. 9-2021, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 50.19 RESPONSIVE AND RESPONSIBLE BIDDER DETERMINATION.
   The city, after review of complete and timely submissions, shall, in its
sole discretion, after taking into account all information in the submission
requirements, determine whether a bidder is responsive and responsible. The
city specifically reserves the right to utilize all information provided in the
contractor or subcontractor’s submission or any information obtained by the
city through its own independent verification of the information provided by
the contractor.
(Ord. 9-2021, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 50.20 CERTIFIED PAYROLL.
   (A)   For projects in which the cost is at least $250,000, the successful
bidder and all subcontractors working on a public work project shall submit a
certified payroll report utilizing the federal form now known as a WH-347 which
must be prepared on a weekly basis and submitted to the city within ten
calendar days after the end of each week in which the bidder or subcontractor
performed its work on the public work project. These certified payroll reports
shall identify the job title and craft of each employee on the project, e.g.,
journeyman electrician or apprentice electrician.
   (B)   The city may withhold payment due for work performed by a bidder if
the bidder fails to timely submit its certified payroll reports until such time
as such certified payroll reports are submitted. The city may also withhold
payment due for work performed by a subcontractor if the subcontractor fails to
timely submit its certified payroll reports until such time as such certified
payroll reports are submitted. The city shall not withhold payment to a bidder
for work performed by the bidder or for work performed by subcontractors who
have submitted their certified payroll reports, because one or more other
subcontractors failed to timely submit their certified payroll reports.
(Ord. 9-2021, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 50.21 PUBLIC RECORDS.
   All information submitted by a bidder or a subcontractor pursuant to this
subchapter, including certified payrolls, are public records subject to review
pursuant to the state’s Access to Public Records Act, (I.C. 5-14-3).
(Ord. 9-2021, passed 10-19-2021)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
Backflow Prevention
   
51.01   Definition
   
51.02   Cross-connection prohibited
   
51.03   Inspections
   
51.04   Right to entry
   
51.05   Discontinuation of service
   
51.06   Backflow preventer
   
51.07   Supplementary provisions
Rates
   
51.20   Applicability of rates
   
51.21   Metered rates per month
   
51.22   Minimum charge per month
   
51.23   Public fire protection
   
51.24   Private fire protection
   
51.25   Tapping fees
   
51.26   Temporary uses
   
51.27   Railroads
   
51.28   Reconnection charge
   
51.29   Bad check charge
   
51.30   Customer meter deposit
   
51.31   Collection and deferred payment charges
   
51.32   Payment in lieu of taxes
BACKFLOW PREVENTION
§ 51.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the city
water system, and the other, water from a private source, water of unknown or
questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow
from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure
differential between the two systems.
(Ord. 9-2015, passed 1-5-2016)
§ 51.02 CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No interconnection
shall be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary, or
emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the city
may enter the supply or distribution system of said municipality, unless such
private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply and the method of connection and
use of such supply shall have been approved by the city water utility and by
the State Utility of Environmental Management in accordance with 327 I.A.C. 8-
10.
(Ord. 9-2015, passed 1-5-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.03 INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the city water utility to cause inspections to be
made of all properties served by the public water system where cross-
connections with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of
inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall
be established by the city water utility.
(Ord. 9-2015, passed 1-5-2016)
§ 51.04 RIGHT TO ENTRY.
   Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the city water
utility shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine
the property served by a connection to the public water system of the city for
cross-connections. On request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property
so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information
regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of access
or refusal of requested pertinent information shall be deemed evidence of the
presence of cross-connections.
(Ord. 9-2015, passed 1-5-2016)
§ 51.05 DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   The City Water Utility is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation
of this subchapter exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system.
Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice is served on
the owner, lessee, or occupants of the property or premises where a violation
is found or suspected to exist. Water service to such property shall not be
restored until the cross-connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   If it is deemed by the City Water Utility that a cross-connection or
an emergency endangers public health, safety, or welfare and requires immediate
action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the Clerk Treasurer
of the city and delivered to the consumer’s premises, service may be
immediately discontinued. The consumer shall have an opportunity for hearing
within ten days of such emergency discontinuance.
(Ord. 9-2015, passed 1-5-2016)
§ 51.06 BACKFLOW PREVENTER.
   (A)   All consumers using toxic or hazardous liquids, all hospitals,
mortuaries, wastewater treatment plants, laboratories, and all other hazardous
users install and maintain a reduced pressure principal backflow preventer in
the main water line serving each building on the premises. The backflow
preventer must be installed in an easily accessible location not subject to
flooding or freezing.
   (B)   The reduced pressure principal backflow preventers shall not be
installed below ground level.
(Ord. 9-2015, passed 1-5-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.07 SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS.
   (A)   This subchapter does not supersede the State Plumbing Code, the IDEM
Rule 327 I.A.C. 8-10, but is supplementary thereto.
   (B)   In addition to IDEM Rule 327 I.A.C. 8-10-4(c), the following customer
facilities need a backflow prevention device: all consumers that maintain fire
protection systems on facilities and stand pipe systems served by the city are
set forth on Schedule “A,” which shall be maintained and amended from time to
time by the Superintendent of the city water utility (“Superintendent of
Water”) as such consumers are added or deleted from the city water utility
service.
   (C)   If, in the judgment of the Superintendent, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water system, the
Superintendent of Water will give notice to the water consumer to install such
an approved device immediately. The water consumer shall, at his or her own
expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner approved
by the Superintendent of Water and shall have inspections and tests made of
such approved devices as required by the Superintendent of Water and in
accordance with the IDEM Rule 327 I.A.C. 8-10.
(Ord. 9-2015, passed 1-5-2016)
RATES
§ 51.20 APPLICABILITY OF RATES.
   There shall be and there are hereby established for the use of and the
service by the waterworks utility of the city the following rates and charges
as described in this subchapter, based on the use of water supplied by said
waterworks system.
(Ord. 1-2017, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 51.21 METERED RATES PER MONTH.
   For use and service rendered by the waterworks system of the city, based on
the use of water supplied by said waterworks system.
 
Consumption per Month Rates
First 2,500 gallons   $7.52
Next 2,500 gallons    $6.05
Next 5,000 gallons    $4.57
Next 20,000 gallons   $3.06
Over 30,000 gallons   $1.51
 
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 51.22 MINIMUM CHARGE PER MONTH.
   Each user shall pay a minimum charge in accordance with the following
applicable size of meter installed, for which the user will be entitled to the
quantity of water set out in the following schedule of rates.
Meter Size Minimum Gallonage Rate
Meter Size Minimum Gallonage Rate
3/4 inch   3,120             $22.56
1 inch     5,815             $37.67
1-1/4 inch 11,230            $60.53
1-1/2 inch 21,230            $91.10
2 inch     43,060            $137.61
3 inch     186,200           $353.54
4 inch     349,910           $600.51
6 inch     861,575           $1,372.39
 
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 51.23 PUBLIC FIRE PROTECTION.
   Monthly surcharge is as follows.
Meter Size Rate
Meter Size Rate
3/4 inch   $3.94
1 inch     $9.87
1-1/2 inch $19.75
2 inch     $31.59
3 inch     $59.25
4 inch     $98.74
6 inch     $197.46
 
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 51.24 PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION.
   Per month:
 Rates
                               Rates
Private hydrants - per hydrant $47.02
Automatic sprinklers
2 inch line                    $5.34
4 inch line                    $23.66
6 inch line                    $47.02
8 inch line                    $94.02
10 inch line                   $141.03
12 inch line                   $188.03
 
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 51.25 TAPPING FEES.
   Each user, at the time he or she is connected with the waterworks system,
shall pay a charge to cover the cost of: excavating and tapping the main;
furnishing and installing service pipe from the main to the lot line; finishing
and installing corporation and stop cocks and furnishing and installing meter
crock (if outside), yoke, and meter. The charge for a three-quarter inch meter
shall be $500. The charge for a tap larger than three-quarter inch meter tap
shall be the cost of labor, materials, power, machinery, transportation, and
overhead incurred for installing the tap, but shall not be less than the charge
for a three-quarter inch tap.
(Ord. 1-2017, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 51.26 TEMPORARY USES.
   Water furnished to temporary users, such as contractors, circuses, and the
like, shall be charged on the above quantity rates as estimated by the
Waterworks Superintendent.
(Ord. 1-2017, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 51.27 RAILROADS.
   Water supplied for railroad use may be charged for on such terms as shall be
fixed by specific contract approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 1-2017, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 51.28 RECONNECTION CHARGE.
   When the service is turned off for non-payment of bill, or whenever for any
reason beyond the control of the waterworks, a re-establishment of services is
required by any one customer, the charge will be made by the waterworks to
cover the cost of discontinuance and re-establishment of service. The charge
together with any arrears due the waterworks, shall be paid by the customer,
service will be re-established.
 
To establish new service connection $15
To re-establish service             $15
 
(Ord. 1-2017, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 51.29 BAD CHECK CHARGE.
   There shall be charge of $20 for any check returned for insufficient funds
or because the check is written on a non-existent bank account.
(Ord. 1-2017, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 51.30 CUSTOMER METER DEPOSIT.
   The customer meter deposit for tenant or purchase of property on contract
shall be $50. Said deposit shall be made by the customer making application for
the respective service, and shall be responsible for the monthly billings. Said
respective deposits, less the amount of any and/or delinquent bills owing,
shall be refunded to said customer at such time as said requests disconnection
or termination of the respective service.
(Ord. 1-2017, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 51.31 COLLECTION AND DEFERRED PAYMENT CHARGES.
   All bills for water services not paid within 15 days from the due date
thereof, as stated in such bills, shall be subject to the collection of a
deferred payment charge of 10% on the first $3 and 3% of the unpaid balance in
excess of $3.
(Ord. 1-2017, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 51.32 PAYMENT IN LIEU OF TAXES.
   The City Council hereby elects to receive payment in lieu of taxes from the
waterworks.
(Ord. 1-2017, passed 2-21-2017)
CHAPTER 52: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
52.01   Purpose
   
52.02   Definition
   
52.03   Litter removal
   
52.04   Cleaning of sidewalks
   
52.05   Litter from vehicles
   
52.06   Garbage receptacles
   
52.07   Conveying litter
   
52.08   Dumping
   
52.09   Burning
   
52.10   Waste disposal service; residential
   
52.11   Waste disposal service; commercial
   
52.12   Failure to pay
 
   
52.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Waste disposal rules, see I.C. 36-9-30-12
§ 52.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter shall be to promote the health and general
welfare of the people of the city by prohibiting the throwing, casting, or
depositing of litter in or upon any private or public property within the city
limits and providing for the collection thereof.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-30-12(a)) (Ord. 1-1969, passed 1-7-1969)
§ 52.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, LITTER shall include, but not be limited
to, ashes, filth, boards, slop, cinders, old tires, sawdust, wood or metal
shavings, rubber, lumber scraps, boxes, barrels, crates, cans, bottles,
cartons, paper, trash, rubbish, debris, garbage, manure, grass cuttings, tree
limbs, discarded food, clothing, or other offensive or disagreeable substance
thrown, cast, dropped, discharged, or deposited by anyone in or upon public or
private property, including streams and watercourses.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-30-12(b)) (Ord. 1-1969, passed 1-7-1969)
§ 52.03 LITTER REMOVAL.
   No person shall permit the gutters, sidewalks, or alleys contiguous to the
property to become littered. No person shall sweep, throw, cast, or otherwise
place or deposit litter of any kind in or upon any curb, gutter, street, alley,
boulevard, highway, right of way, viaduct, sidewalk, vacant or occupied lot,
vacant building, pond, stream, or watercourse.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-30-12(c)) (Ord. 1-1969, passed 1-7-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 CLEANING OF SIDEWALKS.
   The owner or occupant of any real estate shall maintain the sidewalk, lawn
space, and that portion of the street lying between the curb line and the
property line, in good repair and free from litter. The owner or occupant shall
not sweep or otherwise move litter from sidewalks into the gutters or streets.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-30-12(d)) (Ord. 1-1969, passed 1-7-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 LITTER FROM VEHICLES.
   No person within any vehicle shall throw, cast, place, drop, spill, or
deposit litter upon any private or public property.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-30-12(e)) (Ord. 1-1969, passed 1-7-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 GARBAGE RECEPTACLES.
   (A)   The occupants of all premises shall provide adequate receptacles for
garbage disposal, equipped with tight lids or covers. These lids and covers
shall be kept in place at all times. All receptacles shall be placed in easily
accessible locations on the premises but not on alleys where they may obstruct
the circulation and operation of refuse and garbage. Receptacles shall have a
maximum capacity of 20 gallons.
   (B)   Garbage receptacles or trash burners shall not be kept or retained in
front of any premises after they have been emptied. They shall be removed
promptly after their contents have been disposed of.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-30-12(f)) (Ord. 1-1969, passed 1-7-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.07 CONVEYING LITTER.
   No person shall convey or haul over the streets, alleys, or public places of
the city any litter unless the truck or vehicle containing the litter has a box
bottom with tight fitting ends, sides, and bottom, properly closed and tight
fitting, and covered with a lid, screen, wire mesh, tarpaulin, or other cover
which is sufficient to prevent its contents from falling or blowing upon the
streets, alleys, or other public places in the city.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-30-12(g)) (Ord. 1964-1, passed 1-21-1964) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.08 DUMPING.
   No person shall dump, deposit, or place any litter on city property,
including the places or place commonly known as the city landfill, whether
within or without the corporate limits of the city, except at the times and in
the manner and in the places designated for dumping and placing of litter or
other materials by the City Street Commissioner or by the duly authorized and
appointed City Property Custodian.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-30-12(h)) (Ord. 654, passed 7-22-1952) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.09 BURNING.
   (A)   No person shall burn or cause to be burned in the open air outside of
a dwelling house of other building any litter in the area south of the
centerline of North “A” Street, north of the centerline of South “A” Street,
west of the centerline of Fourth Street, and east of the centerline of Broadway
Street, unless the litter is burned in an incinerator of such type and
construction as shall prevent any burning ash or embers from it from flying or
scattering and becoming a fire hazard and endangering surrounding property to
damage by fire.
   (B)   Any incinerator used for the burning of any litter shall be
constructed of metal, cement, brick, stone, or other non-combustible materials,
and covered with a screen of sufficiently small mesh that shall prevent any
burning ash or embers to escape, fly, or scatter from it and create a fire
hazard and endanger surrounding property to damage by fire.
   (C)   The incinerator and the immediate area surrounding the incinerator
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition free of litter and combustible
materials that would create a fire hazard and endanger surrounding property
with damage by fire.
   (D)   The incinerator used shall be subject to inspection by the Chief of
the City Fire Department. If any such incinerator is declared unsafe and a fire
hazard by the Chief of the Fire Department, the incinerator shall not
thereafter be used for the burning of combustible materials. The Chief of the
Fire Department may designate and authorize any member or members of the City
Fire Department to make inspections of such incinerators as contemplated by
this section.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-30-12(i)) (Ord. 1966-7, passed 8-2-1966) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.10 WASTE DISPOSAL SERVICE; RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   The charge per dwelling unit per month to be made for service for
collecting trash in the city shall be $12.49 per dwelling unit, per month,
commencing January 1, 2022 and continuing thereafter through December 31, 2022.
   (B)   The charge per dwelling unit per month to be made for services for
collecting trash in the city shall be $12.99 per dwelling unit, per month,
commencing January 1, 2023 and continuing thereafter through December 31, 2023.
   (C)   The charge per dwelling unit per month to be made for services for
collecting trash in the city shall be $13.51 per dwelling unit, per month,
commencing January 1, 2024 and continuing thereafter through December 31, 2024.
   (D)   Option roll-off containers for residents dropoff events:
      (1)   Roll-off containers rate per pull: $400/load;
      (2)   Roll-off container delivery rate: $7,500/container; and
      (3)   Per container disposal charge one-half ton per load: $45/ton.
(Ord. 1981-8, passed 11-3-1981; Ord. 2-2022, passed 5-17-2022)
§ 52.11 WASTE DISPOSAL SERVICE; COMMERCIAL.
   Any retail, manufacturing, and/or commercial establishment within the city
requesting waste disposal service shall be furnished with that service upon
entering into an agreement with the city to pay a charge to the city for the
service. This charge shall be set forth in the agreement.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-30-12(j)(2)) (Ord. 1976-1, passed 3-2-1976)
§ 52.12 FAILURE TO PAY.
   If the owner of a dwelling unit and/or its occupant fails to pay any charge
set forth in this chapter for the waste disposal services rendered, that charge
shall be an obligation of the owner and the occupant of that dwelling unit and
may be filed as a mechanic’s lien against the real estate involved by the City
Clerk Treasurer, in accordance with state law.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-30-12(j)(3)) (Ord. 1976-1, passed 3-2-1976)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating an provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less
than $5 nor more than $100 for each offense. Each day any violation of this
chapter occurs and continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-30-12(k)) (Ord. 1-1969, passed 1-7-1969)
CHAPTER 53: ELECTRIC AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
Section
Renewable Energy Generation Facilities Interconnection Standards
   
53.01   Findings and determinations
   
53.02   Application
   
53.03   Configuration
   
53.04   Compliance
   
53.05   Maintenance and protection
   
53.06   Automatic disconnection
   
53.07   Inspections
   
53.08   Indemnification
   
53.09   Excess energy
Rates
   
53.20   Billed monthly
   
53.21   Rate schedule
   
53.22   Reduction in rates for removal of IURT
Emergency Curtailment and Load Reduction Plan
   
53.35   Definitions
   
53.36   Company load reduction during fuel shortages
   
53.37   Customer voluntary load reduction during fuel shortages
   
53.38   Mandatory load reduction during fuel shortages
   
53.39   Mandatory curtailment, limitation, and priorities of service
   
53.40   Emergency curtailment without regard to priority
   
53.41   Priority of service
   
53.42   Mandatory curtailment procedure
   
53.43   Curtailment by short term service interruption
   
53.44   Restoration of service
   
53.45   Applicability
 
   
53.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Utility service to the public, see I.C. 36-9-2-15
RENEWABLE ENERGY GENERATION FACILITIES INTERCONNECTION STANDARDS
§ 53.01 FINDINGS AND DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   The findings and determinations set forth in the preambles of the
ordinance from which this subchapter is derived are hereby made findings and
determinations of the Council.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to connect or maintain
the connection of a renewable generating facility to the utility’s grid without
obtaining the utility’s approval of an interconnection application.
(Ord. 18-2020, passed 11-17-2020) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.02 APPLICATION.
   (A)   A customer desiring to interconnect renewable generation facilities
with the utility’s grid for the purpose of offsetting the customer’s electric
load shall complete an interconnection application and submit the application
to the utility for review. After receipt of the application, the utility shall
conduct such further inspection of the renewable generation facilities as the
utility deems necessary and approve or deny the application.
   (B)   If the application is denied, the utility shall provide a written
response to the customer explaining why the application was denied.
   (C)   The utility is hereby authorized to charge a reasonable application
fee to offset costs involved with reviewing the application, inspecting the
renewable generation facilities, and otherwise ensuring compliance with this
subchapter.
(Ord. 18-2020, passed 11-17-2020)
§ 53.03 CONFIGURATION.
   If the interconnection application is approved, then the customer agrees
that no changes shall be made to the configuration of the renewable generation
facilities, as that configuration is described in the application, and no relay
or other control or protection settings specified in the application shall be
set, reset, adjusted, or tampered with, except to the extent necessary to
verify that the renewable generation facilities comply with the utility’s
approved settings.
(Ord. 18-2020, passed 11-17-2020) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.04 COMPLIANCE.
   In addition to such other requirements as the utility deems necessary, any
renewable generation facility allowed to interconnect to the utility’s grid
must comply with:
   (A)   The National Electrical Code and National Electrical Safety Code, as
each may be revised from time to time;
   (B)   The utility’s rules and regulations and the utility’s General Terms
and Conditions for Electric Service, each as contained in the utility’s
electric tariff and each as may be revised from time to time; and
   (C)   All other applicable local, state, and federal codes and laws, as the
same may be in effect from time to time.
(Ord. 18-2020, passed 11-17-2020) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.05 MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION.
   (A)   For any approved renewable generation facilities interconnected to the
utility’s grid, the customer shall install, operate, and maintain, at the
customer’s sole cost and expense, the renewable generation facilities in
accordance with the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers’
applicable Standard for Interconnecting Distributed Resources with Electric
Power Systems, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   The customer shall be responsible for protecting, at the customer’s
sole cost and expense, the renewable generation facilities from any condition
or disturbance on the utility’s electric system, including, but not limited to,
voltage sags or swells, system faults, outages, loss of a single phase of
supply, equipment failures, and lightning or switching surges.
(Ord. 18-2020, passed 11-17-2020) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.06 AUTOMATIC DISCONNECTION.
   (A)   The customer shall operate any interconnected renewable generation
facilities in such a manner as not to cause undue fluctuations in voltage,
intermittent load characteristics, or otherwise interfere with the operation of
the utility’s electric system.
   (B)   At all times when the renewable generation facilities are being
operated in parallel with the utility’s electric system, the customer shall
operate the renewable generation facilities in a manner that no disturbance
will be produced to the service rendered by the utility to any of its other
customers or to any electric system interconnected with the utility’s electric
system.
   (C)   The customer’s control equipment for the renewable generation
facilities shall immediately, completely, and automatically disconnect and
isolate the renewable generation facilities from the utility’s electric system
in the event of a fault on the utility’s electric system, a fault on the
customer’s renewable generation facilities, or loss of a source or sources on
the utility’s electric system. The automatic disconnecting device included in
such control equipment shall not be capable of reclosing until after service is
restored on the utility’s electric system. Additionally, if the fault is with
the customer’s renewable generation facilities, such automatic disconnecting
device shall not be reclosed until after the fault is isolated from the
customer’s renewable generation facilities.
(Ord. 18-2020, passed 11-17-2020) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.07 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Upon reasonable advance notice to the customer, the utility shall have
access to any interconnected renewable generation facilities to perform on-site
inspections to verify that the installation and operation of the renewable
generation facilities comply with the requirements of this subchapter and to
verify the proper installation and continuing safe operation of the renewable
generation facilities. The utility shall also have, at all times, immediate
access to breakers or any other equipment that will isolate the renewable
generation facilities from the utility’s electric system.
   (B)   The utility shall not be responsible for any costs the customer may
incur as a result of such inspection(s). The utility shall have the right and
authority to isolate approved interconnected renewable generation facilities at
the utility’s sole discretion if the utility believes that:
      (1)   Continued interconnection and parallel operation of the renewable
generation facilities with the utility’s electric system creates or contributes
(or will create or contribute) to a system emergency on either the utility’s or
the customer’s electric facilities;
      (2)   The renewable generation facilities are not in compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter; or
      (3)   The renewable generation facilities interfere with the operation of
the utility’s electric system. In non-emergency situations, the utility shall
give the customer reasonable notice prior to isolating the renewable generation
facilities.
(Ord. 18-2020, passed 11-17-2020)
§ 53.08 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   Customer shall procure and keep in force during all periods of
parallel operation of the renewable generation facilities with the utility’s
electric system, homeowners, commercial, or other insurance to protect the
interests of the utility as a named insured, with insurance carriers acceptable
to the utility, and in amounts not less than those reasonably determined by the
utility to be necessary taking into consideration the nameplate capacity,
configuration, and type of the renewable generation facilities. 
   (B)   The customer shall indemnify and hold harmless the utility, the city,
its employees, representatives, agents, and subcontractors from and against all
claims, liability, damages, and expenses, including attorney’s fees, based on
any injury to any person, including the loss of life, or damage to any
property, including the loss of use thereof, arising out of, resulting from, or
connected with, an act or omission by the customer, its employees, agents,
representatives, successors, or assigns in the construction, ownership,
operation, or maintenance of the customer’s renewable generation facilities.
   (C)   If the utility is required to bring an action to enforce its rights
under this section, either as a separate action or in connection with another
action, and said rights are upheld, the customer shall reimburse the utility
for all expenses, including attorney’s fees, incurred in connection with such
action.
(Ord. 18-2020, passed 11-17-2020) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.09 EXCESS ENERGY.
   If a customer owning or leasing a renewable generation facility produces
more energy from such facility than the customer’s electric load at that meter,
then the excess energy shall be purchased from the customer by IMPA pursuant to
the terms of a separate power purchase agreement between the customer and IMPA.
The utility shall own any meter used to measure output of energy from the
customer’s renewable generation facility.
(Ord. 18-2020, passed 11-17-2020)
RATES
§ 53.20 BILLED MONTHLY.
   For the purpose of billing and collecting the charges for electric use, the
meters shall be read monthly, and the use shall be billed monthly.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 53.21 RATE SCHEDULE.
   The following rates are subject to a fuel cost adjustment factor.
   (A)   Rate RS electric residential service.
 
Energy Charge per kWh per Month Rate
Minimum charge per month        $6.15
First 40 kWh                    $0.15372
Next 60 kWh                     $0.12572
Next 900 kWh                    $0.08835
Over 1,000 kWh                  $0.08085
 
   (B)   Rate CS electric commercial and general power service.
Energy Charge per kWh per Month Rate
Minimum charge per month        $6.15
Energy Charge per kWh per Month Rate
Minimum charge per month        $6.15
First 40 kWh                    $0.15372
Next 460 kWh                    $0.13331
Next 500 kWh                    $0.11270
Next 1,000 kWh                  $0.09209
Next 5,000 kWh                  $0.08263
Over 7,000 kWh                  $0.07691
 
   (C)   Rate LS all electric heat for library or school service.
 
Minimum charge per month        $10.10
Energy charge per kWh per month $0.08085
 
   (D)   Outdoor lighting service.
 
Energy Charge per Lamp per Month          Rate
175 watt                                  $5.03
400 watt                                  $7.23
Plus
Each 30-foot standard wood pol (per pole) $0.57
Each span of secondary wire (per span)    $0.38
 
   (E)   Rate SL public street lighting and highway lighting.
 
Energy Charge per Lamp per Year    Rate
Mercury Vapor High Pressure Sodium
175 watt      100 watt             $61.52
              150 watt             $68.42
250 watt                           $75.33
400 watt      250 watt             $86.62
1,000 watt                         $119.55
 
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 6-21-2022)
§ 53.22 REDUCTION IN RATES FOR REMOVAL OF IURT.
   Reduction in electric rates for removal of IURT are as follows.
Rate Classification Proposed Rate Components Current Rates* Adjusted Rates**
Rate Classification    Proposed Rate Components Current Rates* Adjusted Rates**
                       Minimum charge per month $6.24          $6.15
                       Energy Charge per kWh
RS Residential         First 40 kWh             $0.15590       $0.15372
                       Next 60 kWh              $0.12750       $0.12572
                       Next 900 kWh             $0.08960       $0.08835
                       Over 1,000 kWh           $0.08200       $0.08085
                       Minimum charge per month $6.24          $6.15
                       Energy Charge per kWh
                       First 40 kWh             $0.15590       $0.15372
CS Commercial and      Next 460 kWh             $0.13520       $0.13331
General Power          Next 500 kWh             $0.11430       $0.11270
                       Next 1,000 kWh           $0.09340       $0.09209
                       Next 5,000 kWh           $0.08380       $0.08263
                       Over 7,000 kWh           $0.07800       $0.07691
LS All Electric Heat   Minimum charge per month $10.24         $10.10
for Library or School  Energy Charge per kWh
                       For all kWh per kWh      $0.08200       $0.08085
                       Energy Charge per Month
                       175 watt                 $5.10          $5.03
                       400 watt                 $7.33          $7.23
OL Outdoor Lighting    Plus
                       Each 30-foot standard    $0.58          $0.57
                       wood pole (per pole)
                       Each span of secondary   $0.39          $0.38
                       wire (per span)
                       Energy Charge per Year
                       175 watt mercury vapor   $62.39         $61.52
                       250 watt mercury vapor   $76.40         $75.33
                       400 watt mercury vapor   $87.85         $86.62
SL Street Lighting and 1,000 watt mercury vapor $121.25        $119.55
Highway Lighting       100 watt high pressure   $62.39         $61.52
                       sodium
                       150 watt high pressure   $69.39         $68.42
                       sodium
                       400 watt high pressure   $87.85         $86.62
                       sodium
Notes to table:
*   Current rates include Indiana Utility Receipts Tax of 1.4%
**   Adjusted rates reflect repeal of 1.4% Indiana Utility Receipts Tax by
state legislature in March 2022
 
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 6-21-2022)
EMERGENCY CURTAILMENT AND LOAD REDUCTION PLAN
§ 53.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE MONTHLY CONSUMPTION. The customer’s average billing month usage based
upon the three-month period in the prior 12 months which corresponds to the
billing month being curtailed and the immediately preceding and succeeding
months. Adjustments may be made for customers with changed circumstances that
have caused the prior year’s usage during the period to be nonrepresentative of
current usage during the period.
   COMMERCIAL CUSTOMERS. Customers engaged primarily in wholesale or retail
trade and services including clubs, institutions, and city, local, state, and
federal governmental agencies, except educational institutions.
   DISPENSABLE USES. The following and similar types of uses of electric energy
shall be considered DISPENSABLE USES:
      (1)   Outdoor flood and advertising lighting, except for the minimum
level necessary to protect life and property and a single illuminated sign
identifying commercial facilities that are open after dark;
      (2)   General lighting levels in stores and offices greater than minimum
functional levels;
      (3)   Show window and display lighting;
      (4)   Greater number of elevators operating in office buildings during
non-peak hours than is necessary;
      (5)   Parking lot lighting above minimum functional levels;
      (6)   Energy greater than that necessary to maintain a temperature of not
less than 78°F during operation of cooling equipment and not more than 65°F
during operation of heating equipment;
      (7)   Greater than minimum work schedules, as for building cleaning and
maintenance, restocking, and the like, which shall require office or industrial
facilities to be illuminated, cooled, or heated beyond normal working hours;
      (8)   Night athletics and recreational activities; and
      (9)   Public museums, art galleries, and historical buildings requiring
illumination, cooling, or heating.
   HUMAN NEEDS CUSTOMERS. Hospitals, medical centers, nursing homes, and
customers where curtailment would adversely affect public health and safety
such as municipal fire departments, police departments, civil defense, and
emergency Red Cross services, and any other facility whose use of electric
energy is vital to public health and safety as determined by the utility.
   INDUSTRIAL CUSTOMERS. Customers who are engaged primarily in a process that
creates or changes raw or unfinished materials into another form or product.
   LIVING QUARTERS. As used in Service Priority Class II, hotels, motels,
dormitories, and similar dwelling places.
   RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS. Customers living in residential dwellings, mobile
homes, apartments, or condominiums.
   SERVICE OBLIGATION. The largest metered demand (peak demand for customers
served on industrial and commercial rates) in the previous 12 months. If no
such demand information is available, an estimate shall be used, determined by
dividing the kilowatt hours in the maximum usage month in such previous 12
months by 200 hours.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-2-15(b)(5)) (Ord. passed 6-26-1923; Ord. passed 12-26-1933;
Ord. passed 9-25-1934; Ord. passed 9-11-1945; Ord. 678, passed 11-24-1953; Ord.
689, passed 9-14-1954; Ord. 1963-13, passed 9-3-1963; Ord. 1974-11, passed 9-3-
1974; Ord. 1976-4, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 1976-7, passed 8-17-1976; Ord. 1-
1978, passed 2-21-1978; Ord. 1978-8, passed 7-5-1978; Ord. 1980-4, passed 7-15-
1980; Ord. 1981-3, passed 2-3-1981)
§ 53.36 COMPANY LOAD REDUCTION DURING FUEL SHORTAGES.
   This step shall be taken by the utility when its fuel supplies are
decreasing and the remaining fuel supplies are sufficient, in its opinion, for
not more than approximately 50 days of operation of its generation facilities.
   (A)   Utility use of electric energy shall be reduced in any way that shall
not jeopardize essential operations.
   (B)   Fuel supply levels at the utility’s generating stations shall become a
determinant in economic dispatch decisions in the effort to maintain a
reasonable supply of fuel at all generating stations.
   (C)   The utility shall partially or fully terminate the availability of
electric energy under the surplus capacity provisions of rates for industrial
and commercial power service. This shall not apply to cooperative or municipal
utilities with generation.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-2-15(b)(1)) (Ord. passed 6-26-1923; Ord. passed 12-26-1933;
Ord. passed 9-25-1934; Ord. passed 9-11-1945; Ord. 678, passed 11-24-1953; Ord.
689, passed 9-14-1954; Ord. 1963-13, passed 9-3-1963; Ord. 1974-11, passed 9-3-
1974; Ord. 1976-4, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 1976-7, passed 8-17-1976; Ord. 1-
1978, passed 2-21-1978; Ord. 1978-8, passed 7-5-1978; Ord. 1980-4, passed 7-15-
1980; Ord. 1981-3, passed 2-3-1981)
§ 53.37 CUSTOMER VOLUNTARY LOAD REDUCTION DURING FUEL SHORTAGES.
   If fuel supplies continue to decrease and the utility’s remaining fuel
supply is sufficient, in its opinion, for not more than 50 days of operation of
its generating facilities, appeals to users shall be made for the voluntary
curtailment of load. Efforts shall be made to obtain a decrease in usage of
approximately 25%, except that a lesser amount shall be the goal for specific
customers if the 25% reduction results in situations where health and safety
are not adequately protected.
   (A)   Public appeals shall be made by the utility through appropriate news
media asking customers to reduce their use of electric energy by approximately
25% because of impending fuel shortages.
   (B)   Direct appeals shall be made by the utility to major industrial and
commercial customers and to wholesale customers requesting them to shut off
non-essential loads and curtail usage in an effort to obtain a 25% reduction.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-2-15(b)(2)) (Ord. passed 6-26-1923; Ord. passed 12-26-1933;
Ord. passed 9-25-1934; Ord. passed 9-11-1945; Ord. 678, passed 11-24-1953; Ord.
689, passed 9-14-1954; Ord. 1963-13, passed 9-3-1963; Ord. 1974-11, passed 9-3-
1974; Ord. 1976-4, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 1976-7, passed 8-17-1976; Ord. 1-
1978, passed 2-21-1978; Ord. 1978-8, passed 7-5-1978; Ord. 1980-4, passed 7-15-
1980; Ord. 1981-3, passed 2-3-1981)
§ 53.38 MANDATORY LOAD REDUCTION DURING FUEL SHORTAGES.
   If fuel supplies continue to decrease and the utility’s remaining fuel
supply is sufficient, in its opinion, for not more than 40 days of operation of
its generating facilities, mandatory curtailment shall commence pursuant to §§
53.39 through
53.45.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-2-15(b)(3)) (Ord. passed 6-26-1923; Ord. passed 12-26-1933;
Ord. passed 9-25-1934; Ord. passed 9-11-1945; Ord. 678, passed 11-24-1953; Ord.
689, passed 9-14-1954; Ord. 1963-13, passed 9-3-1963; Ord. 1974-11, passed 9-3-
1974; Ord. 1976-4, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 1976-7, passed 8-17-1976; Ord. 1-
1978, passed 2-21-1978; Ord. 1978-8, passed 7-5-1978; Ord. 1980-4, passed 7-15-
1980; Ord. 1981-3, passed 2-3-1981)
§ 53.39 MANDATORY CURTAILMENT, LIMITATION, AND PRIORITIES OF SERVICE.
   When fuel supplies are sufficient for not more than 40 days of operation of
the utility’s generating facilities or when, for any reason, sufficient amounts
of electric power, in the judgment of the utility, are not available to the
company to meet all existing and reasonably anticipated demands for service or
to protect the integrity and stability of the system, the utility shall have
the right to restrict, limit, or curtail electric service within any of its
systems so affected in accordance with any of the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-2-15(b)(4)) (Ord. passed 6-26-1923; Ord. passed 12-26-1933;
Ord. passed 9-25-1934; Ord. passed 9-11-1945; Ord. 678, passed 11-24-1953; Ord.
689, passed 9-14-1954; Ord. 1963-13, passed 9-3-1963; Ord. 1974-11, passed 9-3-
1974; Ord. 1976-4, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 1976-7, passed 8-17-1976; Ord. 1-
1978, passed 2-21-1978; Ord. 1978-8, passed 7-5-1978; Ord. 1980-4, passed 7-15-
1980; Ord. 1981-3, passed 2-3-1981)
§ 53.40 EMERGENCY CURTAILMENT WITHOUT REGARD TO PRIORITY.
   The utility reserves the right to order electric service curtailment without
regard to the priority of service when, in its judgment, such curtailment is
required to forestall imminent and irreparable injury to life, property, or the
electric system. Curtailment may include interruption of selected circuits. A
curtailment pursuant to this section shall not exceed 72 consecutive hours
without approval of the State Public Service Commission.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-2-15(b)(6)) (Ord. passed 6-26-1923; Ord. passed 12-26-1933;
Ord. passed 9-25-1934; Ord. passed 9-11-1945; Ord. 678, passed 11-24-1953; Ord.
689, passed 9-14-1954; Ord. 1963-13, passed 9-3-1963; Ord. 1974-11, passed 9-3-
1974; Ord. 1976-4, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 1976-7, passed 8-17-1976; Ord. 1-
1978, passed 2-21-1978; Ord. 1978-8, passed 7-5-1978; Ord. 1980-4, passed 7-15-
1980; Ord. 1981-3, passed 2-3-1981)
§ 53.41 PRIORITY OF SERVICE.
   Priority of service, in the event of mandatory curtailment, shall be as set
forth below. The highest priority shall be Service Priority Class I, and the
lowest priority of service shall be Service Priority Class V.
 
I   Human needs
II  Residential and living quarters
III Commercial and industrial customers
IV  Schools, colleges, universities, and other educational institutions
V   Dispensable uses and surplus capacity power
 
(Prior Code, § 36-9-2-15(b)(7)) (Ord. passed 6-26-1923; Ord. passed 12-26-1933;
Ord. passed 9-25-1934; Ord. passed 9-11-1945; Ord. 678, passed 11-24-1953; Ord.
689, passed 9-14-1954; Ord. 1963-13, passed 9-3-1963; Ord. 1974-11, passed 9-3-
1974; Ord. 1976-4, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 1976-7, passed 8-17-1976; Ord. 1-
1978, passed 2-21-1978; Ord. 1978-8, passed 7-5-1978; Ord. 1980-4, passed 7-15-
1980; Ord. 1981-3, passed 2-3-1981)
§ 53.42 MANDATORY CURTAILMENT PROCEDURE.
   Curtailment, unless pursuant to §
53.40, shall begin with Service Priority Class V and continue as necessary
through Service Priority Classes IV, III, II, and I as follows.
   (A)   When the utility’s fuel supply reaches 40 days, public notice, by
press release, shall be given to Service Priority Class V customers to curtail
their service by 100%.
   (B)   When the utility’s fuel supply reaches 40 days, public notice shall be
given to Service Priority Class IV to curtail their service to a level of not
more than 50% of service obligation or base monthly consumption, whichever the
utility deems applicable. Service Priority Class III shall be given notice to
curtail service to a level of not more than 75% of service obligation or base
monthly consumption, whichever the utility deems applicable. Service Priority
Class II shall be given notice to curtail service to a level of not more than
85% of service obligation or base monthly consumption, whichever the utility
deems applicable.
   (C)   When the utility’s fuel supply reaches 30 days, public notice shall be
given to Service Priority Class IV to curtail their service to a level that is
necessary to protect and maintain their facilities. Service Priority Class III
shall be given notice to curtail service to a level of not more than 50% of
service obligation or base monthly consumption, whichever the utility deems
applicable. Service Priority Class [class missing] shall be given notice to
curtail service to a level of not more than 75% of service obligation or base
monthly consumption, whichever the utility deems applicable.
   (D)   After Service Priority Classes IV, III, and II have been curtailed to
a level of not more than that prescribed in division (C) above, Service
Priority Classes IV, III, and II shall be further curtailed by equal
percentages until 100% curtailment occurs.
   (E)   After Service Priority Classes IV, III, and II have been completely
curtailed, Service Priority Class I shall become curtailment as necessary.
   (F)   The utility shall give notice of curtailment in the most effective
manner possible and as soon as possible with regard to the exigencies and the
number of customers to be notified. The notice shall specify the date and time
of the curtailment.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-2-15(b)(8)) (Ord. passed 6-26-1923; Ord. passed 12-26-1933;
Ord. passed 9-25-1934; Ord. passed 9-11-1945; Ord. 678, passed 11-24-1953; Ord.
689, passed 9-14-1954; Ord. 1963-13, passed 9-3-1963; Ord. 1974-11, passed 9-3-
1974; Ord. 1976-4, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 1976-7, passed 8-17-1976; Ord. 1-
1978, passed 2-21-1978; Ord. 1978-8, passed 7-5-1978; Ord. 1980-4, passed 7-15-
1980; Ord. 1981-3, passed 2-3-1981) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.43 CURTAILMENT BY SHORT TERM SERVICE INTERRUPTION.
   If mandatory curtailment is imposed, as provided above, the utility may
employ, for not more than two hours’ duration at any one time, selective short
term service interruptions by operation on a rotational basis of distribution
switching equipment to effect necessary curtailment in one or more Service
Priority Classes.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-2-15(b)(9)) (Ord. passed 6-26-1923; Ord. passed 12-26-1933;
Ord. passed 9-25-1934; Ord. passed 9-11-1945; Ord. 678, passed 11-24-1953; Ord.
689, passed 9-14-1954; Ord. 1963-13, passed 9-3-1963; Ord. 1974-11, passed 9-3-
1974; Ord. 1976-4, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 1976-7, passed 8-17-1976; Ord. 1-
1978, passed 2-21-1978; Ord. 1978-8, passed 7-5-1978; Ord. 1980-4, passed 7-15-
1980; Ord. 1981-3, passed 2-3-1981)
§ 53.44 RESTORATION OF SERVICE.
   Service shall be restored in reverse order of the original curtailment.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-2-15(b)(10)) (Ord. passed 6-26-1923; Ord. passed 12-26-
1933; Ord. passed 9-25-1934; Ord. passed 9-11-1945; Ord. 678, passed 11-24-
1953; Ord. 689, passed 9-14-1954; Ord. 1963-13, passed 9-3-1963; Ord. 1974-11,
passed 9-3-1974; Ord. 1976-4, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 1976-7, passed 8-17-1976;
Ord. 1-1978, passed 2-21-1978; Ord. 1978-8, passed 7-5-1978; Ord. 1980-4,
passed 7-15-1980; Ord. 1981-3, passed 2-3-1981)
§ 53.45 APPLICABILITY.
   The terms and provisions of this subchapter shall control notwithstanding
any terms and provisions of the rate schedule, general rules and regulations of
the utility, or any contract or agreement between the utility and any customer
to the contrary.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-2-15(b)(12)) (Ord. passed 6-26-1923; Ord. passed 12-26-
1933; Ord. passed 9-25-1934; Ord. passed 9-11-1945; Ord. 678, passed 11-24-
1953; Ord. 689, passed 9-14-1954; Ord. 1963-13, passed 9-3-1963; Ord. 1974-11,
passed 9-3-1974; Ord. 1976-4, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 1976-7, passed 8-17-1976;
Ord. 1-1978, passed 2-21-1978; Ord. 1978-8, passed 7-5-1978; Ord. 1980-4,
passed 7-15-1980; Ord. 1981-3, passed 2-3-1981)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person or entity found to be in violation of §
53.01 shall be fined not less than $500, nor more than $2,500, for each such
violation, plus costs. In addition to the foregoing fines and at the utility’s
sole discretion, property where a renewable generating facility is unlawfully
connected to the utility’s grid may be disconnected from the utility’s grid
until an interconnection application is approved. Every day that a violation of
§
53.01 occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Customers failing to comply with specified curtailments for more than
seven days shall be subject to disconnection for the duration of the emergency.
Energy use by industrial and large commercial customers in excess of that
permitted under any curtailment shall be subject to a $0.10 per kilowatt hour
penalty, in addition to normal billing charges, for all electric energy taken
in excess of mandatory curtailment limitations. Penalty charges collected
hereunder shall be distributed in a separate account, and shall be used to
reduce the fuel cost adjustment charge of industrial and large commercial
customers who, during the existence of a fuel emergency, have not used electric
energy in excess of mandatory curtailment limitations.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-2-15(b)(11)) (Ord. passed 6-26-1923; Ord. passed 12-26-
1933; Ord. passed 9-25-1934; Ord. passed 9-11-1945; Ord. 678, passed 11-24-
1953; Ord. 689, passed 9-14-1954; Ord. 1963-13, passed 9-3-1963; Ord. 1974-11,
passed 9-3-1974; Ord. 1976-4, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 1976-7, passed 8-17-1976;
Ord. 1-1978, passed 2-21-1978; Ord. 1978-8, passed 7-5-1978; Ord. 1980-4,
passed 7-15-1980; Ord. 1981-3, passed 2-3-1981; Ord. 18-2020, passed 11-17-
2020)
CHAPTER 54: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
54.001   Definitions
   
54.002   Bylaws and regulations of the Council
   
54.003   Damaging or defacing of sewage works property
   
54.004   Right of entry
   
54.005   Failure to comply
   
54.006   Falsifying of information
Connection to Sewerage System
   
54.020   Privies, septic tanks, cesspools, and the like
   
54.021   When connection is required
   
54.022   Construction of building lateral sewers
   
54.023   Extensions outside of the city
   
54.024   Prohibition of discharge to natural outlets
   
54.025   Right to prohibit new connections
   
54.026   Private wells
Wastewater Admissibility
   
54.040   Major contributor permits
   
54.041   Surveillance and monitoring of major contributors
   
54.042   Limitations on point of discharge
   
54.043   Licensed commercial or industrial waste hauling
   
54.044   Special agreements
   
54.045   Prohibitions and limitations
   
54.046   Grease, soil, and sand interceptors
   
54.047   Liability for maintenance of pretreatment and other equipment
   
54.048   Right to reject waste
Sewer Charges, Surcharges, and Service Fees
   
54.060   General provisions
   
54.061   Procedure when water is obtained partially or wholly from sources
other than city waterworks
   
54.062   Procedure when single meter serves more than one user
   
54.063   Portion of water not entering sewerage system
   
54.064   Billing procedure generally
   
54.065   Tenants may be billed; right of owners to examine records
   
54.066   Liability of city for charges
   
54.067   Surcharge based on flow and concentration of wastewater
   
54.068   Rates of surcharge
   
54.069   Sewer charges
   
54.070   Delinquent accounts
   
54.071   Annual review
 
   
54.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Municipal utilities, see I.C. 36-9-23-1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 54.001 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise defined herein, terms shall be defined as in the
Standard Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as amended,
published by the American Health Association and American Water Works
Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, and as set forth in 40
C.F.R. part 136. Waste constituents and characteristics shall be measured by
Standard Methods unless a mutually agreed upon acceptable alternative method is
adopted, or in such other method established by state or federal regulatory
agencies. Monitoring and metering shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BENEFICIAL USES. Include, but are not limited to, domestic, municipal,
agricultural, and industrial use, power generation, recreation, aesthetic
enjoyment, navigation, and the preservation and enhancement of fish, wildlife,
and other aquatic resources or reserves, and other uses, both tangible or
intangible, as specified by state or federal law.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMANDS (BOD). The quantity of dissolved oxygen, in
milligrams per liter, required during stabilization of the decomposable organic
matter by aerobic biochemical action under standard laboratory procedures for
five days at 20°C. The laboratory determinations of BOD shall be made in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Standard Methods, therein and
conventionally referred to as BOD5.
      BUILDING DRAIN. The lowest horizontal piping of a building drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil pipes, waste pipes, and other
drainage pipes inside a building and conveys it to a point outside of the
building.
      CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). A measure of the oxygen equivalent of that
portion of the organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a
strong chemical oxidant. The laboratory determination shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
      COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which carries storm, surface, or ground water
runoff in addition to sewage.
      COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Wastewater having or containing:
         (a)   Measurable biochemical oxygen demand;
         (b)   Suspended solids;
         (c)   pH;
         (d)   Fecal coliform bacteria; or
         (e)   Additional pollutants identified or defined in the city’s
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or by the state
or Board.
      CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS OF WASTEWATER. The chemical, physical,
bacteriological, and radiological properties, including volume, flow rate, and
such other properties which serve to define, classify, or measure the contents,
quality, quantity, and strength of wastewater.
      DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The charge levied on users of a treatment works to
fund debt service on outstanding revenue bonds and current capital costs.
      EFFLUENT. The water, together with any wastes that may be present,
flowing out of a drain, sewer, receptacle, or outlet.
      GARBAGE. Any solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, or dispensing of
food or from the handling, storage, or sale of produce.
      INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Any pollutants which are not compatible
pollutants.
      INFLOW. Water other than wastewater entering the sewerage system from
sources such as leaders, cellar, yard area, and foundation drains, drains from
springs and swampy areas, manhole areas, cross-connections between storm and
sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, storm water, surface runoff, and
street wastewater or drainage.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance or form of
energy discharged, permitted to flow into or enter the sewage system or ground
from an industrial, manufacturing, commercial, or business process or from the
development, recovery, or processing of any natural resource carried on by any
person and shall further mean any waste from an industrial user, but not
including sanitary sewage or storm water.
      INFILTRATION. The water entering the sewerage system directly or via
private sewers, building drains, and building sewers connected therewith, from
the ground, through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipe joints,
connections, or manhole walls.
      INSPECTOR. The person authorized by the Council or the Superintendent to
perform inspection duties assigned to him or her by the Council or
Superintendent.
      LATERAL SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the sewage system
or other place of disposal.
      MAJOR CONTRIBUTOR. A user discharging or introducing into the sewage
system:
         (a)   A flow of more than 50,000 gallons per average workday;
         (b)   A toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in paragraph 307
of Pub. Law No. 92-500, as amended;
         (c)   A flow or pollutant concentration as defined or identified as a
problem pollutant or flow by applicable state or federal regulations or by the
Council;
         (d)   An effluent of significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributors, on the wastewater treatment plant or the
quality of its effluent; or
         (e)   Any substance unusual or unique in quality or quantity requiring
special attention or processing in order to effect proper wastewater treatment.
      NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Sewage discharged by residential users.
      NPDES PERMIT. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
now or hereafter held by the city and setting forth conditions for the
discharge of any pollutants or combination of pollutants.
      NUISANCE. Any substance which is injurious to health or offensive to the
senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with
the comfort or enjoyment of life or property.
      OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. All expenses related directly to the operating
and maintaining, including replacement of the sewage works as identified in the
“Uniform System Accounts for Wastewater Utilities” or as prescribed by the
State Board of Accounts under the general headings “Plant Operation and
Maintenance,” “Sewer Operation and Maintenance,” “Customer Accounts,”
“Administrative and General,” “Insurance,” and “Taxes.”
      pH. The conventional scientific measure of the degree of acidity or
alkalinity.
      POLLUTION. An alteration of the quality of water by waste, contaminants,
or pollutants to a degree which renders such water unfit for beneficial uses.
      PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer owned by the city.
      RECEIVING SEWER SYSTEM. The city municipal sewer system.
      REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes
REPLACEMENT.
      SANITARY SEWAGE. Sewage such as, and having the characteristics of,
domestic sewage from dwelling (including apartment houses and hotels), office
building, factories, or institutions, free from storm and surface water and
industrial wastes.
      SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only sanitary or industrial
waste waters from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions.
      SEWER. A pipe or conduit laid for carrying sewage or other liquids and
solids suspended or entrained therein.
      SEWERAGE SYSTEM. The network of publicly owned sewers and appurtenances
used for collection, transporting, and pumping wastewater to the wastewater
treatment plant, and the wastewater treatment plant itself.
      SHREDDED GARBAGE. Any garbage that is shredded to such a degree that all
particles shall be carried freely in suspension under the conditions normally
prevailing in the sewerage system, with no particles being greater than one-
half inch in dimension.
      STORM SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only storm water, surface runoff,
street wash waters, and drainage.
      SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent, subject to the control of the Council
in all matters, of the Sewer Department.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids which either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquid and which are removable by
laboratory filtration. Their concentration shall be expressed in milligrams per
liter. Quantitative determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures
set forth in Standard Methods.
      USER. Any person who introduces into or discharges into, including both
the owner and occupant of real estate from which is introduced or discharged
into the sewage system, any substance whatsoever.
      USER CHARGE. The charge levied on users of a treatment works, or that
portion of the ad valorem taxes paid by a user, for the user’s proportionate
share of the cost of operation and maintenance (including) replacement of such
works.
      WASTE. Sanitary sewage and any other waste substances, liquid, solid,
gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or
animal origin, of or from any producing, processing, manufacturing, or
industrial operation of whatever nature, including such WASTE placed within
containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal.
      WASTEWATER. The water-carried waste from residences, business buildings,
institutions, and industrial establishments, singular or in any combination,
together with such ground, surface, or storm waters as may be present.
      WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures
used by the city for treatment and disposing of sewage, sludge, and other
sewage constituents and products.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-1.1) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.002 BYLAWS AND REGULATIONS OF THE COUNCIL.
   The Council may adopt and enforce such reasonable regulations not in
conflict with this chapter as may be deemed necessary for the safe, economical,
and efficient management of the city’s sewage system and wastewater treatment
plant and for the construction and use of building (or house) lateral sewers
and connections to the sewage system, which regulations may include limitations
of or prohibition of introduction of or infiltration by storm water, surface
water, and ground water into the sewage system.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-1.2) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.003 DAMAGING OR DEFACING OF SEWAGE WORKS PROPERTY.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or recklessly break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is part of the sewage system.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-1.3) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.004 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Superintendent, Inspector, or any other duly authorized city employee,
upon reasonable notice to any person who is owner, tenant, or occupant of any
real estate, is empowered to enter, upon presentation of proper credentials,
all premises for the purposes of inspection, observation, measuring, sampling,
and testing water, sewage, and industrial waste.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-1.4) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.005 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   Accidental discharges.
      (1)   A user shall notify the Superintendent immediately upon
accidentally discharging chemicals, corrosive substances, or anything harmful
to the sewage system or treatment process, or wastewaters in violation of this
chapter, to enable countermeasures to be taken by the city to minimize damage
to the sewage system, treatment processes, and the receiving stream.
      (2)   Any notification shall be followed within seven days of the date of
occurrence by a detailed written report, signed by the user, describing the
causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent
future similar occurrences.
      (3)   Notifications shall not relieve users of liability for any expense,
loss, or damage to the sewage system, wastewater treatment plant, or treatment
process, or any fines or penalties imposed by the Board, which expenses, loss,
or damage shall be paid by the user.
      (4)   All notices shall be furnished and permanently posted advising
designated responsible employees to call the Superintendent in case of
accidental discharge in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Continued failure to meet requirements. The Council shall have the
following methods of recourse in the event of repeated or willful failure by a
user to meet the wastewater admissibility requirements of this section. In
addition, the city shall have and the Council may exercise all other legally
available remedies.
      (1)   Submission of time schedule. When the city finds that a discharge
of wastewater has been taking place in violation of the admissibility
requirements prescribed in §§
54.040 to 54.048 or the provisions of a major contributor permit, the city may
require the user to submit for approval a detailed time schedule of specific
actions, acceptable to the Board, which the user shall take in order to prevent
or correct a violation of requirements.
      (2)   Issuance of cease and desist orders. When the city finds that a
discharge of wastewater has taken place or is likely to take place in violation
of the admissibility requirements of subsection (i) of this chapter, or of a
major contributor permit, the Board may issue an order to cease and desist, and
may direct the user not complying with such requirements:
         (a)   Comply forthwith;
         (b)   Comply with a time schedule set forth by the Council; or
         (c)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action.
      (3)   Injunction. When the city finds that a discharge of wastewater is
in violation of the admissibility requirements of subsection (i) of this
chapter or the provisions of a major contributor permit, or otherwise causes or
threatens to cause a condition of pollution or nuisance, the Council, on behalf
of the city, may petition any court of proper jurisdiction for the issuance of
a preliminary or permanent injunction or both, as may be appropriate, in
restraining the continuance of such a discharge.
      (4)   Termination of service. The city may revoke any major contributor
permit or terminate or cause to be terminated wastewater service in whole or in
part if a violation of any provisions of this section or the major contributor
permit is found to exist, or if a discharge causes or threatens to cause a
condition of pollution or nuisance as defined in this section, or causes the
city to violate the terms of its NPDES permit or any state or federal law or
regulation.
      (5)   Administrative appeals.
         (a)   Any user affected by any decision, action, or determination,
including cease and desist orders, made by the Superintendent, interpreting or
implementing the provisions of this chapter, any permit issued herein, or any
action, decision, or regulation of the Council adopted pursuant hereto, may
file with the Council a written request for review and reconsideration within
ten days of such a decision, action, or determination, setting forth in detail
the facts supporting the user’s request for reconsideration.
         (b)   The appeal shall, if reasonably possible, be heard by the
Council within 30 days from the date of filing. The Superintendent’s decision,
action, or determination shall remain in effect during such period of
reconsideration, unless the Council otherwise determines on request of the
user.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-1.5) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.006 FALSIFYING OF INFORMATION.
   (A)   A person shall not knowingly make or submit to the city a false
statement, representation, record, report, plan, or other document required to
be filed hereunder or under a duly adopted regulation of the Council, or
voluntarily filed with the intent that the city rely thereon, or falsify,
tamper with, or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring, testing, measuring,
or timing device required or installed under these regulations.
   (B)   A person shall not, during any monitoring or surveillance period,
alter industrial processes or other activities for the purpose of rendering
samples drawn or measurements taken during said monitoring or surveillance
unrepresentative or uncharacteristic of normal operations, flows, or
concentrations of pollutants.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-1.6) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
CONNECTION TO SEWERAGE SYSTEM
§ 54.020 PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS, AND THE LIKE.
   Except as otherwise provided by the Council; the city, or the state or any
of its agencies, a person shall not construct or maintain a privy, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater,
except that septic tank systems and fields existing on February 24, 1981 may be
repaired and maintained in accord with applicable laws and ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-2.1) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.021 WHEN CONNECTION IS REQUIRED.
   Any person constructing a house or other building for occupancy, employment,
recreation, industrial, or commercial activity within the city and abutting on
any street, alley, or easement in which there is, at that time, a public
sanitary or combined sewer or along or across which there is access to such a
sewer, shall connect to that sewer in accord with applicable ordinances and
regulations, and shall not discharge sewage elsewhere than into the sewerage
system.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-2.2) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.022 CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDING LATERAL SEWERS.
   (A)   Generally. The size, shape, alignment, materials, or construction of a
building (or house) lateral sewer and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing the pipe, jointing, testing, and back-filling the trench shall conform
to the city Building and Plumbing Codes and other applicable city rules and
regulations.
   (B)   Determining major contributors. Each commercial and industrial user
shall supply the city with information about expected wastewater constituents
and characteristics to be used in determining whether or not the user will be a
major contributor.
   (C)   Separate sewer requirements. A separate and independent building (or
house) lateral sewer shall be provided for every building (or house); except
where one building (or house) stands at the rear of another on an interior lot
and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building
(or house) through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. In such cases,
the building (or house) lateral sewer from the front building (or house) may be
extended to the rear building (or house) and the whole considered as one
building (or house) lateral sewer.
   (D)   Use of old lateral sewer for new building. Previously existing
building or house lateral sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
or houses only when they are determined, upon examination and test by the
Inspector, to meet all requirements of this subchapter.
   (E)   Elevation and location of building or house lateral sewer. Whenever
reasonably possible, the building or house lateral sewer shall be brought to
the building or house at an elevation below the basement floor. In all
buildings or houses in which any building or house drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the appropriate public sewer, wastewater carried by that
building or house drain shall be lifted by an appropriate means and discharged
to the building or house lateral sewer.
   (F)   Connection to downspouts, drains, and the like. No person shall
connect or reconnect roof downspouts, footing drains, areaway drains,
driveways, parking lots, or other sources of surface, runoff, or groundwater,
after to a building or house lateral sewer or building or house drain which is
in turn connected directly or indirectly to the sewerage system.
   (G)   Inspection; supervision of connection. The applicant for the building
or house lateral sewer permit shall notify the Council or its designated
representative when a building or house lateral sewer is ready for inspection
and connection to the sewerage system. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Inspector or his or her representative using materials and
techniques conforming to the requirements of the Council. The applicant shall
give notice before the burial or covering of the lateral sewer and shall not
cover or bury the sewer until the inspection is completed and the connection
approved.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-2.3) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.023 EXTENSIONS OUTSIDE OF THE CITY.
   A person shall not directly or indirectly make any connections with or
openings into the sewerage system for the purpose of serving any areas outside
the corporate boundaries of the city without first securing a specific
resolution of the Council describing the real estate and property to be served
and authorizing such connection.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-2.4) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.024 PROHIBITION OF DISCHARGE TO NATURAL OUTLETS.
   No person shall discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any
area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-2.5) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.025 RIGHT TO PROHIBIT NEW CONNECTIONS.
   The city shall have the right to prohibit new connections when the excess
capacity of the sewerage system is deemed insufficient by the Board to
accommodate the expected flow, BOD, and/or suspended solids loading from the
prospective sewer user.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-2.6) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.026 PRIVATE WELLS.
   (A)   Registration of wells. Every owner or occupant of real estate within
the corporate limits of the city, or real estate from which there is a lateral
sewer or other means or path of direct or indirect flow into the sewage system,
shall report the existence of a well to the Superintendent on a form supplied
by the Council. The information on the form shall include the name of the owner
or occupant of the real estate, the location of the real estate, the size of
the well pipe, the size (voltage, amperage, and horsepower where ascertainable)
of the well pump motor, and the purpose for which the well water is used by the
owner, occupant, or others.
   (B)   Metering of well water. The Council shall determine the flow of the
well in order to determine the amount of sewage entering the sewage system. The
owner or occupant of the real estate shall pay for the metering device used to
measure the flow. The metering device shall be approved by the Council and
shall remain the property of the owner or occupant of the real estate. However,
tampering with the metering device shall be prohibited. In the case of wells
for household use only, the Council may, in lieu of metering or timing the use
of the well, provide for use of reasonable estimates regarding water volume.
   (C)   Inspection of wells. The Council may direct the Superintendent,
Inspector, or any other employee of the sewage system to enter upon private
property for the purpose of inspecting to determine the existence of private
wells, to oversee or to direct the installation of metering or timing devices,
and to read the meters and devices.
   (D)   Well digging. No person shall dig or drive a well within the city
without first obtaining an application to do so from the Superintendent. The
application shall be on a form approved by the Council and shall show all
pertinent data regarding size and flow. The application shall be signed by both
the installer of the well (the contractor or other person doing the work) and
the owner or his or her agent.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-3) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982, passed
7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
WASTEWATER ADMISSIBILITY
§ 54.040 MAJOR CONTRIBUTOR PERMITS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Any industrial user or any other user shall provide the city with
sufficient information to determine if he or she is a major contributor. Any
user determined to be a major contributor shall be required to obtain a permit
stating the wastewater constituents and characteristics allowed and which sets
for the applicable surveillance schedule and the monitoring requirements the
user shall be subject to in order to discharge into the sewage system. A major
contributor permit shall be valid for four years unless processing changes are
made that, in the opinion of the Superintendent or Council, alter the
wastewater constituents and characteristics significantly. If such a change
occurs, the user shall file a new application. A permit may be renewed without
reapplication at the end of four years at the discretion of the city.
      (2)   A major contributor permit shall not constitute an exception to the
prohibitions and limitations on wastewater admissibility as set forth herein.
Major contributors shall be subject to all applicable fees, rates, and charges
set forth in §§
54.060 through
54.071.
      (3)   A user holding an NPDES permit from the state is automatically
entitled to a major contributor permit from the city. The holder of any NPDES
permit from the state shall file a copy of each report or application he or she
files with the state with the Superintendent. All copies shall be filed with
the Superintendent no later than three days, excluding weekends and city
recognized holidays, after filing with the appropriate state authority. Any
user who applies to the state for an NPDES permit shall also file a copy of the
application and all supporting documents with the city within a three-day
period, excluding weekends and city recognized holidays.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.1)
   (B)   Applications and fees.
      (1)   Major contributors shall submit an application for the proposed
discharge on a form provided by the city. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, studies, or any other information
considered pertinent by the Council.
      (2)   Permit fees for major contributors shall be as follows.
 
Initial Major Contributor Permit                                    Permit Fee
Industries connected to sewage works on or before February 24, 1981 $20
Industries connected to sewage works after February 24, 1981        $100
 
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.2) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.041 SURVEILLANCE AND MONITORING OF MAJOR CONTRIBUTORS.
   (A)   Surveillance schedule.
      (1)   To establish a feasible surveillance schedule, the following
classes of major contributors shall be formed.
 
Class Qualification                             Minimum Surveillance Schedule
A     Flow of 100,000 gallons per day (0.1 MGD) Quarterly
      or more per average workday
      Flow from 0.04 MGD to 0.1 MGD per average
B     workday or discharge with constituents or Semiannually
      characteristics that result in a major
      contributor classification
 
      (2)   (a)   The surveillance period shall normally be for a period of
seven consecutive days, but may be of a longer or shorter duration at the
discretion of the Council or Superintendent.
         (b)   If the surveillance period extends for a greater number of
consecutive days than seven, the city shall have the prerogative of selecting
the seven consecutive days for establishing rates and charges as provided for
in §§
54.060 through
54.071.
   (B)   Surveillance survey charge.
      (1)   The charge for each surveillance survey shall be $20 per day with a
maximum charge for seven days being $140. The Council may adopt a schedule of
lower surveillance fees and may waive any surveillance fees it deems necessary,
particularly when surveillance is to protect or determine improper discharge
found not to exist. If no improper discharge is found, the Council may
nevertheless charge a minimum fee of $10.
      (2)   If the industry has an ongoing pretreatment facility or system
approved by the state or by the Council, there shall be no surveillance fee,
unless the Council finds the user repeatedly violating the effluent standards
applicable to that user.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.3)
   (C)   Monitoring of major contributors.
      (1)   (a)   A major contributor shall install at its own expense:
            1.   A suitable control manhole or other access means, together
with such necessary appurtenances in or on each building lateral sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastewater; and
            2.   Such sampling devices as may be reasonably necessary, all
unless otherwise instructed by the city.
         (b)   1.   A user may be required by the city to install such manholes
or other access means to verify his or her status as a major contributor or
otherwise.
            2.   The manholes or other access means and sampling and testing
devices shall be constructed and maintained to the satisfaction of the city and
at the expense of the owner.
            3.   All such access devices, including manholes, shall be under
the control of the city.
      (2)   The city may provide monitoring equipment during a surveillance
period for control manholes or other access means.
      (3)   Monitoring equipment shall include a device for automatically
measuring flow and a device for automatically taking a composite sample of
wastewater during a 24-hour period, unless otherwise specified by the city.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.4) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.042 LIMITATIONS ON POINT OF DISCHARGE.
   No person shall discharge any substance directly into a manhole or other
opening in the sewage system other than through the approved building or
structural lateral sewer, except in accordance with the terms of this chapter
or by express permission of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.5) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.043 LICENSED COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE HAULING.
   No licensed commercial or industrial waste hauler shall discharge compatible
pollutants and those incompatible pollutants within the limits of admissibility
set out herein to the wastewater treatment plant at any time or place; however,
the Council may accept the discharge at its discretion. Wastewater so received
shall have been generated within the county.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.6) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.044 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   The Council may establish special agreements and arrangements between the
city and any person within the county in accordance with this chapter if the
Council believes unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms
and conditions whereby an unusual wastewater may be accepted for treatment,
subject to payment of applicable fees.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.7) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.045 PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition on discharges. No person shall discharge into the sewage
system any waste which causes, threatens to cause, or is capable of causing,
either alone or by interaction with other substances, any of the following:
      (1)   A fire or explosion;
      (2)   Obstruction of flow in the sewage system or injury to the system or
damage to the wastewater collection, treatment, or disposal facilities;
      (3)   Danger to life or safety of personnel;
      (4)   A nuisance or hindrance of the effective maintenance or operation
of the sewage system, such as having an unusually strong or unpleasant odor;
      (5)   Air pollution by the release of toxic or unusually malodorous gases
or malodorous gas- producing substances;
      (6)   Interference with the wastewater treatment process;
      (7)   The wastewater treatment plant’s effluent or any other product of
the treatment process, residues, sludges, or scum, to be unsuitable for
reclamation, disposal, or to interfere with the reclamation process, or to fail
to meet any of the limitations set by any federal or state agency or the terms
of the city NPDES permit; or
      (8)   Discoloration or any other condition that interferes with control
of the treatment process.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.8)
   (B)   Prohibition of unpolluted waters. Unpolluted water, including, but not
limited to, city water, cooling water, process water, or blowdown from cooling
towers or evaporative coolers, shall not be discharged through direct or
indirect connection to the sewage system for the purpose of diluting wastewater
in order to reduce sewer rates or charges of the user. Limitations on the
amount of unpolluted water that is discharged shall be part of a major
contributor’s permit.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.9)
   (C)   Limitations on radioactive wastes. No person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged any radioactive waste into the sewage system.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.10)
   (D)   Limitations on the use of garbage grinders. Properly shredded garbage
may be discharged into the sewage system.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.11)
   (E)   Limitations on constituents and characteristics. All constituents and
characteristics which separately or in combination may damage structures,
impair the operation of the wastewater treatment plant, interfere with the
treatment process, or impair the quality of the receiving stream or its
tributaries, including, but not limited to, the following constituents and
characteristics, with maximum concentration as shown below.
      (1)   No person shall discharge any wastewater with:
         (a)   A BOD5 concentration in excess of 250 mg/l (milligrams per
liter);
         (b)   Suspended solids concentration in excess of 20 mg/l;
         (c)   A phosphorus concentration in excess of ten mg/l; or
         (d)   An ammonia-nitrogen combination in excess of 25 mg/l.
      (2)   No person shall discharge any wastewater containing concentrations
in excess of the following:
         (a)   A temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
         (b)   A pH lower than six or higher than nine;
         (c)   Two-tenths mg/l cadmium;
         (d)   One-quarter mg/l hexavalent chromium (Cr, VI) for one day, or
0.09 mg/l hexavalent chromium for any 30 consecutive day average;
         (e)   Two mg/l copper;
         (f)   Two-tenths mg/l cyanide amenable to chlorination (CN, A) for one
day, or 0.08 mg/l cyanide amenable to chlorination for any 30 consecutive day
average;
         (g)   Sixty-four-hundredths mg/l cyanide, total (CN, T) for one
cyanide, total for any 30 consecutive day average;
         (h)   One mg/l lead;
         (i)   Two-tenths mg/l mercury;
         (j)   Eight-tenths mg/l nickel;
         (k)   One-tenth mg/l silver;
         (l)   One-half mg/l zinc;
         (m)   Two hundred mg/l oil and grease (animal or vegetable origin);
         (n)   Two hundred mg/l oil and grease (mineral or petroleum origin);
         (o)   One mg/l phenolic compounds which cannot be removed by the
city’s wastewater treatment process;
         (p)   Any of the above divisions (E)(2)(a) through (E)(2)(o), in other
concentration than stated above if applicable state or federal regulations, or
regulations of the Board, set different maximum concentrations; or
         (q)   Any other substance or concentration thereof prohibited to all
users or classes of users by state or federal law, or regulation adopted by the
Council on or after February 24, 1981.
      (3)   The limitations found in division (E)(2) above are found by the
City Council to be those attainable by the best practical technology.
Limitations adopted by the Council shall in all cases be based on the best
practical technology.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.12) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.046 GREASE, SOIL, AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   Such interceptors shall be provided at all restaurants and at all industrial
or commercial enterprises when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary
to contain grease, flammable waste, or sand and other harmful inert materials.
All interceptors shall be approved by the city and shall be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.13) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.047 LIABILITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF PRETREATMENT AND OTHER EQUIPMENT.
   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters
or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
condition by the user at his or her expense, and shall at all reasonable times
be open to inspection and testing by the city.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.14) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.048 RIGHT TO REJECT WASTE.
   The city shall have the right to reject waste and prohibit the introduction
of rejected waste into the sewerage system or the city may require pretreatment
of the waste when the strength or character of the waste is such that it could
cause damage to or interfere with the operation of the sewerage system.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-4.15) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
SEWER CHARGES, SURCHARGES, AND SERVICE FEES
§ 54.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Persons subject to fees and sewer charges. For the use and service
rendered by the sewerage works, sewer charges shall be collected from the
person who owns each and every parcel of real estate that is connected directly
or indirectly to the city’s sewerage system or otherwise discharges wastewater
either directly or indirectly into the sewerage system of the city, which sewer
charges shall be payable as provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-5.1)
   (B)   Effective date; extension to additional property. The sewer charges
fixed by this subchapter shall become effective at the time the user first
discharges to the sewerage system. These sewer charges shall be extended to and
cover any additional premises thereafter served, without the necessity of any
hearing or notice.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-5.2)
   (C)   Rate basis. The sewer flow charges shall be based on the quantity of
water as measured by the water meter used on or in the premises subject to such
sewer charges, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-5.3)
   (D)   Schedule of meter reading. Water meters shall be read once each month
or, at the option of the city, at other intervals.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-5.4) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.061 PROCEDURE WHEN WATER IS OBTAINED PARTIALLY OR WHOLLY FROM SOURCES
OTHER THAN CITY WATERWORKS.
   If a user obtains water partially or wholly from sources other than the City
Waterworks, the total water used shall be measured or determined as provided in
§§
54.026(B) and 54.041(C), or by other reasonable means as the Council may
direct. In the case of single-family household having a private well but no
city water supply, the sewer flow charge shall be for 6,000 gallons per month,
unless a meter is installed on the well at the request of either the user or
the city, in which case, the cost of installation shall be paid for by the user
and the meter shall be provided by the city. The installation of any such meter
shall be approved by the city.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-5.5) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.062 PROCEDURE WHEN SINGLE METER SERVES MORE THAN ONE USER.
   If two or more premises, including apartments and trailers discharging
wastewater into the city’s sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, are
consumers of water, and the quantity of water is measured by a single water
meter, then in that case, for billing purposes, the quantity of water used
shall be the average for each user, and the minimum charge and the sewage rates
and charges shall apply to each of the number of premises served through the
single water meter.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-5.6) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.063 PORTION OF WATER NOT ENTERING SEWERAGE SYSTEM.
   If a user utilizes more than 30,000 gallons of water per month, and can
substantiate to the city that a portion of that water does not and cannot enter
the sewerage system, the Council shall either determine the portion of the
measured water to be used in determining the appropriate sewer charges, or
approve the manner and technique of flow measurement provided by the user for
determining wastewater discharged to the sewerage system. Facilities utilized
to accomplish this shall be installed and maintained in a serviceable condition
by the user at his or her expense, but shall be under the exclusive control of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-5.7) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.064 BILLING PROCEDURE GENERALLY.
   (A)   Sewer billings and invoices shall be rendered and collected
approximately monthly.
   (B)   The Council shall make and enforce all bylaws and regulations which it
deems necessary for the regulation, collection, rebating, and refunding of the
sewer charges prescribed by this subchapter.
   (C)   Major contributors with a flow in excess of 50,000 gallons per average
work day shall have billing determined on the basis of wastewater discharged as
monitored per §
54.041(A), with the following exception.
   (D)   At its option, the city may accept monitoring data and information
from such a major contributor to substantiate billing determination on a more
frequent basis than as established in §
54.041(A). That allowance, however, shall not exempt the major contributor from
the surveillance survey fee set by the city to offset the costs of monitoring
performed by the city.
   (E)   If there is a difference in analytical results that is not explainable
by normal variation in the testing procedure, the user may, within 30 days of
billing, appeal to the Council.
   (F)   (1)   So that domestic and residential users of sewage service shall
not be penalized for sprinkling lawns during the months of July, August, and
September, the billing for sewage service for residential and/or domestic users
for those months of July, August, and September shall be based upon the water
usage for the previous months of January, February, and March. If the water
usage for those previous months of January, February, and March is greater than
the water usage of those months of July, August, and September, then the
billing for sewage service shall be computed on the actual water used in the
month for which the sewage service bill is being rendered.
      (2)   Domestic and/or residential sewage service as applicable to the
sprinkling rate shall apply to each lot, parcel of real estate, or building
which is occupied and used as a residence. This sprinkling rate shall not apply
to any premises which are partially or wholly used for commercial or industrial
purposes. If a portion of those premises shall be used for commercial or
industrial purposes, the owner shall have the privilege of separating the water
service so that the residential portion of the premises is served through a
separate water meter, and in that case, the water usage as registered by the
water meter serving that portion of the premises used for residential purposes
shall qualify for the sprinkling rate.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-5.8) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.065 TENANTS MAY BE BILLED; RIGHT OF OWNERS TO EXAMINE RECORDS.
   The sewer charges may be billed to the tenants occupying the premises
served, unless otherwise instructed in writing by the person who owns the
premises. These billings shall in no way relieve the owner of liability if
payment is not made as required by this subchapter. The owners of the premises
served, which are occupied by tenants, shall have the rights to examine the
city collection records to determine if these sewer charges have been paid by
those tenants. Any such examination shall be made at the office at which the
records are kept and during the normal business hours of that office.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-5.9) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.066 LIABILITY OF CITY FOR CHARGES.
   The city shall be subject to the sewer charges provided in this subchapter
for services rendered to any city department or agency, except the City Sewer
Department.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-5.10) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.067 SURCHARGE BASED ON FLOW AND CONCENTRATION OF WASTEWATER.
   (A)   All wastewater discharged by major contributors shall meet the
admissibility standards in §§
54.040 through
54.048, by pretreatment if necessary in the determination of the Council.
Wastewater beyond the limits of admissibility set forth in §
54.045(E)(1) may be accepted and surcharged in accordance with the schedule in
§
54.068.
   (B)   Surcharges shall be based on actual quantities discharged for
treatment as determined from measured concentration and flow. Surcharge rates
for wastewater characteristics not provided for in this subchapter may be set
at the reasonable discretion of the Council, taking into account all of the
Sewer Department’s significant cost factors, relating to treatment, handling,
and disposal.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-5.11) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.068 RATES OF SURCHARGE.
   The rate of surcharge, in addition to volumetric charges, for the following
constituents shall be as follows:
   (A)   For biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in excess of 250 milligrams per
liter: $0.203 per pound;
   (B)   For chemical oxygen demand (COD) where BOD cannot be determined in
excess of 500 milligrams per liter: $0.203 per pound;
   (C)   For suspended solids in excess of 250 milligrams per liter: $0.178 per
pound;
   (D)   For phosphorous in excess of ten milligrams per liter: $3.50 per
pound; and
   (E)   For ammonia-nitrogen in excess of 25 milligrams per liter: $1.40 per
pound.
(Ord. 10-2018, passed 1-15-2019)
§ 54.069 SEWER CHARGES.
   (A)   For the use and the service rendered by said sewerage works,
volumetric sewer charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be
in an amount determinable as follows.
Metered Rates per Month
Consumption per Month (gallons) Rate per 1,000 Gallons
                                Phase I Phase II
Metered Rates per Month
Consumption per Month (gallons)                          Rate per 1,000 Gallons
                                                         Phase I Phase II
First 2,500                                              $8.92   $9.28
Next 2,500                                               $6.97   $7.25
Next 5,000                                               $6.42   $6.68
Next 20,000                                              $5.92   $6.16
Next 70,000                                              $5.81   $6.04
Next 400,000                                             $5.05   $5.25
Over 500,000                                             $4.76   $4.95
Flat Monthly Sewer Charge for Any Residential User Not a $46.15  $48.01
Metered Water User
Jonesboro Operation and Maintenance Flow Rate per 1,000  $2.70   $2.70
Gallons
Monthly Minimum Sewer Charge                             $22.30  $23.20
 
   (B)   The Council is empowered to determine rates, charges, and fees for
septic tank, industrial wastes, and other disposable wastewater and wastes
delivered to the wastewater treatment plant, as provided in §
54.043 and to collect such charges and fees.
   (C)   The Council is empowered to determine and to collect such charges as
it may reasonably provide for under such special agreements entered into by the
Council, on behalf of the city, under §
54.044
(Ord. 10-2018, passed 1-15-2019)
§ 54.070 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   Charges for sewerage service levied pursuant to this subchapter shall be due
and payable on or before the due dates shown on the bills. Any service charge
not paid by the due date, which shall be approximately 15 days after the bill
is rendered, shall be deemed delinquent. Delinquent sewage charges, together
with costs and other expenses of collection, may be collected by any lawful
remedy, including, where applicable, the placing of and foreclosure of liens on
real estate as provided by state law.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-5.14) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.071 ANNUAL REVIEW.
   The Sewer Department shall file with the Mayor and City Council, by May 31
of each year, an annual report for the previous calendar year showing the
financial condition of the Sewer Department and the following additional
information, as well as any other information the Council may deem useful or
appropriate. This report shall contain, where appropriate, recommendations to
the Council for amendments to this subchapter regarding rates, surcharges,
industrial surveillance, limitations on pollutants and concentrations thereof,
and all other matters either within the scope of this subchapter or pertaining
to collection and treatment of sewage.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-6.1) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
§ 54.999 PENALTY.
   The commission of any act prohibited by this chapter or by lawful order of
the Superintendent or lawful order or regulation of the Council, or the failure
to perform without lawful justification any lawful order of the Superintendent
or lawful order or regulation of the Council shall be a punishable violation of
this chapter for which, unless there is another specific penalty provided, the
penalty shall be a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $500. In the case of
discharges into the sewerage system in violation of this chapter or any valid
order or regulation of the Council, each day of violation constitutes a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-23-1-5.3) (Ord. 2-1981, passed 2-24-1981; Ord. 3-1982,
passed 7-6-1982)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
74.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Enforcement
   
70.03   Traffic lanes
   
70.04   Towing
Statutory reference:
   General provisions, see I.C. 9-13
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The definitions set
forth in I.C. 9-13-2 shall apply to the same terms used in this code title.
   CAMPER. Any recreational vehicle whose combined length exceeds 20 feet.
   TRUCK. Any vehicle with more than two wheels or more than one rear axle, or
with an empty vehicle weight of more than 5,000 pounds. The term also includes
trailers and semi-trailers, whether detached from or attached to a motor
vehicle, recreational vehicle, or house car.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-1-28(a))
§ 70.02 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Police Department shall enforce this code title. City police
officers may direct traffic in person or by means of a visible or audible
signal. During a fire or other emergency, the provisions of this code title may
be disregarded or altered by police officers or Fire Departments where
necessary. The City Police Department may promulgate and enforce temporary
traffic regulations during any emergency.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-1-28(b))
§ 70.03 TRAFFIC LANES.
   The city may mark traffic lanes on the roadway of any street where a regular
alignment of traffic is necessary.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-1-28(c))
§ 70.04 TOWING.
   Any city police officer may, upon discovering any vehicle parked, stopped,
or standing in violation of this code title, cause that vehicle to be removed
by private towing contractors engaged by the city. Any such vehicle shall be
removed to the designated impoundment sites and shall not be released to any
person until the city has received payment for all costs and expenses in towing
and storing that vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-1-28(d))
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Parking prohibitions
   
71.02   Stopping in front of building
   
71.03   Alley parking
   
71.04   Parking position
   
71.05   Angle parking
   
71.06   Private parking signs
   
71.07   Parking and loitering on walkways, driveways, and parking areas
   
71.08   Parking and assemblies on protected property
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle at any time for any purpose
in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the direction of police officer or traffic
control sign or signal:
   (A)   Within an intersection;
   (B)   On a crosswalk;
   (C)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 20 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the
Police Department shall indicate a different length by proper signs;
   (D)   Within 35 feet from the intersection of curb lines;
   (E)   Within 30 feet upon the approach of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or
traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway;
   (F)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station;
   (G)   Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant;
   (H)   In front of any public or private driveway;
   (I)   On a sidewalk;
   (J)   Alongside of or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (K)   On the roadway side of any parked vehicle, commonly known as “double
parking;” or
   (L)   Upon any bridge or under any elevated structure.
(Ord. 10 2022, passed 11-1-2022) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 STOPPING IN FRONT OF BUILDING.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of the following
places at any time except temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of
passengers or when necessary to obedience to traffic regulations or traffic
signs or signals, or the direction of a police officer: within a space of 25
feet immediately in front of the entrance of any church, school, hotel,
theatre, motion-picture house, hospital, steam railway station, bus, or public
meeting place.
(Ord. 10 2022, passed 11-1-2022) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 ALLEY PARKING.
   No person shall park any vehicle in any alley except for a period not
exceeding 30 minutes while loading or unloading the vehicle.
(Ord. 10 2022, passed 11-1-2022) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 PARKING POSITION.
   Except where angle parking is permitted, a vehicle stopped or parked upon a
roadway shall be stopped or parked with the curb-side wheels of the vehicle
parallel with and within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway. On a
two-way traffic street, a vehicle shall only be parked on the right side of the
roadway.
(Ord. 10 2022, passed 11-1-2022) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 ANGLE PARKING.
   Vehicles may be parked at an angle to the curb, as marked on the roadway on
those streets.
(Ord. 10 2022, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 71.06 PRIVATE PARKING SIGNS.
   No person shall place any sign along or on any street or alley or designate
any place thereon with the intent to regulate or prevent the parking or
vehicles on any street or alley.
(Ord. 10 2022, passed 11-1-2022) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07 PARKING AND LOITERING ON WALKWAYS, DRIVEWAYS, AND PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to block entrances or exits to any parking area,
walkway, or driveway adjacent to any business building or public building in
any manner, whether by vehicle, persons, or barricades, unless by direction of
the owner or manager of any public building or business, whereby doing so,
causes any difficulty in entering or exiting the premises or adjacent drive or
parking area.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park or stop on any parking areas, walkways,
or driveways, adjacent to any business buildings or public buildings unless
such parking, stopping, or standing is directly related to the business and/or
public building, or is with the permission of the owner or manager of such
premises.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive motor vehicles repeatedly
through parking areas or driveways of any public building or business building
without attempting to park said vehicle for the purpose of doing business in
the building, unless such repeated driving is directly related to the business
and/or public building, or is done with the permission of the owner or manager
of such premises.
   (D)   Before any person is charged with a violation of this section, the
owner or manager of the parking areas, walkways, or driveways to be protected
shall post a sign in a conspicuous location indicating that said areas are
protected by the terms of this section. Said sign shall be not less than 18 by
24 inches and shall contain, in two and one-half inches or larger block
letters, the following legend:
   “Parking regulated by Ordinance No. 4, 1992”
   (E)   The registered owner, owners, or operator of a vehicle parked or
stopped in violation of this section shall be presumed to be the person or
persons who left such vehicle unlawfully parked or stopped and shall be liable
under the terms of this section.
   (F)   Notice of violation of this section shall be attached to such vehicle.
Notice shall be in the form of a standard parking violation ticket.
(Ord. 4, 1992, passed - -1992) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08 PARKING AND ASSEMBLIES ON PROTECTED PROPERTY.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a PROTECTED PROPERTY shall be defined as
any business, church, organization, or property to which the public has access
that has a conspicuously posted notice that said property is protected by this
section reading in substantially the following form: “This property is
protected by the terms of Ordinance 8, 1997, of the City of Gas City regarding
unauthorized parking.”
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to intentionally block entrances or exits to any
parking area on a protected property in any manner unless at the direction of
the owner or manager such parking is permitted. Blocking of entrances and exits
shall include the parking of any type bicycle or vehicle in such a manner that
it creates difficulty or limitations in entering or exiting the premises of the
protected property, except for the purposes of repairs by municipal authorities
or private contractors engaged by owners.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle through any
parking area or driveway of any protected property without intent to park said
vehicle for purposes of conducting business at the protected property.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave an unoccupied vehicle
upon a walkway, driveway, or parking area of a protected property and leave
such premises to go elsewhere without the knowledge and consent of the owner or
manager of the protected property. Any such vehicle parked for over 45 minutes
may be towed away at the vehicle owner’s expense.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the walkway,
driveway, or parking area of a protected property unless the individual
entering the premises does so for the purpose of conducting business or does so
with the knowledge and consent of the owner or manager of the protected
property.
   (F)   If the owner of a public property, business, church, or other
organization wishes to declare and post their property as “protected property,”
the owner shall give notice to the city of such posting and shall cooperate in
the prosecution of any car or person charged with violation of this section
pursuant to said posting.
   (G)   The city shall furnish a form to be executed by the property owner
which shall constitute notice to the city of the posting of notice of a
protected property. The city shall provide for a fee determined by the Board of
Public Works, for a standard form notice as provided in division (A) above to
be posted and maintained by the owner. Such notices shall be posted in
conspicuous places designating the property to be protected property, and only
upon such proper posting shall compliance with this section be enforced by the
city.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for anyone other than the owner or his or her
authorized agent to remove, deface, or tamper with any sign or notice posted
pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 8, 1997, passed 12-2-1997) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provisions of §
71.07 shall, on conviction, be fined in a sum not less than $5, nor more than
$50 for each offense.
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
71.08 shall be fined not less than $25 for the first offense; $50 for the
second offense; and $75 plus the city’s court costs for each violation of §
71.08.
(Ord. 4, 1992, passed - -1992; Ord. 8, 1997, passed 12-2-1997)
CHAPTER 72: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
   
72.01   General prohibition
   
72.02   Definitions
   
72.03   Registration required
   
72.04   License required
   
72.05   Liability coverage
   
72.06   Required equipment
   
72.07   Speed restrictions
   
72.08   Place of operation
   
72.09   Occupants
   
72.10   Subject to traffic rules
   
72.11   Responsibility of owners and operators
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, the operation of vehicles
originally designed for operation on a golf course, whether powered by battery,
fuel engine, or otherwise, and commonly referred to as “golf carts” on city
streets and thoroughfares, is and shall be prohibited, except insofar as such
golf carts are registered, equipped, and operated in full compliance with this
chapter.
(Ord. 3-2020, passed 4-21-2020) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A valid license to operate a motor vehicle issued by the
state or any other state.
   GOLF CART. A vehicle with four wheels originally designed for operation on a
golf course and powered by battery or fuel engine.
   MULTIPURPOSE OFF-HIGHWAY UTILITY VEHICLE (MOHUV). A vehicle commonly
referred to as a SIDE BY SIDE or MULE that has four or more wheels, a steering
wheel, non-straddle seating, and maximum speeds between 25 mph and 50 mph. In
addition, MOHUVs must have foot controls for throttle and braking and rollover
protective structures.
(Ord. 3-2020, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 72.03 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner or lessee of a golf cart must register the golf cart
annually with the City Clerk Treasurer’s office on or before May 1, and an
annual registration fee of $25 be paid to the Clerk Treasurer, who shall
deposit the golf cart registration fee into the local Police Continuing
Education Fund (CEF).
   (B)   The City Clerk Treasurer’s office shall issue a certificate of
registration (permit) and numerical tag which shall be affixed to the center of
the slow moving vehicle sign of the golf cart or multipurpose off-highway
utility vehicle.
   (C)   The certificate of registration must be in the golf cart or
multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle or in the possession of the person
operating the golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle at all
times when the golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle is in
operation on the streets or thoroughfares of the city.
   (D)   Only the current numerical tag may be displayed on the golf cart or
multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle. Provided, however, all permits issued
prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and
all numeric tags issued and placed on golf carts in compliance with the prior
golf cart ordinance shall be deemed to be compliant until May 1, 2020.
   (E)   Licensed golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle dealers
may purchase “dealer” stickers for the purpose of allowing test drives of golf
carts or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle. Such dealer stickers shall
be placed on the golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle in the
same manner as an individual owner. The number of dealer stickers per business
shall be determined by the City Police Chief. Dealers shall be required to
comply with the requirements of this chapter in the same manner as an
individual owner.
(Ord. 3-2020, passed 4-21-2020) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Only persons holding a valid motor vehicle driver’s license may operate a
golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle on the streets or public
thoroughfares within the city limits. The owner or lessee of the multipurpose
off-highway utility vehicle must also comply with all State Department of
Natural Resource registration requirements.
(Ord. 3-2020, passed 4-21-2020) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 LIABILITY COVERAGE.
   The financial responsibility of the owner, lessee, or operator
notwithstanding, the golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle must
be covered by liability coverage in an amount not less than that provided by
state statutes for motor vehicles operated on public thoroughfares in the
state. Proof of such liability coverage must be available on the golf cart or
multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle or carried by the operator at all
times the golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle is operated on
the streets or thoroughfares of the city.
(Ord. 3-2020, passed 4-21-2020) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
   The golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle must be equipped
as follows: it is the responsibility of the owner, lessee, and operator to make
sure that the listed below equipment is installed and in working order prior to
operating the golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle on the
streets or public thoroughfares within the city limits:
   (A)   Two operating headlights, one on each side of the front of the golf
cart or multipurpose off- highway utility vehicle;
   (B)   Tail lights, one on each side of the rear of the golf cart or
multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle and must be visible for a distance of
500 feet;
   (C)   Brake lights; and
   (D)   A slow moving vehicle placard shall be prominently affixed to the rear
of the golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle in such a manner
as to be visible from a distance of 500 feet.
(Ord. 3-2020, passed 4-21-2020) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
   Golf carts or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicles may be operated on
streets or thoroughfares within the city on which the speed limit is 30 mph or
less.
(Ord. 3-2020, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 72.08 PLACE OF OPERATION.
   Golf carts or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicles may not be operated:
   (A)   On sidewalks; or
   (B)   On State Highway 22 (Main Street), except to cross the said State
Highway 22 at intersections regulated by an automatic traffic signal (or as
directed by a law enforcement officer) in a path 90 degrees to the State
Highway (Main Street). Provided however, golf carts or multipurpose off-highway
utility vehicles may be operated on State Highway 22 (Main Street) in
connection with and during the course of such special events as may be from
time to time determined and so designated by the City Board of Works and
Safety.
(Ord. 3-2020, passed 4-21-2020) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.09 OCCUPANTS.
   Occupants of a golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle in
operation on the city streets or thoroughfares shall be limited to the number
of persons for whom factory seating is installed on the cart or vehicle.
Occupants of the golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle,
including the operator, shall be seated in the cart or vehicle and no part of
the body of the operator or an occupant shall extend outside the perimeter of
the cart or vehicle while in operation. No operator or occupant of a golf cart
or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle may ride on the lap of, or
otherwise be held by, any other person.
(Ord. 3-2020, passed 4-21-2020) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC RULES.
   The operation of golf carts or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle
shall be subject to all traffic rules (in addition to the requirements set
forth herein), as required by city traffic ordinances and state statutes
governing the operation of motor vehicles.
(Ord. 3-2020, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 72.11 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OPERATORS.
   The owner or lessee of a golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility
vehicle, who applies for a permit to operate the golf cart or multipurpose off-
highway utility vehicle within the city as hereinabove provided in §
72.03, shall agree to be responsible, jointly and severally, with any person
who is permitted to operate the golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility
vehicle, for any injury or damages the operator caused by reason of the
operation of the golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle if such
operator is liable for such damages.
(Ord. 3-2020, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the operator of the golf cart
or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle to comply with the provisions of §§
72.07 through
72.10 (including specifically responsibility for the actions of all occupants)
as set for in §
72.09. The failure to comply with the requirements set forth in §§
72.07 through
72.10 shall constitute a violation of this chapter by the operator. Violation
of §§
72.07 through
72.10 shall constitute a Class C infraction.
      (2)   An owner, lessee, or operator may be cited to appear in a court of
competent jurisdiction by the issuance of a state uniform traffic ticket. Upon
a finding by such court that an owner, lessee, or operator of a golf cart or
multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle has violated any provisions of this
chapter, such person shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed
$500, as provided in I.C. 34-28-5-4(c) along with court cost.
      (3)   In addition, the permit, as hereinabove provided, may be subject to
suspension or revocation.
      (4)   A fine assessed for violation of this chapter shall be deposited
into the General Fund of the city.
   (B)   In the event that two or more offenses constituting violations of this
chapter occur within one year of a first offense, the permit to operate the
golf cart or multipurpose off-highway utility vehicle shall be revoked and may
not be reissued for a period of one year.
(Ord. 3-2020, passed 4-21-2020)
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
      
II.   Stop and yield signs
      
III.   One-way streets
      
IV.   Turn restrictions
      
V.   Truck routes
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Speed limits generally. No person shall operate any vehicle at a speed
in excess of those listed for the streets below.
Street Speed (mph) Portion Covered
Street        Speed Portion Covered
              (mph)
First Street  40    250 feet South of Tulip Drive to the North city limits
                    Grant Street to Fifth Street   (B)   School zones. No person shall operate any
Main Street   25    vehicle at a speed in excess of those listed below during any time when children
                    are present.
Broadway      20    Main Street to North “B” Street
Street
Eighth Street 20    North “E” Street to North “H” Street
Fifth Street  20    Main Street to South “C” Street
Fourth Street 20    Main Street to South “C” Street
Main Street   25    River Street to Ward Street
North “B” 20    Broadway Street to Ward Street
Street
North “H” 20    Beech Drive to Ninth Street
Street
South “A” 20    Fifth Street to Sixth Street
Street
South “A” 20    Third Street to Fourth Street
Street
South “B” 20    Third Street to Sixth Street
Street
 
   (C)   Park zones. The following will have a speed limit of 20 mph when
children are present.
 
Street           Portion Covered
Broadway Street  South “H” Street to 1470 feet South of Main Street
South “H” StrBroadway Street to Rogers Avenue
 
(Prior Code, § 9-4-1-58)
   (D)   State laws. The speed of vehicles upon the streets within the city
shall be subject to the general state motor vehicle laws regulating the speed
of vehicles within city limits, except with relation to the speed zones already
established by city ordinance as they apply to city parks and school zones
within the city limits.
   (E)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty
of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than
$100.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-1-58)
(Ord. passed 8-10-1915; Ord. passed 6-6-1961; Ord. 5, 2001, passed 8-21-2001)
Statutory reference:
   Local authorities - alteration of speed limits, see I.C. 9-21-5-3
SCHEDULE II. STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Alleys. Every driver emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall stop that vehicle immediately before driving onto a sidewalk or into a
sidewalk area extending across any alley or private driveway.
   (B)   Preferential streets. The city hereby designates the following streets
as preferential streets at the following intersections. All vehicle shall
comply with the requirements of I.C. 9-13-2 by stopping or yielding as required
by official traffic control devices or signs posted under this code section.
Stop Street Stops For Preferential Street
Ash Lane              Chestnut Drive
Stop Street                  Stops For  Preferential Street
Ash Lane                                Chestnut Drive
Beech Drive                             Eighth Street
Beech Drive                             North “H” Street
Byron Court                             Eastmont Drive
Cherry Lane                             Ash Lane
Cherry Lane                             Chestnut Drive
Chestnut Drive                          North “D” Street
CR 400 East                             South “H” Street
Eastmont Drive                          Virgil Drive
Eighth Street                           North “D” Street
Eighth Street                           North “F” Street
Eighth Street                           North “H” Street
Evans Road                              South “H” Street
Fairview Drive                          Tenth Street
Fifth Street                            Main Street
Fifth Street                            South “H” Street
Fourth Street                           Main Street
Grant Street                            Main Street
Harrisburg Avenue                       Main Street
Jacks Street                            Eighth Street
Jacks Street                            South “F” Street
Jones Road                              Main Street
Jones Road                              Tenth Street
Locust Drive                            North “H” Street
Locust Drive                            North Third Street
Ninth Street                            North “H” Street
Ninth Street                            South “F” Street
North “A” Street                    Fifth Street
North “A” Street                    First Street
North “A” Street                    Fourth Street
North “A” Street                    Grant Street
North “A” Street                    Harrisburg Avenue
North “A” Street                    Second Street
North “A” Street                    Seventh Street
North “A” Street                    Short Street
North “A” Street                    Sixth Street
North “A” Street                    Third Street
North “B” Street                    Seventh Street
North “C” Street                    Fifth Street
North “C” Street                    First Street
North “C” Street                    Fourth Street
North “C” Street                    Grant Street
North “C” Street                    Harrisburg Avenue
North “C” Street                    Second Street
North “C” Street                    Third Street
North “D” Street                    First Street
North “D” Street                    Harrisburg Avenue
North “E” Street                    Eighth Street
North “E” Street                    Grant Street
North “E” Street                    Ninth Street
North “E” Street                    Tenth Street
North “E” Street                    Third Street
North “F” Street                    First Street
North “F” Street                    Grant Street
North “F” Street                    Harrisburg Avenue
North “G” Street                    Eighth Street
North “G” Street                    First Street
North “G” Street                    Grant Street
North “G” Street                    Harrisburg Avenue
North “G” Street                    Ninth Street
North “G” Street                    Tenth Street
North “H” Street                    First Street
North “J” Street                    First Street
Olynger Road                            Tenth Street
Poplar Lane                             Beech Drive
River Street                            Main Street
Rogers Avenue                           South “H” Street
Second Street                           Main Street
Second Street                           North “E” Street
Second Street                           North “H” Street
Seventh Street                          Main Street
Short Street                            Main Street
Short Street                            North “B” Street
Sixth Street                            Main Street
Sixth Street                            North “D” Street
Sixth Street                            South “D” Street
South “A” Street                    Fifth Street
South “A” Street                    First Street
South “A” Street                    Grant Street
South “A” Street                    Second Street
South “A” Street                    Seventh Street
South “A” Street                    Sixth Street
South “A” Street                    Third Street
South “C” Street                    Fifth Street
South “C” Street                    First Street
South “C” Street                    Fourth Street
South “C” Street                    Second Street
South “C” Street                    Seventh Street
South “C” Street                    Sixth Street
South “C” Street                    Third Street
South “E” Street                    Fifth Street
South “E” Street                    First Street
South “E” Street                    Fourth Street
South “E” Street                    Second Street
South “E” Street                    Third Street
South “F” Street                    First Street
South “F” Street                    Seventh Street
South “F” Street                    Tenth Street
South “G” Street                    Fifth Street
South “G” Street                    First Street
South “G” Street                    Fourth Street
South “G” Street                    Second Street
South “G” Street                    Seventh Street
South “G” Street                    Sixth Street
South “G” Street                    Third Street
South “H” Street (westbound)        First Street
South “H” Street (westbound)        Seventh Street
South “I” Street                    Evans Road
South “I” Street                    Rogers Avenue
South “J” Street                    Rogers Avenue
South “K” Street                    Evans Road
South “K” Street                    Rogers Avenue
Third Street                            Main Street
Third Street                            South “H” Street
Tulip Drive                             First Street
Vine Street                             Broadway Street
Vine Street                             Ward Street
Virgil Drive                            Eastmont Drive
Walden Drive                            Virgil Drive
Walnut Drive                            Chestnut Drive
Walnut Drive                            First Street
Ward Street                             Main Street
Ward Street                             North “B” Street
West Street                             Main Street
Wright Drive                            Virgil Drive
Yield Street                            Preferential Street
Oaks Street                  Yields For Jones Road
Walden Drive                            Eastmont Drive
 
   (C)   Multiple stop intersections. The city designates the following
intersections as multiple stop intersections. All persons operating vehicles
shall stop before proceeding through any such intersection.
Intersection Intersection Type
Intersection                                         Intersection Type
East North “A” Street and Second Street          Four-way
North “B” Street and Fifth Street                Four-way
North “B” Street and First Street                Four-way
North “B” Street and Fourth Street               Four-way
North “B” Street and Grant Street                Four-way
North “B” Street and Harrisburg Avenue           Four-way
North “B” Street and Second Street               Four-way
North “B” Street and Sixth Street                Four-way
North “B” Street and Third Street                Four-way
North “C” Street, Eastmont Drive, and Seventh StrFour-way
North “C” Street and Sixth Street                Three-way
North “D” Street, Ash Lane, and Fifth Street     Four-way
North “D” Street, Farmington Road, and Tenth StreFour-way
North “D” Street and Fourth Street               Three-way
North “D” Street and Grant Street                Four-way
North “D” Street and Ninth Street                Three-way
North “D” Street and Second Street               Four-way
North “D” Street and Seventh Street              Three-way
North “D” Street and Sixth Street                Three-way
North “D” Street, Tenth Street, and Farmington RoFour-way
North “D” Street and Third Street                Four-way
North “E” Street and First Street                Four-way
North “E” Street and Harrisburg Avenue           Three-way
North “F” Street and Eighth Street               Three-way
North “F” Street and Ninth Street                Four-way
North “F” Street and Tenth Street                Three-way
North “G” Street and Harrisburg Avenue           Three-way
North “H” Street, Chestnut Drive, and Colony Way Four-way
North “H” Street and Eighth Street               Three-way
North “H” Street and Tenth Street                Three-way
South “A” Street and Fourth Street               Four-way
South “B” Street and Fifth Street                Four-way
South “B” Street and First Street                Four-way
South “B” Street and Fourth Street               Four-way
South “B” Street and Grant Street                Four-way
South “B” Street and Second Street               Four-way
South “B” Street and Seventh Street              Four-way
South “B” Street and Sixth Street                Four-way
South “B” Street and Third Street                Four-way
South “C” Street and Grant Street                Three-way
South “D” Street and Fifth Street                Four-way
South “D” Street and First Street                Four-way
South “D” Street and Fourth Street               Four-way
South “D” Street and Second Street               Four-way
South “D” Street and Seventh Street              Four-way
South “D” Street and Third Street                Four-way
South “F” Street and Eighth Street               Three-way
South “F” Street and Fifth Street                Three-way
South “F” Street and Fourth Street               Four-way
South “F” Street and Second Street               Four-way
South “F” Street and Sixth Street                Three-way
South “F” Street and Third Street                Four-way
South “H” Street and Fourth Street               Four-way
South “H” Street and Sixth Street                Three-way
South “J” Street and Evans Road                  Three-way
Walnut Drive and Third Street                        Four-way
West South “H” Street and Evans Road             Three-way
Wright Drive and Tenth Street                        Three-way
 
   (D)   Official traffic control signal intersections. Traffic control signal
intersections are as follows:
      (1)   Broadway Street and Main Street;
      (2)   Main Street and First Street;
      (3)   Main Street and Third Street; and
      (4)   Main Street and Tenth Street.
   (E)   Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this code section
shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction, shall be
fined not more than $100.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-1-34) (Ord. passed 5-10-1904; Ord. passed 4-27-1943; Ord.
passed 7-14-1959; Ord. 746, passed 8-2-1960; Ord. passed 9-15-1964; Ord. 2-
2010, passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 10-2023, passed 9-5-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Stop and yield signs, see I.C. 9-4-1-34
SCHEDULE III. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   Any person operating a vehicle on any of the following streets or
alleys shall only move that vehicle in the direction indicated:
      (1)   First alley North of Main Street from Third Street to Fourth
Street, westbound;
      (2)   North Second Street from the intersection of Memorial Way to East
North “A” Street shall be a one-way northbound; and
      (3)   Memorial Way South from North “A” Street and East to the
intersection of North Second Street shall be one-way southbound and eastbound.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this code section shall be
deemed guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined
not more than $100.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-1-71) (Ord. 2-2010, passed 7-6-2010)
Statutory reference:
   One-way streets and alleys, see I.C. 9-21-4-14
SCHEDULE IV. TURN RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No person operating any vehicle shall make a right turn on red at the
following intersections.
Intersection From To
Intersection                 From       To
                             Eastbound  Southbound
Main Street and First Street Northbound Eastbound
                             Southbound Westbound
                             Westbound  Northbound
                             Eastbound  Southbound
Main Street and Third Street Northbound Eastbound
                             Southbound Westbound
                             Westbound  Northbound
 
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this code section shall be
deemed guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined
not more than $100.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-1-75)
SCHEDULE V. TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   No person shall operate any truck over and upon any city street or
alley, except on the truck routes provided in this code section.
   (B)   Drivers of vehicles subject to division (A) above shall use the
following streets when traveling into, through, and out of the city:
      (1)   All state highways; and
      (2)   First Street, from South “H” Street to the North city limits line.
   (C)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to refuse or
garbage trucks regularly operating in the city while in the process of
collecting refuse and garbage within the city.
   (D)   The provisions of this schedule shall not prohibit the driver of a
vehicle subject to division (A) above from traveling upon or over any city
street or alley to load or unload cargo within the city, if the operator uses
the shortest possible way between the designated truck route and the place of
delivery or pickup, or as otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (E)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this schedule shall
be guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined a sum
not less than $10, nor more than $500.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-1-125) (Ord. 722, passed 3-25-1958; Ord. 1983-6, passed 8-
16-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Weight limit restrictions, see I.C. 9-20
CHAPTER 74: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   No parking zones
      
II.   Limited parking zones
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING ZONES.
   The streets described below are designated no parking zones. When
appropriate signs conforming to the requirements this title are erected, no
person shall park a vehicle on the side of the street designated “no parking”
during the hours set forth on the same.
Street From To Side of Street Time of Restriction
Street          From            To               Side of Street Time of
                                                                Restriction
Amy Way         Kaybee Drive    Dead-end         Both           Any time
Broadway Street Main Street     North “B” StrEast           Any time
Broadway Street Main Street     170 feet North   West           7:00 a.m. to 5:
                                of Vine Street                  00 p.m.
Earthwise Drive Sloan Drive     Dead-end         Both           Any time
East Side       Fischer Parkway Fischer Parkway  Both           Any time
Parkway
First Street    South “H”   North “H” StrEast           Any time
                Street
First Street    South “H”   North “H” StrWest           Any time
                Street
Fischer Parkway SR 22           City limits      Both           Any time
Fourth Street   South “B”   South “A” StrEast           Any time
                Street
Industrial      Sloan Drive     CR 600 East      Both           Any time
Drive
Main Street     Harrisburg      Jones Road       North          2:00 a.m. to 8:
                Avenue                                          00 a.m. Sunday
Main Street     Harrisburg      Jones Road       South          2:00 a.m. to 8:
                Avenue                                          00 a.m. Sunday
Main Street     West corporate  Ward Street      North          Any time
                line
Main Street     West corporate  Ward Street      South          Any time
                line
Museum          Kaybee Drive    Dead-end         Both           Any time
Boulevard
North “B”   Broadway Street 200 feet East of South          Any time
Street                          Broadway Street
North “B”   Broadway Street Ward Street      North          Any time
Street
North Beaner    SR 22           Sloan Drive      Both           Any time
Boulevard
North “H”   600 feet West
Street          of Chestnut     Chestnut Drive   North          Any time
                Drive
North Kaybee    SR 22           Dead-end         Both           Any time
Drive
                Half block
Second Street   South of Main   Main Street      East           Any time
                Street
Second Street   Main Street     Half block North West           Any time
                                of Main Street
Sloan Drive     SR 22           Industrial Drive Both           Any time
South Beaner    SR 22           Dead-end         Both           Any time
Boulevard
South “D”   First Street    Second Street    South          Any time
Street
South “D”   Third Street    250 feet East of South          Any time
Street                          Third Street
South Kaybee    SR 22           Dead-end         Both           Any time
Drive
Tenth Street    North city      South city       Both           Any time
                limits          limits
Third Street    South “A”   Main Street      East           Any time
                Street
Third Street    South “A”   North “A” StrWest           Any time
                Street
 
(Ord. 10 2022, passed 11-1-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE II. LIMITED PARKING ZONES.
   (A)   The streets described below are designated limited parking zones. When
appropriate signs conforming to the requirements of this title, no person shall
park a vehicle on the side of the street or for any continuous period of time
longer than designated below.
 
Street          From             To               Side of Street Limit
Broadway Street 170 feet North   North “B” StrWest           30 minutes any
                of Vine Street                                   time
Main Street     Grant Street     Half block East  South          Two hours*
                                 of Third Street
Main Street     Grant Street     Third Street     North          Two hours*
Second Street   Half block South Main Street      West           30 minutes any
                of Main Street                                   time
South “D”   First Street     Second Street    North          Two hours any
Street                                                           time
Note to table:
*   Two hour parking: weekdays 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and Saturday 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
 
   (B)   North Second Street from Memorial Way to East North “A” Street, twelve
parking spaces shall be permitted and shall be so marked along the West side of
North Second Street, two of which shall be reserved for handicapped parking.
   (C)   (1)   This division (C) pertains to the city municipal parking lot
which is located directly North of City Hall and is more particularly described
as follows, to-wit: lots numbered 631 through and including 636 in the First
Addition to the city and consisting of six 44-foot lots.
      (2)   Parking shall be allowed in the municipal parking lot described
herein as follows: parking is limited to not more than 24 consecutive hours,
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. on Monday through midnight on Friday of any
week.
      (3)   Vehicles found in violation of this division (C) may be towed at
the owner’s or operator’s expense. Owners or operators of vehicles found in
violation of this division (C) may be fined not more than $100 per violation.
(Ord. 7, 1989, passed 12-19-1989; Ord. 2-2010, passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 10 2022,
passed 11-1-2022)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   ANIMALS
      
93.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
94.   FAIR HOUSING
CHAPTER 90: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
90.01   Requirement to follow rules and regulations
   
90.02   Firearms
   
90.03   Alcoholic beverages
   
90.04   Park hours
   
90.05   Vehicles
   
90.06   Fires
   
90.07   Animals
   
90.08   Pond area
   
90.09   Overnight camping
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 REQUIREMENT TO FOLLOW RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   All persons using the city public park facilities shall do so in accordance
with the rules and regulations in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 36-10-3-1(b)) (Ord. 1965-12, passed 8-17-1965; Ord. 1979-2,
passed 8-7-1979)
§ 90.02 FIREARMS.
   No person shall possess firearms or bows and arrows, except by written
authorization by the Park Board, on park grounds at any time. This restriction
shall not be applicable to duly authorized law enforcement personnel.
(Prior Code, § 36-10-3-1(b)(1)) (Ord. 1965-12, passed 8-17-1965; Ord. 1979-2,
passed 8-7-1979) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   Alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs shall not be sold, purchased,
possessed, or consumed on park grounds at any time. Alcoholic beverages may be
possessed and consumed with the written permission of the Park Board, and
subject to such conditions and restrictions deemed appropriate in the sole
discretion of the Park Board and also subject to all regulations as the Park
Board may from time to time adopt.
(Prior Code, § 36-10-3-1(b)(2)) (Ord. 1965-12, passed 8-17-1965; Ord. 1979-2,
passed 8-7-1979) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 PARK HOURS.
   (A)   Persons may use the city park facilities during the following times,
unless different hours are posted by order of the Park Board:
      (1)   Summer (April 1 through October 31): 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m.; and
      (2)   Winter (November 1 through March 31): 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
   (B)   The Park Board may grant written exceptions to the time limits
provided in this section under any circumstances the Park Board deems proper.
(Prior Code, § 36-10-3-1(b)(3)) (Ord. 1965-12, passed 8-17-1965; Ord. 1979-2,
passed 8-7-1979) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 VEHICLES.
   Persons may use motor vehicles on park property if the vehicles are operated
on paved roadway surfaces and designated parking areas. Motor vehicles shall
not be permitted on park property unless the vehicle is duly registered and
licensed for highway travel. No vehicle shall travel on park premises at a
speed in excess of ten mph. Wheeled vehicles of any type or description shall
not be permitted on the paved tennis court area or any paved basketball or
other paved recreational area.
(Prior Code, § 36-10-3-1(b)(4)) (Ord. 1965-12, passed 8-17-1965; Ord. 1979-2,
passed 8-7-1979) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 FIRES.
   Open fires shall not be permitted on park premises with the exception of
cooking fires, which shall be confined to portable grills, barbeques, cook
stoves, or other suitable cooking equipment. Cooking fires permitted by this
code section shall not be left unattended. All fires permitted by this section
shall be properly and completely extinguished after use.
(Prior Code, § 36-10-3-1(b)(5)) (Ord. 1965-12, passed 8-17-1965; Ord. 1979-2,
passed 8-7-1979) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 ANIMALS.
   Dogs, cats, or other animals or pets shall not be permitted on park premises
unless that animal is at all times restrained by a leash, lead, or chain. These
animals shall not be permitted on park premises unless under the direct control
of a responsible person.
(Prior Code, § 36-10-3-1(b)(6)) (Ord. 1965-12, passed 8-17-1965; Ord. 1979-2,
passed 8-7-1979) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 POND AREA.
   No person shall wade, swim, boat, or ice skate on any water pond area within
any park, unless posted otherwise by the Park Board.
(Prior Code, § 36-10-3-1(b)(7)) (Ord. 1965-12, passed 8-17-1965; Ord. 1979-2,
passed 8-7-1979) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 OVERNIGHT CAMPING.
   No person shall camp overnight without first obtaining a written permit from
the Park Board or unless such camping is allowed by posting by Park Board.
(Prior Code, § 36-10-3-1(b)(8)) (Ord. 1965-12, passed 8-17-1965; Ord. 1979-2,
passed 8-7-1979) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than
$100.
(Prior Code, § 36-10-3-1(b)(9)) (Ord. 1965-12, passed 8-17-1965; Ord. 1979-2,
passed 8-7-1979)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Donation drop boxes prohibited
   
91.02   Weed control
Noise Control
   
91.15   Definitions
   
91.16   General prohibitions
   
91.17   Specific restrictions
   
91.18   Quantitative limits
   
91.19   Exemptions and permits
   
91.20   Disposition of fines
Abandoned and Junk Vehicles
   
91.35   Purpose
   
91.36   Definitions
   
91.37   Enforcement procedure
   
91.38   Written notice to remove
   
91.39   Fees and expenses
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DONATION DROP BOXES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   I.C. 36-1-3 et seq. authorizes a local government to exercise such
powers as necessary and desirable to conduct its affairs granted by statute or
otherwise to effectively discharge its duties and undertake such action not
inconsistent with state law in operating and conducting affairs of local
interests.
   (B)   Receptacles inviting deposits and collection of clothing, shoes,
household goods, and other personal property donated by the public (DONATION
DROP BOXES or DROP BOXES) promote the accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuge,
junk, and other abandoned materials that create a harborage for rats, mice,
insects, and other vermin, all of which constitute a nuisance as defined by
I.C. 32-30-6-6 which give arise to dangers to the health, safety, and welfare
of the citizens of the city.
   (C)   The placement or maintenance of donation drop boxes, as defined in
division (B) above, within the city is prohibited.
   (D)   The code enforcement officer of the city is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce this section.
   (E)   Upon the discovery of the existence of a donation drop box, the code
enforcement officer shall notify the owner of such drop box that such is in
violation of this section and order the removal thereof within ten days.
   (F)   If such drop box is located on private property, the code enforcement
officer shall further notify the owner of such property of violation of this
section and order the removal of the drop box within ten days.
   (G)   All such orders shall include the removal of any trash, debris,
rubbish, clothing, or any other items intended for and located on or around the
drop box.
   (H)   The notice and order issued by the code enforcement officer shall be
served on the owner of the drop box and, if located on private property, the
owner of such property, and shall be posted on the drop box. Such notice and
order shall be sufficient if:
      (1)   Served personally by the code enforcement officer on the owner of
the drop box and, if appropriate, the owner of the property on which it is
located; or
      (2)   Served by first class mail, postage prepaid mail at the address of
such owner as shown on the drop box or the county records.
   (I)   In the event of the failure of the owner of a drop box, or the owner
of private property on which such drop box is located, to comply with the
notification and order of the code enforcement officer to remove the drop box
as hereinabove provided, the code enforcement officer shall issue to such owner
of the drop box and the property owner, if applicable, a notice of ordinance
violation.
   (J)   The notice of ordinance violation issued by the code enforcement
officer shall be filed with the Clerk of the Court of the city or the Clerk of
any other court of the county. The notice of violation shall include:
      (1)   The ordinance number;
      (2)   The name and address of the owner of the drop box, the location of
the drop box, and the owner of the property on which the drop box is located if
on private property;
      (3)   The date of issuance of the notification and order to remove; and
      (4)   The date, time, and place set for the appearance of such person in
the named Court.
(Ord. 10-2016, passed 1-3-2017) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 WEED CONTROL.
   (A)   The city hereby adopts I.C. 36-7-10.1.
   (B)   The city may enforce the provisions of this state law and require
owners of the property to cut and remove weeds.
   (C)   Weeds and noxious vegetation shall become subject to this code section
if permitted to grow to more than eight inches in height.
   (D)   This section shall apply to all property owned or leased by any
person, including the lot area, curb space, and sidewalk area abutting any real
estate.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-10-3) (Ord. 291, passed 10-25-1907; Ord. 628, passed 9-27-
1949; Ord. 1968-13, passed 11-6-1968)
Statutory reference:
   Removal of vegetation, see I.C. 36-7-10.1
NOISE CONTROL
§ 91.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All terminology
used in this subchapter shall be in conformance with applicable publications of
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The loudness of a sound measured through a filtering
device intended to simulate human hearing. The level is designated dB(A) or
dBA. The sound pressure level of a sound measured through an A-weighting filter
network. The level read is designated dB(A) or dBA.
   COMMERCIAL ZONE. Zones B-1 and B-2 as established in the zoning ordinance of
the city.
   DECIBEL (dB). A unit for measuring the sound pressure level of a sound. The
unit used for comparing the sound pressure level of a sound to the sound
pressure level of a reference sound having a sound pressure of 20 micropascals.
   FREQUENCY. An objective way to describe the pitch of sound. The number of
periodic oscillations, vibrations, or waves per unit time (usually one second).
   HERTZ (Hz). A unit for measuring the frequency of a sound (sometimes called
CYCLES PER SECOND). The unit used for measuring the frequency of a sound. The
number of HERTZ is the number of cycles per second of a periodic sound pressure
wave.
   INDUSTRIAL ZONE. Zone I-1 as established in the zoning ordinance of the
city.
   LIGHT MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motorized vehicle with gross vehicular weight less
than 8,000 lbs., including automobiles, vans, motorcycles, motor-driven cycles,
motor scooters, dune buggies, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, go-karts,
minibikes, trail bikes, and light trucks.
   MODIFIED EXHAUST SYSTEM. Any exhaust system in which the original noise
abatement devices have been removed, altered, or replaced to produce more
noise.
   NOISE. Any unwanted sound.
   OCTAVE BAND. A way to divide the entire frequency range of sound into
sections for more accurate measurements. A portion of the entire sound
frequency spectrum contained between two frequencies A and B such that A=2b.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any noise for which the information content is
unambiguously communicated to the listener, including understandable spoken
speech, comprehension, or whether a voice is raised (agitated) or normal or
comprehensible musical rhythms.
   RESIDENTIAL ZONES. Zones R-1, R-2, and R-3 as established in the zoning
ordinance of the city.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument designed to measure sound pressure levels.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. An objective way to describe the loudness of a sound.
Means 20 times the logarithm (base ten) of the ratio of the measured sound
pressure to a reference pressure of 20 micropascals. The SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL
is expressed in decibels (dB).
(Ord. 9, 1993, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 91.16 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall make or cause to be made any noise that unreasonably annoys,
disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or
welfare of any person or precludes his, her, or their enjoyment of property or
affects his, her, or their property’s value. This general prohibition is not
limited by the specific restrictions listed in §
91.17.
(Ord. 9, 1993, passed 5-18-1993) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 SPECIFIC RESTRICTIONS.
   The following acts are declared to be unlawful:
   (A)   Operating or permitting the use or operation of any such device in
such a manner to be plainly audible to any persons on or in an adjoining
property, apartment, office, structure, sidewalk, or vehicle shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this subchapter;
   (B)   Operating or permitting the use or operation of any mechanically
powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, lawnmower,
snowblower, or similar device used outdoors between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. in such a manner that will disturb or annoy any reasonable person
nearby;
   (C)   Operating or permitting the operation of any tool or equipment used in
construction, drilling or demolition between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. in such a manner that will disturb or annoy any reasonable person nearby;
   (D)   Operating a horn or other audible signaling device on any motor
vehicle except in an emergency or when required by law;
   (E)   Participation in any party or gathering giving rise to noise that is
plainly audible across property boundaries or in such a manner to be plainly
audible to any persons on or in an adjoining property, apartment, office, or
structure shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subchapter;
   (F)   Harboring or keeping any animal which, by causing frequent or long,
continued noise, shall disturb or annoy any reasonable person nearby; and/or
   (G)   The creation of any loud and raucous noise on any street adjacent to
any school, rest home, nursing home, church, or court while the same are in
use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the
workings of such institution, or which unduly disturbs the patients in the
hospital; provided, that conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets
indicating that the same is a school, hospital, or court street.
(Ord. 9, 1993, passed 5-18-1993) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.18 QUANTITATIVE LIMITS.
   (A)   Motor vehicles.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause the sound pressure
level of the noise emitted during the operation of a light motor vehicle to
exceed 80 dBA in speed zones of 35 mph or less within the corporate limits of
the city. The sound pressure level measurement shall be made at a distance of
not less than 15 feet from the edge of the lane of travel of the violator.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a light motor
vehicle which causes excessive noise as a result of a defective or modified
exhaust system or as a result of an unnecessary rapid acceleration, de-
acceleration, engine revving, or tire squealing, or as the result of the
operation of audio devices such as radios or tape players on or from such
vehicle.
   (B)   Stationary source.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause the sound pressure
level to exceed the limits listed below at any point on the boundary of the
property where the person is located:
         (a)   If the person is located within a residential zone: 51 dBA
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
         (b)   If the person is located within a commercial zone: 64 dBA at all
times; and
         (c)   If the person is located within an industrial zone: 70 dBA at
all times.
      (2)   If the property boundary lies between two zones, the lower limit
shall apply regardless of the zone in which the person creating the noise is
located.
      (3)   In addition to the above, no person within a residential or a
commercial zone shall make or cause to be made any earth-shaking vibrations
perceptible without the aid of instruments beyond the property boundary of the
vibration source. No person within an industrial zone shall make or cause to be
made any earth-shaking vibrations perceptible without the aid of instruments
beyond the zone boundary of the zone in which the vibration source is located.
   (C)   Octave-band breakdowns. The octave-band breakdowns of the dBA limits
used in this subchapter shall be:
      (1)   Residential zone (51 dBA).
 
Octave-Band Center Frequency (Hz) Maximum Boundary SPL (dB)
31.5                              72
1,000                             45
2,000                             39
4,000                             34
8,000                             32
 
      (2)   Commercial zone (64 dBA).
 
Octave-Band Center Frequency (Hz) Maximum Boundary SPL (dB)
31.5                              79
1,000                             55
2,000                             50
4,000                             46
8,000                             43
 
      (3)   Industrial zone (70 dBA).
 
Octave-Band Center Frequency (Hz) Maximum Boundary SPL (dB)
31.5                              80
1,000                             57
2,000                             52
4,000                             48
8,000                             45
 
(Ord. 9, 1993, passed 5-18-1993) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.19 EXEMPTIONS AND PERMITS.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the emission of
sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or
the emission of sound in the performance of work to prevent or alleviate
physical or property damage threatened or caused by a public calamity or other
emergency. The Police Department of the city shall have the authority to issue
permits for:
      (1)   Holidays, celebrations, concerts, parades, school and athletic
events, special park and recreational activities, or other special events
(public or personal); and
      (2)   Persons who demonstrate that bringing the source of sound or
activity for which the permit is sought into compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, the
community, or other persons and that the adverse impact on the health, safety,
and welfare of persons affected by the permit has been outweighed by such
hardship. Permits may contain any conditions (including a time limit) that are
necessary to limit the adverse impact of the activity.
   (B)   Noncompliance with any condition of the permit shall terminate it and
subject the person holding it to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   The Police Department of the city may issue guidelines defining the
procedures to be followed in applying for a permit and the specific criteria to
be considered in determining whether to issue a permit.
(Ord. 9, 1993, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 91.20 DISPOSITION OF FINES.
   All fines collected upon conviction of any person charged with a violation
of any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be paid into the City
Treasury, as required by law.
(Ord. 9, 1993, passed 5-18-1993)
ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES
§ 91.35 PURPOSE.
   The City Council, recognizing the existence of abandoned and junk vehicles
in the yards of residences within the city, and in open lots and those
encroaching upon the rights-of-way of streets, alleys, and highways within the
city, and the City Council being desirous to obtain and enforce the removal of
such vehicles in order to protect the general welfare of the city and its
citizens, the City Council does hereby and herewith declare such abandoned and
junk vehicles to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 4, 1995, passed 5-2-1995)
§ 91.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED, JUNKED VEHICLE. Any one of the following:
      (1)   A vehicle illegally located on public property;
      (2)   A vehicle left on public property without being moved for three
days;
      (3)   A vehicle located on public property in such a manner as to
constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic on a public right-of-way;
      (4)   A vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control of that property for more than 48 hours;
      (5)   A vehicle from which the engine, transmission, or differential has
been removed or that is otherwise partially dismantled or inoperable and left
on public property;
      (6)   A vehicle that has been removed by towing service or public agency
upon request of an officer enforcing a statute or ordinance other than this
subchapter if the vehicle removed is not claimed or redeemed by the owner or
the owner’s agent within 15 days of the vehicle’s removal; or
      (7)   A vehicle that is at least six model years old, mechanically
inoperable, and is left on private property continuously in a location visible
from public property for more than 30 days.
   MOTOR VEHICLE IN AN INOPERABLE CONDITION. All types of motor-driven vehicles
used or usable for the conveyance of persons or property which is unable to
move under its own power due to defective or missing parts and which has
remained in such condition for a continuous period of not less than ten
consecutive days. Such a motor vehicle shall also include all types of motor-
driven vehicles, although able to move under its own power, that is in such a
condition due to defective or missing parts as to be dangerous or unfit for
further use as a conveyance upon the public highways.
(Ord. 4, 1995, passed 5-2-1995)
§ 91.37 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
   The following city departments or individuals are designated to enforce this
subchapter within the city, to-wit:
   (A)   City nuisance abatement officer; and
   (B)   Any member of the City Police Department.
(Ord. 4, 1995, passed 5-2-1995)
§ 91.38 WRITTEN NOTICE TO REMOVE.
   Written notice giving five days to remove such motor vehicle shall be placed
upon the motor vehicle to be removed. When convenient, copies of said written
notice shall be served upon any adult occupying the real estate upon which such
motor vehicle is located or upon the record owner of such motor vehicle.
(Ord. 4, 1995, passed 5-2-1995) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.39 FEES AND EXPENSES.
   The city may charge any expenses incurred by it in the enforcement of this
subchapter, including all towing and storage charges, to the owner or occupant
of the real estate upon which that vehicle is located or unto the owner of the
motor vehicle.
(Ord. 4, 1995, passed 5-2-1995)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Upon determination of a violation of §
91.01, the Court may:
      (1)   Order removal of the drop box by the code enforcement officer at
the expense of the owner of the drop box and/or the owner of the property upon
which it is located;
      (2)   Order payment of any storage costs of such drop box; and
      (3)   Impose a fine of not less than $25 and no more than $100 per day.
Each day after the expiration of the time allotted for removal shall constitute
a separate violation of §
91.01.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §
91.02 shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and, upon
conviction, shall be fined not more than $300. Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense. This fine shall be in addition to the cost
collection procedures set forth in I.C. 36-7-10.1-4.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-10-3)
   (D)   (1)   Any person found in violation of the motor vehicle noise limits
set forth in §§
91.15 through
91.20 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $200.
      (2)   Any person found in violation of any other provision of §§
91.15 through
91.20 shall be fined not less than $25 for the first offense; not less than $75
for the second offense; and not less than $150 for the third or subsequent
offense.
      (3)   Each day that a violation is in effect shall constitute a separate
offense.
      (4)   During any trial concerning the provisions of §§
91.15 through
91.20, the Court may admit evidence of the sound pressure level as tested by a
sound level meter which meets or exceeds ANSI specifications for Type II
equipment.
   (E)   Any person who fails to comply with any order to remove an abandoned
or junk vehicle issued under §§
91.35 through
91.39 shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and, upon
conviction, the owner of the abandoned or junk vehicle or the occupant of the
real estate upon which that vehicle is located and/or the owner of that real
estate shall be fined not less than $20 nor more than $100, plus the court
costs of the enforcement of §§
91.35 through
91.39. Each day a violation occurs or continues after the expiration date of
the order to remove such vehicle shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 291, passed 10-25-1907; Ord. 628, passed 9-27-1949; Ord. 1968-13, passed
11-6-1968; Ord. 9, 1993, passed 5-18-1993; Ord. 4, 1995, passed 5-2-1995; Ord.
10-2016, passed 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
   
92.01   Adoption of state law
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Duties and responsibilities of animal owners
   
92.04   Vaccination of dogs and cats
   
92.05   Animal cruelty, neglect and abandonment of animals
   
92.06   Animal bites and quarantine
   
92.07   Vicious animals
   
92.08   Restraint of animals; animals at large
   
92.09   Report of vehicular collision with animal
   
92.10   Interfering with animal control officer
   
92.11   Animal waste
   
92.12   Animals in vehicles
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   (A)   All laws of the state which pertain to the regulation and control of
animals, including, but not limited to, their ownership, licensing, harboring,
abandonment, running at large, rabies control and quarantine, pursuit, capture,
confinement, the prevention and control of diseases of domestic animals, and
the active rules and regulations of the State Board of Health and unlawful acts
relating thereto which are not inconsistent with this title are made a part of
this chapter by reference.
   (B)   The sections of this chapter are not to replace state laws but are to
be considered supplementary and in addition to the laws of the state and are to
be fully enforced where not inconsistent with those laws. Any violation of the
state statute which is an infraction by state law under the state statute.
(Ord. 11-2021, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED. To desert any animal or leave any animals without making
provisions for long term care of that animal or to leave in a place without the
expressed permission of the property owner, custodian, or tenant of the
property.
   ACCLIMATED. The point at which an animal has adapted to a new temperature,
climate, or environment. Factors such as body size and shape, hair coat, body
condition, and the animal’s overall health greatly influence the time required
for an animal to ACCLIMATE to these high or low temperatures.
   ANIMAL. Any living non-human creature, domestic or wild, including livestock
and poultry.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person who is authorized to implement and
enforce animal care and control ordinances as defined.
   ANIMAL CRUELTY. An intentional or malicious act(s) whereby unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain, suffering, or death is caused.
   ANIMAL NEGLECT. The same definition as found in I.C. 35-46-3-0.5(6).
   FERAL CAT. Any cat that has no apparent owner or identification and is wild,
untamed, unsocialized, unmanageable, and unable to be approached or handled.
   HARBORER/CAREGIVER. Any person who performs acts of providing care, shelter,
protection, restraint, refuge, food, or nourishment in such a manner as to
control an animal’s activities.
   IMPOUNDMENT. The act of taking physical possession and control of an animal
by an animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law and
transporting it to an animal control facility or humane society.
   OWNER. Any person who owns, harbors, keeps, feeds, maintains, has lawful
possession of, or knowingly causes or permits an animal to be harbored or kept
in his or her care or who permits an animal to remain on or about his or her
premises.
   SHELTER (ADEQUATE). Providing protective cover for a domestic animal
appropriate for its species and offering adequate space to ensure the animal’s
safety and good health. ADEQUATE SHELTER should:
      (1)   Be structurally sound, maintained in good repair, and constructed
with material that protects the animal from injury;
      (2)   Allow the animal easy access in and out;
      (3)   Have a weather-resistant top, bottom, and sides;
      (4)   Have an opening on no more than one side that allows the animal to
remain dry and have a floor that is level, dry, and raised, if necessary, to
prevent water/snow from entering the structure;
      (5)   Be of adequate size to allow the animal to stand erect with the
animal’s head up, turn around easily, and to sit and lie down in a comfortable
and normal position;
      (6)   When the temperature is 80°F or higher, or whenever appropriate for
a particular dog’s breed, age, body, and health condition, offer adequate shade
during daylight hours (provided by trees, a tarp or other means) that prevents
overheating or discomfort to the animal; and
      (7)   When the temperature is 40°F or lower, or whenever appropriate for
a particular dog’s breed, age, body, and health condition, include sufficient,
dry bedding material or other means of protection from the weather that will
allow the animal to retain body heat when the weather is colder than what an
animal of that breed and condition can comfortably tolerate.
   SPACE (ADEQUATE). Any area in which an animal is confined should be suitable
for the animal’s species, size, age, and breed, allowing the animal to turn
about freely, stand, sit, lie, and move comfortably and in a normal position.
Sick and injured animals should be confined as directed by a veterinarian.
   TUFTS ANIMAL CARE AND CONDITION SCALES (TACC). Scales developed for use by
veterinarians, animal control officers, police, and cruelty investigators by
Tufts Center for Animals and Public Policy for the purpose of assessing body
condition, weather and environmental safety, and physical care in dogs.
   UNSANITARY CONDITIONS. Animal housing or quarters, including exercise areas,
that are contaminated by health hazards, irritants, items, or conditions that
endanger or pose a risk to an animal’s health, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Excessive animal waste, garbage, and trash;
      (2)   Standing water or mud;
      (3)   Rancid/contaminated food or water;
      (4)   Fumes, foul or noxious odor, air, hazardous chemicals, or poisons;
      (5)   Decaying material;
      (6)   Uncontrolled parasite or rodent infestation; or
      (7)   Areas that contain nails, screws, broken glass, broken boards,
pits, poisons, sharp implements, or other items that could cause injury,
illness, or death to an animal.
(Ord. 11-2021, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 92.03 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF ANIMAL OWNERS.
   (A)   No person may own any animals within the city, except that dogs, cats,
and other household pets can be owned if they are not kept, bred, or maintained
for commercial purposes and if they are kept in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
   (B)   Any owner of an animal shall see that such animal has access to
adequate food, water, and space as defined in this chapter, and that the
following conditions, if applicable, are met.
      (1)   Dog and cat owners must ensure their pets have access to adequate
shelter as defined in this chapter.
      (2)   Dog and cat owners must ensure their pets are current on all
required vaccinations, including rabies as well as distemper and parvovirus
inoculations.
      (3)   Animals are protected against abuse, cruelty, neglect, torment,
overload, overwork, or any other mistreatment.
      (4)   Animals receive adequate veterinary care as defined in this
chapter, and if diseased or exhibiting symptoms of disease, receives proper
medical care and is segregated from other animals so as to prevent transmittal
of the disease.
      (5)   Animals are maintained in compliance with all applicable federal,
state, and local laws and all regulations respecting animal care.
   (C)   In addition to the general requirements of the duties and
responsibilities of animal owners in this section, every owner or keeper of an
animal kept in the city shall see that:
      (1)   Animals kept outdoors have access to adequate shelter, food, water,
and space, as defined in this chapter, in all weather conditions;
      (2)   In accordance to the Tufts Animal Care and Condition Scales, when
the temperature is:
         (a)   At or below 40°F, animals must have access to adequate shelter,
food, water, and space, including adequate, dry bedding material or other means
of protection from the weather that will allow the animal to retain body heat
when the weather is colder than what an animal of that breed and condition can
comfortably tolerate, or, they must have continued and uninterrupted access to
a climate-controlled facility; and
         (b)   At or above 80°F, animals must have access to adequate shelter,
food, water, and space, including adequate shade during daylight hours
(provided by trees, a tarp or other means) that prevents overheating or
discomfort to the animal, or, they must have continued and uninterrupted access
to a climate-controlled facility.
      (3)   In extreme weather conditions and temperatures, including a heat
advisory, wind chill warning, or tornado warning that has been issued by local,
state, or national authority, animals must be monitored by a competent person
and have access to adequate shelter, food, water, and space, including adequate
bedding and/or shade as described in this section, or, continued and
uninterrupted access to a climate-controlled facility; and
      (4)   Cases will be investigated by law enforcement on an individual
basis using the Tufts Animal Care and Condition Scales to determine the proper
resources and care necessary to ensure each animal’s safety and well-being
based on its breed, age, body, and health condition, and acclimation to the
environment and weather conditions.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall restrict an owner/keeper from allowing
an animal to be outside for reasonable amounts of time during extreme
temperatures to relieve itself and exercise if the animal is being monitored by
a competent person.
   (E)   No owner shall allow his or her animals to become a public nuisance.
Animals who engage in excessive, continuous, or untimely barking, harassing
persons, chasing vehicles, habitually attacking other animals, trespassing upon
school grounds, or trespassing, damaging private property shall be deemed a
public nuisance, and may be impounded.
(Ord. 11-2021, passed 10-12-2021) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 VACCINATION OF DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   See 345 I.A.C. Article 1: State Board of Animal Health.
   (B)   All dogs and cats three months of age and older must be vaccinated
against rabies. The rabies vaccination of a dog or cat shall be maintained by
ongoing revaccination of the animal as follows.
      (1)   Dogs and cats that are vaccinated with a rabies vaccine, the label
of which recommends annual boosters shall be revaccinated within 12 months of
the prior vaccination.
      (2)   Dog and cats that are vaccinated with a rabies vaccine, the label
of which recommends a booster one year later and triennially thereafter shall
be revaccinated within 36 months of each vaccination thereafter.
   (C)   The owner of the animal is responsible for procuring the vaccinations
required by this section.
(Ord. 11-2021, passed 10-12-2021) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 ANIMAL CRUELTY, NEGLECT AND ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   A person who:
      (1)   Willfully or maliciously kills, abuses, maims, tortures, or
disfigures any animal or willfully or maliciously administers poison to any
animal or exposes any poisonous substance with the intent that the poisonous
substance shall be taken and swallowed by such animal;
      (2)   Overloads, overworks, torments, or intentionally deprives an animal
of its necessary food, water, or shelter resulting in preventable suffering or
death;
      (3)   Beats, mutilates, uses for the purposes of bait as defined in this
chapter, or causes said actions to occur; or
      (4)   Engages in any of the following:
         (a)   Owns, possesses, keeps, or trains any animal with the intent
that such animal shall be engaged in an exhibition of fighting;
         (b)   Builds, makes, maintains, or keeps a pit on premises owned or
occupied by the animal owner or allows a pit to be built, made, maintained, or
kept on said premises for the purposes of an exhibition of animal fighting;
         (c)   Encourages, instigates, promotes, or assists in an exhibition of
animal fighting or intentional combat; or
         (d)   Charges admission; is an assistant, umpire, or participant; is
present as a spectator to any exhibition of animal fighting or combat; or
commits animal cruelty under this section.
   (B)   A person who owns or confines any animal and fails to supply it with
adequate shelter, food, water, space, or veterinary care, as defined in this
chapter, with such acts committed without malicious or punitive intent, commits
animal neglect under this section.
   (C)   A person who abandons an animal in a residence or other owned property
or tethers an animal outside for the purposes of abandonment at a residence, or
place of business.
   (D)   Any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law
may impound any animal found to be the victim of animal cruelty, animal
neglect, or animal abandonment.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit hunting or fishing, as
permitted by the law of the state and the rules and regulations of the State
Department of Natural Resources.
(Ord. 11-2021, passed 10-12-2021) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 ANIMAL BITES AND QUARANTINE.
   (A)   Every case of a human bitten by a domestic or wild animal shall be
reported promptly to Marion Animal Care and Control or the local law
enforcement agency. It is the duty of the person bitten or the parent/guardian
to make the report in conformance with 410 I.A.C. 1-2.3-52. Law enforcement K9s
are exempted from this section.
   (B)   Any animal which bites a person, or which has possibly been exposed to
rabies, shall be quarantined for not less than ten days in an animal shelter,
in a kennel, or with a veterinarian.
   (C)   During quarantine, if the animal is confined by Marion Animal Care and
Control, a charge equal to the actual cost of housing the animal, not to exceed
$50 per day, shall be paid to Marion Animal Care and Control Service.
   (D)   During the quarantine period, the owner must provide a current rabies
vaccination certificate for his or her feline or canine that is being
quarantined. If proof of vaccination cannot be supplied, the animal will be
vaccinated by a veterinarian at the owner’s expense upon release.
   (E)   Upon receiving information about any animal which has bitten a person
or which has possibly been exposed to rabies, the law enforcement agency shall
notify Marion Animal Care and Control. If a veterinarian determines that an
animal in quarantine is a possible rabies carrier, the County Health Office
shall be notified. Any necessary action shall be to confirm the diagnosis and
disposal of the animal.
(Ord. 11-2021, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 92.07 VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any animal who has been the subject of a prior judgement in which a
court made a finding that the animal was dangerous, violent, or vicious will be
considered an ANIMAL DEEMED VICIOUS for purposes of this section.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, accompany, or be
responsible for the presence of any dog, cat, or other animal deemed vicious on
the streets or public places of the city or allow the animal to run on the
premises of another at any time, unless, in addition to the other requirements
of this chapter, said dog, cat, or other animal shall be securely muzzled to
effectively prevent it from biting any person or other animal. Upon impounding
an animal deemed vicious for any reason, the animal control officer may, for
reasons of public safety, retain the animal at the impoundment facility until
disposition by the appropriate court.
   (C)   The following additional precautions shall be taken by the owners,
possessors, or custodians of animals deemed vicious.
      (1)   In addition to the requirements in §
92.08, the owner of a dog deemed vicious who maintains said dog out-of-doors
shall fence a portion of the property with a second perimeter or area fence.
Within this perimeter or area fence, said animal must be humanely confined
inside a pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common
fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure
sides and a secure top attached to all sides. The sides must either be buried
two feet into the ground, sunken into a concrete pad, or securely attached to a
wire bottom. The gate to the kennel shall be of the inward-opening type and
shall be kept locked except when tending to the animal’s needs such as cleaning
the kennel or providing food and water.
      (2)   Whenever a dog deemed vicious is outside of its enclosure as
provided for in this division (C), but on the owner’s property, it must be
attended to by the owner and restrained by a secure collar and leash of
sufficient strength to prevent escape. The leash shall be no longer than ten
feet, and the animal must be kept at least five feet within the perimeter
boundaries of the property unless the perimeter boundary is securely fenced.
      (3)   No dog deemed vicious shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied
to any inanimate object such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its own
enclosure as provided for in this division (C).
   (D)   This section shall not apply to law enforcement dogs.
(Ord. 11-2021, passed 10-12-2021) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS; ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor of any animal to allow
such animal to run at large, whether wearing a collar and tag or not, within
the city. Any and all such animals found running at large, whether wearing a
collar and tag or not, may be immediately impounded by officers of the animal
control unit or any police officer. The officers may pursue the animal onto
private property to effect capture of such animal.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of any animal to
exercise reasonable care and take all necessary steps and precautions to
protect other people, property, and animals from injuries or damage which might
result from the animal’s behavior. If the owner or custodian of any animal is a
minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be jointly responsible for
the minor’s violation of this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of any animal to
ensure that the animal is kept under restraint and that reasonable care and
precautions are taken to prevent the animal from leaving the real property
limits of its owner, possessor, or custodian, and ensure that it is:
      (1)   Securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence,
pen, or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise
escape on its own volition; and that such enclosure is securely locked at any
time the animal is left unattended;
      (2)   Securely and humanely restrained by chain, cable, or trolley, or
other tether of sufficient strength to prevent escape; or
      (3)   On a leash and under the direct control of a competent person while
on public property or property open to the public; or off a leash and obedient
to that person’s command and that person is present with the animal any time it
is not restrained in areas designated as a dog park.
   (D)   The chaining of dogs is discouraged, but if it is done, the following
is required.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any animal to be tethered between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; or to tether or confine an animal at a
vacant structure or premises for any purpose or time when it is not monitored
by a competent person who is present at the property for the duration of such
tethering or confinement.
      (2)   The animal must have shelter from the weather, yet free from
becoming entangled with the tether.
      (3)   The tether must be at least 12 feet in length with operational
swivels on both ends. If the dog is attached to a trolley system, the running
line must be at least 12 feet in length and the tether length must be greater
than the height of the running line.
      (4)   The animal shall not be tethered by use of a choke collar nor by
any rope, chain, or cord directly attached to the animal’s neck. The tether
must be not of a weight heavy enough to cause physical damage to the animal’s
neck or body.
      (5)   The tether must be attached in a manner so that it cannot wrap
around vertical items such as a barrel, pole, or tree. It must be able to move
freely in all directions.
(Ord. 11-2021, passed 10-12-2021) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 REPORT OF VEHICULAR COLLISION WITH ANIMAL.
   Any person operating a motor vehicle who causes injury or death to an animal
shall stop at once, assess the extent of injury, and immediately notify the
owner or the Police Department, together with a description of the animal
struck, the location of the striking, and an estimate as to the condition of
the animal after being struck if possible.
(Ord. 11-2021, passed 10-12-2021) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.10 INTERFERING WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer or other
officer empowered to act by law, to take or attempt to take any animal from the
vehicle used to transport the animal or in any way try to prevent the officer
from discharging their lawful duties as empowered.
(Ord. 11-2021, passed 10-12-2021) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.11 ANIMAL WASTE.
   The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any feces
deposited by his or her animal on public property, public walks, public parks,
or recreation areas or private property of others.
(Ord. 11-2021, passed 10-12-2021) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.12 ANIMALS IN VEHICLES.
   No animal shall be left unattended in a vehicle when the conditions in that
vehicle would constitute a health hazard to the animal (extreme heat or cold).
No animal shall be transported on public property in any non-passenger
compartment of a vehicle unless confined in a kennel that is secured to the
vehicle in a manner intended to prevent the kennel and animal from being thrown
from the vehicle in an accident or rapid stop or other use of the vehicle which
could cause injury to the pet. No animal shall be transported in the trunk of
any vehicle.
(Ord. 11-2021, passed 10-12-2021) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person violating §
92.03 may be fined up to $500 per occurrence.
   (B)   A person violating §
92.04 may be fined up to $500 per occurrence.
   (C)   A person violating §
92.05 may be fined up to $2,500 per occurrence. Notwithstanding any judgement
under §
92.05, animal cruelty, animal neglect, or animal abandonment cases may also be
prosecuted according to I.C. 35-46-3-12.
   (D)   A person violating §
92.07 may be fined up to $500 per occurrence.
   (E)   A person violating §
92.08 may be fined up to $500 per occurrence.
   (F)   A person violating §
92.09 may be fined up to $500 per occurrence.
   (G)   A person violating §
92.10 may be fined up to $2,500 per occurrence.
   (H)   A person violating §
92.11 may be fined up to $500 per occurrence.
   (I)   A person violating §
92.12 may be fined up to $500 per occurrence.
(Ord. 11-2021, passed 10-12-2021)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Smoke Detectors
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Basic requirements
   
93.03   Installation; location
   
93.04   Maintenance
   
93.05   Duty of property owner, manager, or rental agent
   
93.06   Enforcement
Open Burning
   
93.20   Short title
   
93.21   Purpose
   
93.22   Definitions
   
93.23   Control
   
93.24   Findings and complaints
   
93.25   Administrative offices
Fireworks
   
93.40   Consumer fireworks
   
93.41   Fireworks in the city park
 
   
93.99   Penalty
SMOKE DETECTORS
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SIGNAL. An audible signal indicating the detection of invisible
particles or products of combustion other than heat.
   AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION. The City Fire Department which has
enforcement responsibility for this subchapter.
   FAMILY LIVING UNIT. The structure, area, room, or combination of rooms in
which a family or individual lives. This is meant to cover living area only and
not common usage areas in multi-family buildings such as corridors, lobbies,
basements, and the like.
   LABELED. Equipment or materials to which has been attached a label, symbol,
or other identifying mark of an organization acceptable to the authority having
jurisdiction.
   LISTED. Equipment or materials included in a list published by an
organization acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction and which product
meets appropriate standards or has been tested and found suitable for use in a
specified manner.
   NFPA #74. Standard #74 of the National Fire Protection Association, which is
located in Battery March Park, Quincy, Massachusetts, 02269.
   RENTAL AGENT. Any person, partnership, or corporation who rents, subleases,
lets, or otherwise not owned by the occupant. This term shall not be construed
to mean a real estate agent who is employed for the sole purpose of selling
residential units.
   SLEEPING AREAS. The area or areas of the family living unit in which the
bedrooms or sleeping rooms separated by other use areas, such as kitchens or
living rooms, but not bathrooms, shall be considered SLEEPING AREAS.
   SHALL. Indicated a mandatory requirement.
   SMOKE DETECTOR. A device which detects visible or invisible particles or
products of combustion, other than heat, as approved by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc. or Factory Mutual. The SMOKE DETECTOR shall be equipped with
a test button, and it shall produce an alarm signal upon detection of any
visible or invisible particles or products of combustion. It may be either
battery-powered with a minimum nine volts or it may be powered by a 110-volt
alternating current.
(Ord. 7, 1990, passed 12-4-1990)
§ 93.02 BASIC REQUIREMENTS.
   All family living units within the corporate limits of the city shall be
equipped with a minimum of one functional, properly located, labeled, and
listed smoke detector, or its equivalent or better, as described in the NFPA
#74.
(Ord. 7, 1990, passed 12-4-1990) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 INSTALLATION; LOCATION.
   (A)   A minimum of one smoke detector, or its equivalent or better, as
described in NFPA #74, shall be installed in each family living unit within the
corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   All smoke detectors shall be installed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions and subject to the approval of the authority having jurisdiction.
   (C)   The smoke detector shall be installed to protect the sleeping areas
and shall be located outside of the bedrooms, but in the immediate vicinity of
the sleeping areas, within 15 feet of all rooms used for sleeping areas.
   (D)   The smoke detector shall be installed on or near the ceiling, not less
than six inches from any wall, or on a wall, not less than six inches or more
than 12 inches from the ceiling, and its installation shall be subject to
approval by the authority having jurisdiction. No smoke detector shall be
recessed into the ceiling or wall.
   (E)   All smoke detectors shall be accessible for servicing and testing.
   (F)   If a smoke detector is A.C.-powered, it shall be directly attached to
a junction box not controlled by any switch other than the main power supply.
The installation of A.C.-powered smoke detectors shall conform to all
electrical standards adopted by the city. A smoke detector required under this
subchapter shall be installed according to the directions and specifications of
the manufacturer, but if in conflict with any electrical standard, the city
electrical standard shall take precedence.
(Ord. 7, 1990, passed 12-4-1990) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or
remove any smoke detector, except when it is necessary for maintenance or
inspection purposes. Any smoke detector removed for repair or replacement shall
be re-installed or replaced so that it is operable and in place during normal
sleeping hours.
   (B)   Rented residential dwelling units. Each smoke detector may be tested
in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations, but will be tested at six-
month intervals in every individual residential dwelling unit, and maintained
as necessary, to ensure it is in operable condition. At any change of tenancy,
smoke detectors shall be tested and be in operable condition before the unit is
re-occupied.
   (C)   Owner-occupied dwelling units. Each smoke detector may be tested in
accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations, but shall be tested at six-
month intervals, and maintained as necessary to ensure it is in operable
condition.
(Ord. 7, 1990, passed 12-4-1990) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER, MANAGER, OR RENTAL AGENT.
   (A)   Every owner, and the manager or rental agent of such owner, of any
such residential dwelling units shall be held responsible for the installation
of all smoke detectors. It shall be the responsibility of the tenant to
maintain in good working order all such smoke detectors provided by the owner
or agent until said tenant vacates the premises, unless said smoke detector
requires A.C.-powered supply, then the responsibility for maintaining such
smoke detector shall be upon the owner or agent for the property. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner or agent to replace a defective smoke detector
for inhabited rental dwelling units.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of all private residential
dwelling units to maintain all such smoke detectors to be in good working
order, whether A.C.-powered or D.C.-powered smoke detectors, for the duration
of occupancy of all such private dwelling units.
(Ord. 7, 1990, passed 12-4-1990) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Fire Department shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the
terms of this subchapter, subject to standards and procedures separately
promulgated by the city for enforcement of ordinances.
(Ord. 7, 1990, passed 12-4-1990)
OPEN BURNING
§ 93.20 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as “Ordinance for the Control and Prohibition
of Open Fires.”
(Ord. 1-1987, passed 6-16-1987)
§ 93.21 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is designed to control the burning of certain combustible
and non-combustible material in the open air or in containers, furnaces, or
similar appurtenances, causing the emission of smoke, offensive odors, fumes,
gases, soot, or other pollutants which interfere with the enjoyment by the
people of the city, of life, and property.
(Ord. 1-1987, passed 6-16-1987)
§ 93.22 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR POLLUTANTS. Any substances such as cinders, fly ash, smoke fumes, gas
mist, and offensive odors.
   AIR POLLUTION. The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of substances in
quantities, having characteristic and being of duration which are, with
reasonable certainty, injurious to human life and property, or which
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life and property for reason of
emission of odors, vapors, liquids, or gases.
   COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS. Any waste or substances which is easily inflammable;
tree leaves, papers, cartons, paper boxes, dry limbs, dry grass cuttings.
   NUISANCE. Environmental conditions, intermittent, or continuous, produced or
correctable by a person, prejudicial to the reasonable enjoyment of health,
comfort, or safety by an individual or causing injury or damage to persons and
property.
   NON-COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS. Any waste material or substance not easily
inflammable, such as clothing, bedding, garbage, fresh grass cuttings, fresh
tree leaves, mattresses, tires, and other rubber products, automobile hulks,
furniture, rugs, rags, cans, waste foodstuffs, dead animals, animal excrement,
sawdust, any material which is subject to slow combustion usually emitting
smoke, offensive odors, fumes, gases, or similar pollutants.
   OPEN BURNING. Any fire from which the products of combustion are emitted
directly into the outdoor atmosphere, the burning on the ground or in metal
containers or appurtenances other than accepted devices.
   PERSON. Any individual, renter, owner, lessee, partnership, voluntary
association, responsible for the use of the property.
   SMOKE. Any small gasborne particles resulting from incomplete combustion and
present in sufficient quantity to be visually observable.
   SOURCE. Any property, real or personal, or person contributing to air
pollution.
   VIOLATOR. A person contributing to air pollution in violation of standards
established in this subchapter.
(Ord. 1-1987, passed 6-16-1987)
§ 93.23 CONTROL.
   No person within the corporate limits of the city shall cause, allow, or
permit within his or her property, whether such property is owned, rented,
leased, or under his or her care, except as herein specified.
   (A)   Combustible materials may be burned in an adequate container or
appurtenance, shall be permanently located in the rear yard of the property,
within a safe and reasonable distance but no closer than five feet from any
building structure or vehicle. Under no circumstances shall any open burning be
performed in front of a building on sidewalks and streets.
   (B)   The open burning of non-combustible material is prohibited.
   (C)   Open burning may be permitted when carrying out training and
instructions of fire fighters in extinguishing methods and techniques, when
cooking food in the open and the emission of smoke does not constitute a
nuisance, in case of campfires and bonfires or similar activities, in the
demolition of condemned buildings, provided such open fire is authorized by the
Chief of the Fire Department of the city or his or her qualified
representative, when devices are used for heating purposes by construction
workers.
   (D)   Burning of combustible materials shall be conducted between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. No fire shall be permitted to burn, smolder, or
smoke after 6:00 p.m. and shall be totally extinguished at 7:00 p.m.
(Ord. 1-1987, passed 6-16-1987) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.24 FINDINGS AND COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   When a complaint alleging the existence of a violation of this
subchapter is received by an police officer, such complaint shall be promptly
investigated. Such officer shall communicate with the person against whom the
complaint is filed and seek voluntary compliance. If voluntary compliance
cannot be obtained, such officer shall, without delay, notify the violator in
writing and, should the violation persist, he or she shall sign or cause to be
signed the necessary writs.
   (B)   A police officer, finding a violation during the course of
inspections, shall proceed in the same manner as if a violation had been
reported to him or her by another party or parties.
(Ord. 1-1987, passed 6-16-1987)
§ 93.25 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES.
   The Fire Chief, and police officers, shall be and are hereby designated as
officers in full charge of the enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1-1987, passed 6-16-1987)
FIREWORKS
§ 93.40 CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Except as herein provided, the use or discharge of consumer fireworks
within the city shall be prohibited, and it shall be a violation of this
section to use, ignite, or discharge any type of consumer fireworks, as defined
by I.C. 22-11-14, within the corporate limits of the city; provided however,
the prohibition shall not apply:
      (1)   Between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and two hours after sunset on June
29, June 30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 7, July 8, and July 9;
      (2)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. on July 4; and
      (3)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00 a.m. on
January 1.
   (B)   Provided further, the use or discharge of consumer fireworks on the
times and on the dates herein specified may take place only:
      (1)   At a specified discharge location as designated by the City Fire
Chief;
      (2)   Upon property of the person using or discharging the consumer
fireworks; or
      (3)   On the property of one who gives permission to use and discharge
consumer fireworks.
(Ord. 2-2012, passed 5-15-2012) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.41 FIREWORKS IN THE CITY PARK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell fireworks of any type or
nature, whether deemed legal or illegal, in the city park on July 3 or July 4
of any year.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to ignite, use, or discharge any fireworks of any
type or nature, whether deemed legal or illegal, in the city park on July 3 or
July 4 of any year.
(Ord. 7, 1994, passed - -1994) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of §§
93.01 through
93.06, or who shall fail to comply with an order as affirmed or modified by the
authority having jurisdiction shall be subject to a fine of $50.
      (2)   Each day such violation is permitted to continue shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense.
      (3)   The violation and penalty as herein described in this division (B)
shall not be subject to any other fine or penalty within this chapter.
   (C)   A person violating the provisions of §§
93.20 through
93.25 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $300, to which may be added imprisonment of five
days. Each day’s violation shall be regarded as committed each day of which
such person shall continue or permit any violation to exist after notification
thereof by any or all enforcement officers.
   (D)   A violation of §
93.40 constitutes an infraction which may be punishable by a fine of not less
than $10 or more than $50 for the first occurrence and not less than $100 or
more than $500 for a second occurrence within five years of the first
occurrence of violation.
   (E)   Any person that violates §
93.41 shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and, upon
conviction, shall be fined not more than $25 for each violation. This fine is
in addition to any cost of collection procedures set forth by Indiana Code. All
fireworks found in the possession or control of anyone in violation of §
93.41 will be confiscated and disposed of as thereafter directed by the Court.
(Ord. 1-1987, passed 6-16-1987; Ord. 7, 1990, passed 12-4-1990; Ord. 7, 1994,
passed - -1994; Ord. 2-2012, passed 5-15-2012)
CHAPTER 94: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
94.01   Policy statement
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Unlawful practice
   
94.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
94.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions
   
94.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage service
   
94.07   Interference, coercion, or intimidation
   
94.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
   
94.09   Equal access to housing in HUD programs
   
94.10   Exemptions
   
94.11   Administrative enforcement
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   It shall be the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 through
3619, as amended, the Federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974,
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5301 et seq., as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 6-2014, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who:
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-2)
   COMMISSION. The State Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C. 22-9-
1-4 et seq.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)
   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint under
I.C. 22-9.5-6.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
94.04 through
94.08 or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that
is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a
residence by one or more families.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-8)
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual, with the status of such family being
further defined by FAMILIAL STATUS.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-9)
   FAMILIAL STATUS. One or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18
years being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody of
such individual or the written permission of such parent or other person. The
protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of FAMILIAL STATUS
shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing
legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
   HANDICAP.
      (1)   With respect to a person:
         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of such person’s major life activities;
         (b)   A record of having such an impairment;
         (c)   Being regarded as having such impairment;
         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; or
         (e)   Any other impairment defined in 910 I.A.C. 2-3.
      (2)   The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use of or
addictions to a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802 or 910
I.A.C. 2-3-2(14); nor does the term HANDICAP include an individual solely
because that individual is a transvestite.
(910 I.A.C. 2-3-2(14)
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under 11 U.S.C., receivers, and fiduciaries.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for
a consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the occupant.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)
(Ord. 6-2014, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, §
94.09, and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale
or rental of housing set forth in I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in §
94.04 shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) below and I.C. 22-
9.5-3;
   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) below, nothing in §
94.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses
at any one time; provided, that in the sale of such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or
exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24-month period. The
private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on his or her behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses
at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single family house shall be
exempted from application of this section only if such house is sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesperson, or any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of
any such broker, agent, or salesperson, or person; and
         (b)   Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
94.04(A)(3), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstracters, title companies, and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title.
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent,
other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in providing sales
or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions involving the sale
or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
      (3)   They are the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Ord. 6-2014, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   (A)   As made applicable by §
93.03 and except as exempted by §
93.03(B) and §
94.10, it shall be unlawful:
      (1)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or
to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable
or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin;
      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services of
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin;
      (3)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or
published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status,
or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or
discrimination;
      (4)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available;
      (5)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induct any person to sell or
rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry
into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin;
      (6)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap
of:
         (a)   The buyer or renter;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (7)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of:
         (a)   The person;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
   (B)   For purposes of this division (B), DISCRIMINATION includes:
      (1)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by
such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification
on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
      (2)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
      (3)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months after
September 13, 1998, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a
manner that:
         (a)   The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
         (b)   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
         (c)   All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
            1.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
            2.   Light, switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other
environmental controls in accessible locations; and
            3.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
   (C)   Compliance with the appropriate requirement Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. § 12101 and of the American National
Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility an usability for
physically handicapped people (commonly cited as ANSI A117.1”) suffices to
satisfy the requirements of division (B)(3)(c)3. above.
   (D)   Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made available to
an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or
safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
(Ord. 6-2014, passed 6-3-2014) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED
TRANSACTION means any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status.
(Ord. 6-2014, passed 6-3-2014) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICE.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her
in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on
account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national
origin.
(Ord. 6-2014, passed 6-3-2014) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
94.03 through
94.06.
(Ord. 6-2014, passed 6-3-2014) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates, or interferes with, or attempts to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status, or national origin and because he or she is or has been
selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; and/or
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in division (A)
above; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
(Ord. 6-2014, passed 6-3-2014) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.09 EQUAL ACCESS TO HOUSING IN HUD PROGRAMS.
   Pursuant to 24 C.F.R. §§ 5.403 and 574.3, the definition of FAMILY is
revised to include families regardless of the actual or perceived sexual
orientation, gender identity, or marital status of its members.
(Ord. 6-2014, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.10 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq. shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those activities or
organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or
national origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not
in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or
purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to
its members or from giving preference to its members.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply with
respect to housing for older persons. As used in this section, HOUSING FOR
OLDER PERSONS means housing:
      (1)   Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of
the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the State Civil
Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program);
      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or
older; or
      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years
of age or older per unit.
(Ord. 6-2014, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.11 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering this
chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioner as set forth
in division (B) below shall be vested in the Mayor of the city.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the city, because
of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully administer
enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this chapter, herein
elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the provisions of this
chapter by complainants to the State Civil Rights Commission for administrative
enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6, and the Mayor of the city shall
refer all said complaints to the Commission as provided for under division (A)
above to said Commission for purposes of investigation, resolution, and
appropriate relief as provided for under I.C. 22-9.5-6.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the city shall administer
their departments, programs, and activities related to housing and urban
development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter
and shall cooperate with the Mayor and the Commission to further such purposes.
   (D)   The Mayor of the city, or the Mayor’s designee, shall provide
information on remedies available to any aggrieved person or complainant
requesting such information.
(Ord. 6-2014, passed 6-3-2014)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in §
94.08(A), or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any
denial of the opportunity to participate shall be fined according to local,
state, and federal law; and if bodily injury results, shall be fined not more
than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and if death
results, shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for life.
(Ord. 6-2014, passed 6-3-2014)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
      
111.   ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, AND OTHER DRUGS
      
112.   MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
CHAPTER 110: PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
Section
   
110.01   Definition
   
110.02   Purpose, intent, and authority
   
110.03   Permit; requirement and fee
   
110.04   Permit; accompanying merchant
   
110.05   Permit; display of identification
   
110.06   Permit; required to carry
   
110.07   Solicitation restrictions
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 DEFINITION.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT means transient merchant as defined by I.C. 25-37-1-2 et
seq.
(Ord. 1-2011, passed 3-1-2011)
§ 110.02 PURPOSE, INTENT, AND AUTHORITY.
   The city hereby taxes, licenses, and regulates transient merchants and
charges a fee for the transaction of business by transient merchants within the
city limits and provides for the punishment of persons violating this chapter.
(Ord. 1-2011, passed 3-1-2011)
§ 110.03 PERMIT; REQUIREMENT AND FEE.
   (A)   Each transient merchant shall obtain a permit from the City Clerk
Treasurer before engaging in business by paying a licensing fee in the amount
of $25 per week. A week shall consist of seven consecutive calendar days
commencing on the day of issuance of the license.
   (B)   This fee shall defray the costs of the city in administering its
regulatory power and be paid in full prior to the issuance of the license. Such
fee shall be deposited into the city’s General Fund.
(Ord. 1-2011, passed 3-1-2011) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 PERMIT; ACCOMPANYING MERCHANT.
   No person shall accompany a transient merchant during the transaction of
business unless that person has obtained a permit under this chapter.
(Ord. 1-2011, passed 3-1-2011) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 PERMIT; DISPLAY OF IDENTIFICATION.
   All transient merchants and solicitors shall display on their person
identification which clearly states their name and the organization, if any,
with which they are affiliated in the transaction of business.
(Ord. 1-2011, passed 3-1-2011) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 PERMIT; REQUIRED TO CARRY.
   All transient merchants shall carry with them the permit issued by the City
Clerk Treasurer.
(Ord. 1-2011, passed 3-1-2011) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 SOLICITATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No transient merchant shall enter upon property in the city on which a
sign or notice stating “No Solicitors” or words to that effect is posted and
plainly visible.
   (B)   Transient merchants are prohibited from soliciting on Sundays and
holidays. HOLIDAYS are defined as New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King Jr. Day,
President’s Day, Valentines Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day,
Columbus Day, Halloween, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve Day, and
Christmas Day. The hours of soliciting shall be limited to 10:00 a.m. through
5:00 p.m., local time.
(Ord. 1-2011, passed 3-1-2011) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not to exceed
$100. Each day a transient merchant shall engage in the transaction of business
without a license or in violation of §§
110.04 through
110.07 shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1-2011, passed 3-1-2011)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, AND OTHER DRUGS
Section
Alcohol
   
111.01   Liquor retailer’s permits
   
111.02   Nude and semi-nude acts prohibited in commercial enterprises
Tobacco and Nicotine Products
   
111.15   Prohibitions
   
111.16   Exceptions
   
111.17   Definitions
Designated Outdoor Refreshment Areas
   
111.30   Downtown DORA Area
   
111.31   PAC DORA Area
 
   
111.99   Penalty
ALCOHOL
§ 111.01 LIQUOR RETAILER’S PERMITS.
   The Council hereby authorizes the issuance of liquor retailer’s permits for
premises in the city pursuant to I.C. 7.1-3-9-4 and 905 I.A.C. 1-1-1 et seq.,
as amended.
(Prior Code, § 7.1-3-9-4) (Ord. 30, passed 11-30-1892; Ord. 32, passed 1-13-
1893; Ord. 6, 1909, passed - -; Ord. 1911-4, passed 3-28-1911; Ord. 66-9,
passed 8-16-1966)
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance authorizing the issuance of liquor retailer’s permits within
certain municipalities, see
    I.C. 7.1-3-9-4
§ 111.02 NUDE AND SEMI-NUDE ACTS PROHIBITED IN COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISES.
   (A)   The following acts shall be prohibited and it shall be a violation of
this section for any person maintaining, owning, or operating a commercial
establishment located within the corporate limits of the city, at which
alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises:
      (1)   To suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of
said commercial establishment, to expose to the public view that area of the
human female breast at or below the top of the areola thereof;
      (2)   To suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of
said commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is
intended to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of the female
breast as described in division (A)(1) above;
      (3)   To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of said
commercial establishment, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic
area, buttocks, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage; and/or
      (4)   To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of said
commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to
give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or
anal cleft or cleavage.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any female person, while on the premises of a
commercial establishment located within the corporate limits of the city, at
which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the
premises, to expose to public view that area of the human female breast at or
below the top of the areola thereof or to employ any device or covering which
is intended to give the appearance of or simulate such areas of the female
breast as described herein.
   (C)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person, while on
the premises of a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the
city, at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the
premises, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks,
anus, or anal cleft or cleavage, or to employ any device or covering which is
intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage.
(Ord. 6, 1994, passed 7-19-1994) Penalty, see §
111.99
TOBACCO AND NICOTINE PRODUCTS
§ 111.15 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Smoking, as defined in I.C. 7.1-5-12-3, and the use of electronic
cigarettes (e-cigarettes, e-cigs, and electronic water pipes), vaporizers, and
vapor products are prohibited in the following locations:
      (1)   An enclosed area of a structure in which the public is invited or
permitted (public place), including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums;
         (b)   Banks, laundromats, professional offices, and retail
establishments;
         (c)   Bingo facilities;
         (d)   Child care and adult day care facilities;
         (e)   Convention facilities;
         (f)   Public and private education facilities;
         (g)   Elevators;
         (h)   Gaming facilities;
         (i)   Healthcare facilities;
         (j)   Hotels and motels;
         (k)   Common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer
parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit
residential facilities;
         (l)   Polling places;
         (m)   Public transportation vehicles and related facilities;
         (n)   Restaurants;
         (o)   Shopping malls;
         (p)   Shopping malls;
         (q)   Motion picture and live performance theatres;
         (r)   Bars, except as provided in §
111.16(A);
         (s)   All restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other
common-use areas of such structures and facilities; and
         (t)   Schools.
      (2)   A place of employment;
      (3)   Outdoor dining areas within the public-right-of way; outdoor
seating areas of restaurants, bars, and businesses, except benches and those
seating areas restricted to individuals over the age of 18; and areas that are
within eight feet of where smoking is prohibited; and
      (4)   The area within eight feet of a public entrance to:
         (a)   A public place; or
         (b)   A place of employment.
   (B)   Prohibits the possession of tobacco, electronic cigarettes (e-
cigarettes, e-cigs, and electronic water pipes), vaporizers, and vapor products
on his or her person by anyone under the age of 21.
(Ord. 01-2023, passed 2-7-2023) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.16 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Smoking, as defined in I.C. 7.1-5-12-3, and the use of electronic
cigarettes (e-cigarettes, e-cigs, and electronic water pipes), vaporizers, and
vapor products may be allowed in the following locations:
      (1)   Clubs, fraternal clubs, and labor organizations;
      (2)   A premises owned or leased as a private residence, unless such is
used as a licensed child care, adult day care, or health facility;
      (3)   Tobacco specialty bars, tobacco retail stores, and vape shops;
      (4)   A bar or tavern owned or leased by a business that prohibits entry
by patrons who are less than 21 years of age; and
      (5)   A bar or tavern in which the business owner or operator holds a
beer, liquor, or wine retailer’s permit.
   (B)   None of the areas set forth as an exception shall be exempt from the
provisions of this subchapter if smoke from an area enters, either directly or
indirectly, through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means, an
area where smoking is otherwise prohibited by this subchapter.
   (C)   The owner, operator, manager, or official in charge of an
establishment or premises in which smoking or vaping is allowed shall post
conspicuous signs in the establishment that read “warning: smoking or vaping is
allowed in this establishment,” or other similar language.
(Ord. 01-2023, passed 2-7-2023) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.17 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BARS and TAVERNS. An establishment that meets the following conditions:
      (1)   Holds one or more of the following licenses:
         (a)   A beer retailer’s permit under I.C. 7.1-3-4;
         (b)   A liquor retailer’s permit under I.C. 7.1-3-9; or
         (c)   A wine retailer’s permit under I.C. 7.1-3-14.
      (2)   Does not employ an individual who is less than 18 years of age; and
      (3)   Does not allow individuals less than 21 years of age to enter.
   CLUBS. An association or corporation that:
      (1)   Organized under the authority of law;
      (2)   Been in active, continuous existence for at least three years;
      (3)   Maintained a membership roll for a three-year period;
      (4)   Shall have a paid-up membership of more than 50 members;
      (5)   Shall be the owner, lessee, or occupant of an establishment
operated solely for objects of a national, social, patriotic, political, or
athletic nature, or the like;
      (6)   Shall not be operated for financial gain;
      (7)   The property and advantages belong to its members; and
      (8)   It shall maintain an establishment provided with special space and
accommodations where, in consideration of payment, food, with or without
lodging, is habitually served.
   E-CIGS or E-CIGARETTES. Other terms used to refer to ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES.
   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE. A device that is capable of providing an inhalable
dose of nicotine or any other substance intended for human consumption by
delivering a vaporized solution that can be used by a person to simulate
smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the device. The term
includes the components and cartridges.
   ELECTRONIC WATER PIPE. A device that is capable of providing an inhalable
dose of nicotine or any other substance through water intended for human
consumption by delivering a vaporized solution that can be used by a person to
simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the device.
   E-LIQUID. A substance that:
      (1)   May or may not contain nicotine; and
      (2)   Is intended to be vaporized and inhaled using a vapor product.
   FRATERNAL CLUBS; LABOR ORGANIZATIONS.
      (1)   An association or corporation whose membership is comprised of or
forms:
         (a)   A lodge or local chapter or corresponding unit of a fraternal
order of another association of a like nature, or a body whose membership is
comprised of persons who have served in the armed forces of the United States;
and/or
         (b)   Has been in continual existence on a national scale for more
than five years.
      (2)   FRATERNAL CLUBS and LABOR ORGANIZATIONS need not meet the
requirements of the definition of CLUBS, but are considered CLUBS for all other
purposes.
   VAPING. The process of inhalation or exhalation of the electronic cigarette,
e-cigs, electronic water pipe, and vaporizers.
   VAPORIZER. A device like an electronic cigarette that is used to inhale the
e-liquid.
   VAPOR PRODUCT. A powered vaporizer that converts e-liquid to a vapor
intended for inhalation through an electronic cigarette or an electric water
pipe.
(Ord. 01-2023, passed 2-7-2023)
DESIGNATED OUTDOOR REFRESHMENT AREAS
§ 111.30 DOWNTOWN DORA AREA.
   (A)   All definitions in I.C. 7.1-3-31 et seq. shall apply to this section.
   (B)   The Council hereby adopts the map of the city Downtown DORA Area
attached to Ord. 10-2024 as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference.
   (C)   The following area is designated as the city Downtown DORA Area:
      (1)   Beginning at the intersection of the north right-of-way line of
Main Street (SR 22/US 35) and the west right-of-way line of North Third Street;
thence north to the south right-of-way line of North A Street; thence west to
the west right-of-way line of Harrisburg Avenue; thence south to the north
right-of-way line of Main Street (SR 22/US 35); thence west to the east right-
of-way line of the railroad; thence south to the south right-of-way line of
Main Street (SR 22/US 35); thence east to the west right-of-way line of
Harrisburg Avenue; thence south to the north right-of-way line of South A
Street; thence east to the west right-of-way line of North Third Street; thence
north to the place of beginning; also, the properties located at 105 North
Harrisburg Avenue and 306 West Main Street.
      (2)   Except all residential properties are excluded.
   (D)   The city Downtown DORA boundary streets are as follows:
      (1)   To the north, North A Street.
      (2)   To the east, Third Street.
      (3)   To the south, South A Street.
      (4)   To the west, railroad.
   (E)   The Council finds that the city Downtown DORA is consistent with the
city's zoning code.
   (F)   The Council hereby approves and adopts the minimum signage designating
the city Downtown DORA Area attached to Ord. 10-2024 as Exhibit "B" and
incorporated herein by reference and directs the city to place the signage at
the designated locations on Exhibit "A" of Ord. 10-2024.
   (G)   The Council recognizes that additional signage designating the city
Downtown DORA Area may be warranted and necessary, and Exhibit "A" and Exhibit
"B" of Ord. 10-2024 are only minimum standards and therefore, the city's Board
of Public Works and Safety is hereby authorized and granted full authority to
increase the number or change the type of signage subject to the standards set
forth in the effective zoning ordinance.
   (H)   The city Downtown DORA shall be in effect during all authorized times
pursuant to I.C. 7.1-3-1-14 as amended from time to time by the Indiana General
Assembly.
   (I)   (1)   The following retailer permittees have submitted a completed
application to the city to participate in the area as a designated permittee
and the city finds that each of them is an appropriate designated permittee and
requests the Indiana Alcohol Commission to issue each a "refreshment area
designation:"
         (a)   River Rat Properties, LLC, 512 East Main Street, Gas City,
Indiana 46933.
         (b)   BKLKB, LLC, 135 East Main Street, Gas City, Indiana 46933.
      (2)   Any additional licensed premises located within the Downtown DORA
who desires to be designated as a "designated permittee" and granted a
"refreshment area designation" shall submit an application to the city for
approval and recommendation by the Council by resolution.
   (J)   The locations of the "designated permittees" identified in division
(I) have been identified on Exhibit "A" of Ord. 10-2024.
   (K)   The city Board of Public Works and Safety has adopted the city special
event permit application which is incorporated by reference as Exhibit "C" of
Ord. 10-2024. A special event permit application, including the Exhibit 1
"State Form Designated Outdoor Refreshment Area Designation Form" shall be
submitted to the city Planning and Zoning Department for approval by the Board
of Public Works and Safety prior to:
      (1)   A "designated permittee" expanding their operations into the area
outside of the designated outdoor patio area;
      (2)   An "approved vendor" either by this section or by future
resolution, requesting a temporary permit to serve in the area;
      (3)   Any organization holding a special event in the area with a vendor
requesting a temporary permit to serve.
   (L)   A vendor's location may be at any designated area within the Downtown
DORA Area as shown on Exhibit "A" of Ord. 10-2024, subject to approval of the
special event permit and state form by the city Board of Public Works and
Safety, and issuance of the appropriate permit by the Indiana Alcohol and
Tobacco Commission.
   (M)   Business participation.
      (1)   Nothing in this section prohibits a business, landlord, or other
establishment from prohibiting open containers of alcoholic beverages to enter
their premises or from prohibiting alcoholic beverages purchased from another
establishment to enter their premises. Any such establishment shall post a
conspicuous notice of such prohibition at the entrances to such establishment.
      (2)   The city maintains full authority and control over the sidewalks
and common area and no one may prohibit or limit open containers in accordance
with I.C. 7.1-3-31 within the DORA area in those spaces, except for the city
Police Department or another law enforcement agency in the exercise of its law
enforcement duties.
   (N)   Upon receipt of "refreshment area designation" from the Indiana
Alcohol Commission, the designated permittee as defined by Indiana Code shall
remove all stanchions, fencing, or other means of separation previously
required by law from all common areas, sidewalks, and rights-of-way of the city
as provided by I.C. 7.1-3-31-15. Failure to remove said enclosures within 72
hours notice shall result in a fine in accordance with this code.
   (O)   In accordance with I.C. 7.1-3-31 et seq:
      (1)   A person may consume an alcoholic beverage purchase from a
designated permittee or vendor anywhere within the refreshment area boundaries,
subject to the right of any retailer permittee or business within the
refreshment area to refuse to allow individuals to enter the licensed premises
or business with an alcoholic beverage.
      (2)   All designated permittees and vendors may allow a person to exit
the designated permittee's or vendor's licensed premises with not more than two
open containers of an alcoholic beverage at a time. The contents of an open
container may not exceed the following:
         (a)   Beer or flavored malt beverage of not more than 16 ounces.
         (b)   Wine, cider, or hard seltzer of not more than 12 ounces.
         (c)   A mixed drink of not more than ten ounces containing not more
than two ounces of liquor.
   (P)   A sign, as required by I.C. 7.1-3-31-16, and attached to Ord. 10-2024
as Exhibit "D" must be posted at each exit of a designated permittee and on the
licensed premises of a vendor.
   (Q)   Glass containers may only be allowed in a designated permittee's
outdoor dining area and may not be removed into the Downtown DORA Area.
   (R)   Designated permittees and approved vendors may use only non-breakable
plastic bottles, plastic cups, or paper cups, affixed with a logo or label that
identifies the container for use only in the DORA Area.
(Ord. 10-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 111.31 PAC DORA AREA.
   (A)   All definitions in I.C. 7.1-3-31 et seq. shall apply to this section.
   (B)   The Council hereby adopts the map of the city PAC DORA Area attached
as Exhibit "A" of Ord. 5-2025 and incorporated herein by reference.
   (C)   The following area is designated as the city PAC DORA Area:
      (1)   Beginning at the intersection of the south right-of-way line of
Main Street (SR 22/US 35) and the east right-of-way line of South Tenth Street;
thence east to the south right-of-way line of Olynger Road; thence west to the
east right-of-way line of South Tenth Street; thence north to the south right-
of-way line of Main Street (SR 22/US 35).
      (2)   Except all residential properties are excluded.
   (D)   The city PAC DORA boundary streets are as follows:
      (1)   To the north and east, US 35/SR 22.
      (2)   To the south, Olynger Road.
      (3)   To the west, Tenth Street.
   (E)   The Council finds that the city PAC DORA is consistent with the city's
zoning code.
   (F)   The Council hereby approves and adopts the minimum signage designating
the city PAC DORA Area attached to Ord. 5-2025 as Exhibit "B" and incorporated
herein by reference and directs the city to place the signage at the designated
locations on Exhibit "A" of Ord. 5-2025.
   (G)   The Council recognizes that additional signage designating the city
PAC DORA Area may be warranted and necessary, and Exhibit "A" and Exhibit "B"
of Ord. 5-2025 are only minimum standards and therefore, the city's Board of
Public Works and Safety is hereby authorized and granted full authority to
increase the number or change the type of signage subject to the standards set
forth in the effective zoning ordinance.
   (H)   The city PAC DORA shall be in effect during all authorized times
pursuant to I.C. 7.1-3-1- 14 as amended from time to time by the Indiana
General Assembly.
   (I)   (1)   The following retailer permittees have submitted a completed
application to the city to participate in the area as a designated permittee
and the city finds that each of them is an appropriate designated permittee and
requests the Indiana Alcohol Commission to issue each a "refreshment area
designation:"
         (a)   City Performing Arts Center, 100 Auditorium Blvd, Gas City,
Indiana 46933.
         (b)   Mississinewa Cigar Company, 103 8 E Main Street, Gas City,
Indiana 46933.
      (2)   Any additional licensed premises located within the PAC DORA who
desires to be designated as a "designated permittee" and granted a "refreshment
area designation" shall submit an application to the city for approval and
recommendation by the Council by resolution.
   (J)   The locations of the "designated permittees" identified in division
(I) have been identified on Exhibit "A" of Ord. 5-2025.
   (K)   The city Board of Public Works and Safety has adopted the city special
event permit application which is incorporated by reference as Exhibit "C" of
Ord. 5-2025. A special event permit application, including the Exhibit 1 "State
Form Designated Outdoor Refreshment Area Designation Form" shall be submitted
to the city Planning and Zoning Department for approval by the Board of Public
Works and Safety prior to:
      (1)   A "designated permittee" expanding their operations into the area
outside of the designated outdoor patio area;
      (2)   An "approved vendor" either by this section or by future
resolution, requesting a temporary permit to serve in the area;
      (3)   Any organization holding a special event in the area with a vendor
requesting a temporary permit to serve.
   (L)   A vendor's location may be at any designated area within the PAC DORA
Area as shown on Exhibit "A" of Ord. 5-2025, subject to approval of the special
event permit and state form by the city Board of Public Works and Safety, and
issuance of the appropriate permit by the Indiana Alcohol and Tobacco
Commission.
   (M)   Business participation.
      (1)   Nothing in this section prohibits a business, landlord, or other
establishment from prohibiting open containers of alcoholic beverages to enter
their premises or from prohibiting alcoholic beverages purchased from another
establishment to enter their premises. Any such establishment shall post a
conspicuous notice of such prohibition at the entrances to such establishment.
      (2)   The city maintains full authority and control over the sidewalks
and common area and no one may prohibit or limit open containers in accordance
with I.C. 7.1-3-31 within the DORA Area in those spaces, except for the city
Police Department or another law enforcement agency in the exercise of its law
enforcement duties.
   (N)   Upon receipt of "refreshment area designation" from the Indiana
Alcohol Commission, the designated permittee as defined by Indiana Code shall
remove all stanchions, fencing, or other means of separation previously
required by law from all common areas, sidewalks, and rights-of-way of the city
as provided by I.C. 7.1-3-31-15. Failure to remove said enclosures within 72
hours notice shall result in a fine in accordance with this code.
   (O)   In accordance with I.C. 7.1-3-31 et seq:
      (1)   A person may consume an alcoholic beverage purchase from a
designated permittee or vendor anywhere within the refreshment area boundaries,
subject to the right of any retailer permittee or business within the
refreshment area to refuse to allow individuals to enter the licenses premises
or business with an alcoholic beverage.
      (2)   All designated permittees and vendors may allow a person to exit
the designated permittee's or vendor's licensed premises with not more than two
open containers of an alcoholic beverage at a time. The contents of an open
container may not exceed the following:
         (a)   Beer or flavored malt beverage of not more than 16 ounces.
         (b)   Wine, cider, or hard seltzer of not more than 12 ounces.
         (c)   A mixed drink of not more than ten ounces containing not more
than two ounces of liquor.
   (P)   A sign, as required by I.C. 7.1-3-31-16, and attached to Ord. 5-2025
as Exhibit "D" must be posted at each exit of a designated permittee and on the
licensed premises of a vendor.
   (Q)   Glass containers may only be allowed in a designated permittee's
outdoor dining area and may not be removed into the PAC DORA Area.
   (R)   Designated permittees and approved vendors may use only non-breakable
plastic bottles, plastic cups, or paper cups, affixed with a logo or label that
identifies the container for use only in the DORA Area.
(Ord. 5-2025, passed 3-18-2025)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A violation of §
111.02 may be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $2,500 per
occurrence.
   (C)   Any person violating §§
111.15 through
111.17 shall be subject to a fine not exceeding the following:
      (1)   One hundred dollars for the first violation of §§
111.15 through
111.17; and
      (2)   Five hundred dollars for the second or subsequent violation of §§
111.15 through
111.17.
(Ord. 6, 1994, passed 7-19-1994; Ord. 01-2023, passed 2-7-2023)
CHAPTER 112: MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Mobile food vending business permitted
   
112.03   License application and general standards
   
112.04   Mobile food vending vehicle operations
   
112.05   Food safety; health inspections and certificates
   
112.06   License denial, suspension, revocation and appeals
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases in this section shall have the meanings
given, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. A person applying to the city to operate as a mobile food vendor.
   CUSTOMER. Any person with whom a mobile food vendor conducts business, or
any person who stops to contemplate conducting business with a mobile food
vendor.
   FOOD VENDING VEHICLE. Any motorized vehicle used to sell food or beverages
by a mobile food vendor.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. Any person who dispenses food or beverages from a food
vending vehicle, concession trailer, tent, or free-standing tables for
immediate service and/or consumption.
   PERSON. Any individual, group of individuals, firm, partnership, company,
corporation, trustee, association, or any public or private entity and includes
the individual or entity's employees or agents.
   PREPACKAGED FOOD. Any commercially labeled and processed food that is
prepackaged to prevent direct human contact with the food product upon
distribution from the manufacturer, a food facility, or other approved source.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. All property that is not public property.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any property owned and operated by the city. PUBLIC
PROPERTY includes all rights-of-way except public sidewalks and rights-of-way
in city-owned parks.
   SELL. To transfer or exchange for value, to expose or offer for sale or
exchange, or to procure, store, keep or have in one’s possession or control for
the purpose of selling.
(Ord. 11-2024, passed 7-2-2024)
§ 112.02 MOBILE FOOD VENDING BUSINESS PERMITTED.
   (A)   No person may operate as a mobile food vendor in the city without
obtaining a mobile food vending license under this chapter and any other
licenses or permits that may be required by other applicable state or county
law.
   (B)   A separate mobile food vending license shall be required for each food
vending vehicle operated by a mobile food vendor.
   (C)   A violation of this chapter may result in the suspension or revocation
of a mobile food vending license and civil penalties.
(Ord. 11-2024, passed 7-2-2024)
§ 112.03 LICENSE APPLICATION AND GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Application requirements. An applicant shall submit a written
application, under oath, to the city on a form provided by the Planning and
Zoning Department for a mobile food vending license. The application shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   The applicant’s name, address, telephone number, and email address;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of any associated entities
or organizations that the applicant is representing and copies of documents
verifying that relationship;
      (3)   The applicant's primary residence and/or business addresses for the
past five years;
      (4)   The nature of the food or beverages that the applicant will sell
for the purpose of the Planning and Zoning Department establishing the
applicant's food type classification; and
      (5)   Whether the applicant was denied a license to operate as a mobile
food vendor or whether the applicant had a mobile food vending license
suspended or revoked and, if so, the reasons for the denial, suspension or
revocation.
   (B)   Requirements for each food vending vehicle. In addition to the written
application, an applicant shall provide the following information for each food
vending vehicle:
      (1)   A list of all vehicle license numbers, vehicle descriptions,
vehicle identification numbers, and vehicle registration for the food vending
vehicle(s);
      (2)   Proof of vehicle insurance for the food vending vehicle(s).
   (C)   Requirements for food vending vehicle drivers. Any person who drives a
food vending vehicle shall hold a current license (classification/level
required by the state for food vending vehicle driver's license).
   (D)   Requests for information. The applicant shall complete the application
and submit additional information requested by the Planning and Zoning
Department as allowed by this section. The applicant may submit one application
for all vehicles which require a license but shall pay a separate licensing fee
for each license. Failure to submit a complete application may result in denial
of a license.
   (E)   Health inspection. Within 30 days of receiving a complete application,
the Grant County Health Department or its designee shall conduct a health
inspection of the applicant’s food vending vehicle prior to issuing a mobile
food vending license. The purpose of the inspection is to ensure the
applicant's food vending vehicle is safe for preparing, handling and selling
food and the applicant follows Indiana Food Code Title 16 Article 42.
   (F)   Issuance of license. The Planning and Zoning Department shall issue a
mobile food vending license to the applicant upon receipt of a complete
application and the applicant's food vending vehicle(s) passing an initial
inspection. Licenses shall be valid for one year from the date of receiving
license.
   (G)   Substitution of licensed food vending vehicles. Licenses are not
transferable, nor shall a license authorize the activities licensed by any
person other than the licensee, except that the sale of a food vending vehicle
identified in a license application, when replaced by another food vending
vehicle on a one-for-one basis, will not invalidate the original license nor
require a new license application. When replacing a food vending vehicle with
another vehicle, the licensee shall provide the Planning and Zoning Department
the information required by division (B). The health inspection of a
replacement vehicle shall take place as soon as practicable but no more than 14
calendar days from the Planning and Zoning Department receipt of the
information in division (B) of this section.
   (H)   Transfer of assets. If a mobile food vendor transfers its mobile food
vending business assets, the recipient of the assets shall, before operating,
apply for and obtain a new mobile food vending license from the Planning and
Zoning Department.
   (I)   Fees. The Planning and Zoning Department is authorized to establish a
reasonable schedule and classifications of fees not to exceed $75 for an annual
mobile food vending license. An applicant shall pay license fee established by
the Planning and Zoning Department unless otherwise exempted.
   (J)   Renewal. Licenses shall be renewed annually. The Planning and Zoning
Department shall send notice to the licensee. The licensee shall submit the
renewal annually, prior to the license's expiration date. A licensee may
continue operations while an application for renewal is pending with the
Planning and Zoning Department.
   (K)   Unlawful conduct. It is unlawful for any person to intentionally
provide false information or to intentionally omit information on an
application for a license under this chapter.
   (L)   Application guide. The Planning and Zoning Department shall prepare a
guide for applicants. The guide shall include instructions for applying for,
obtaining, maintaining, and renewing a mobile food vending license and shall
describe the standards used to inspect food vending vehicles. The guide shall
be made available to applicants at the Planning and Zoning Office and on the
city website.
(Ord. 11-2024, passed 7-2-2024)
§ 112.04 MOBILE FOOD VENDING VEHICLE OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with state and local law. Mobile food vendor shall follow
any applicable state and local laws, including without limitation all fire
codes, zoning codes, occupational tax codes, and any other applicable state or
local code provisions.
   (B)   Location of operations. A mobile food vendor may operate in the
following locations:
      (1)   Public property. A mobile food vendor may operate on public
property, so long as the food vending vehicle is not parked within 30 feet of
an intersection. A mobile food vendor may operate from legal parking spaces,
including metered spaces upon payment of appropriate fees, on the public right-
of-way. When operating on public property, a mobile food vendor is subject to
the same parking rules, restrictions, and obligations that a commercial vehicle
would be subject to if not used by a mobile food vendor.
      (2)   Private property. A mobile food vendor may operate on private
property under the following circumstances:
         (a)   The property is in an industrial or business zoning district,
and the vendor has permission of the property owner and/or his or her designee.
         (b)   The property is in a residential zoning district, and the mobile
food vendor has been invited by a resident in that district to operate on their
property for the purpose of serving food to that resident or their guests.
      (3)   No interference with pedestrians or vehicles. A mobile food vendor
shall not interfere with or obstruct the passage of pedestrians or vehicles
along any street, sidewalk or parkway.
      (4)   If a food vending vehicle is parked within the city or state right-
of-way (e.g., parking spaces) the vendor must follow all traffic and parking
laws.
   (C)   Operational standards. When operating, a mobile food vendor shall:
      (1)   Maintain a food vending vehicle in good operating order and visual
appearance, including
removing any graffiti that is not a part of the overall design or art featured
on the vehicle;
      (2)   Park so that its service window faces the sidewalk;
      (3)   Serve customers through its service window;
      (4)   Provide a waste receptacle for customers which is clearly marked
and request its use by customers;
      (5)   Pick up, remove and dispose of all refuse within 25 feet of the
vendor's operating area at the conclusion of service;
      (6)   Submit to and pass any required health inspections;
      (7)   Display its mobile food vendor license and health certificate in a
conspicuous location in its operating window for public view;
      (8)   Mobile food vendors may participate in special events (private and
public) only with the permission of the event organizer. Most special events
are designed as a fundraiser for the organizer and require a fee paid by
vendors interested in participating;
      (9)   Mobile food vendors shall not be located within ten feet of any
fire hydrant;
      (10)   Mobile food vendors shall not park in any area which would block
the view of traffic, traffic signals, or traffic signs, or park in any area
which would obstruct the free and safe passage of vehicles or pedestrians; and
      (11)   Mobile food vendors shall not park for more than 24 hours in one
location unless in conjunction with a single event or public celebration with
the approval of the organizers of the event or celebration.
   (D)   Rulemaking authority.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Department may promulgate administrative
rules regulating mobile food vendors and mobile food vending vehicles to
implement this chapter. Any rule adopted by the Planning and Zoning Department
must be narrowly tailored to address a demonstrable health or safety risk.
      (2)   Rules adopted pursuant to this section may not:
         (a)   Mobile food vendors shall not park closer than 200 feet to any
restaurant operating at a permanent fixed location unless the mobile food
vendor obtains written consent from such restaurant waiving distance
requirements;
         (b)   Impose operating hours that differ from the operating hours
imposed on restaurants;
         (c)   Require a mobile food vendor to enter into any agreement with a
commercial establishment or restaurant approved by the Grant County Health
Department;
         (d)   Require a mobile food vendor that only serves prepackaged food
to have a hand washing sink in the vendor's food vending vehicle;
         (e)   Require a mobile food vendor to obtain licenses or permits for
the vendor’s employees;
         (f)   Require a food vending vehicle to receive a fire inspection if
the vendor can demonstrate that the vehicle has passed a state or local fire
inspection within the previous year;
         (g)   Require a mobile food vendor to associate with a commissary if
the vendor carries all the equipment necessary to comply with health and safety
standards and Indiana Food Code Title 16, Article 42;
         (h)   Limit the number of mobile food vendor licenses issued;
         (i)   Require the mobile food vendor to obtain any additional permits
from the city, unless the mobile food vendor seeks to operate in a local,
public park;
         (j)   Require a mobile food vendor to maintain insurance that names
the city as an additional insured unless the vendor is attending an event
sponsored by the city; and
         (k)   Require a mobile food vendor to submit to inspections beyond the
number and scope of the health inspections conducted by the Grant County Health
Department unless there is an investigation of a reported foodborne illness.
(Ord. 11-2024, passed 7-2-2024)
§ 112.05 FOOD SAFETY; HEALTH INSPECTIONS AND CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Food hygiene standards. Mobile food vendors shall follow the Indiana
Food Code Title 16 Article 42.
   (B)   Food safety certification. If required, at least one person working in
a food vending vehicle must hold a current food safety certification.
   (C)   Mobile food vendor classifications. Upon receipt of a complete license
application, the Grant County Health Department shall classify a mobile food
vendor into one of the following three classifications for the purpose of
conducting inspections:
      (1)   Mobile food Type I vendor. A vendor who dispenses prepackaged foods
and/or non-time/temperature control for safety (non-TCS) beverages or poses a
low risk of harm to the public shall be classified as a mobile food Type I
vendor.
      (2)   Mobile food Type II vendor. A vendor who dispenses food that
requires limited handling and preparation shall be classified as a mobile food
Type II vendor.
      (3)   Mobile food Type III vendor. A vendor who prepares, cooks, holds
and serves food from the food vending vehicle shall be classified as a mobile
food Type III vendor.
   (D)   Health inspections. For the purpose of protecting public health and
safety, the Grant County Health Department shall ensure that mobile food
vendors are inspected on an ongoing, randomized basis pursuant to the frequency
set forth in division (H) based on their classification and inspection grade.
   (E)   Recordkeeping. The city shall establish and maintain a database to
record the names of licensees, inspections, inspection reports and public
complaints. The database shall also allow mobile food vendors to provide
periodic itineraries to the Grant County Health Department.
   (F)   Health certificate. Upon completion of an inspection, the Grant County
Health Department shall issue a health certificate to the mobile food vendor
displaying the vendor’s letter grade or achievement of excellence and record
the grade in the database.
   (G)   Frequency or inspections. Health inspections shall occur on a
randomized basis, pursuant to the following frequency, based on the mobile food
vendor’s classification.
      (1)   Mobile food Type I vendors. A mobile food Type I vendor shall be
inspected only upon the city being notified of a public health or safety
complaint regarding the vendor. If the inspection reveals a violation of law,
the vendor shall become subject to inspections at the frequency set for a
mobile food Type II vendor until the vendor obtains a certificate of
excellence.
      (2)   Mobile food Type II vendors. A mobile food Type II vendor shall be
inspected once per calendar year. If a mobile food Type II vendor receives a
certificate of excellence, it shall become subject to inspections at the
frequency set for mobile food Type I vendors. If a mobile food Type II vendor
holding a certificate of excellence receives a score lower than an “A” on a
subsequent inspection, the vendor shall lose its certificate of excellence and
return to being inspected once per year.
      (3)   Mobile food Type III vendors. A mobile food Type III vendor shall
be inspected twice per calendar year. If a mobile food Type III vendor receives
a certificate of excellence, it shall be inspected at the frequency set for
mobile food Type II vendors. If a mobile food Type III vendor holding a
certificate of excellence receives a score lower than an “A” on a subsequent
inspection, the vendor shall lose its certificate of excellence and return to
being inspected twice per calendar year.
   (H)   Changing classifications. The Grant County Health Department shall
specify the categories of foods or beverages that mobile vendors in each
classification may serve. If a mobile food vendor seeks to serve food or
beverages that may require the vendor to be reclassified, the mobile food
vendor shall notify the Grant County Health Department of the nature of the
food or beverages to be sold and the Grant County Health Department shall
reclassify the mobile food vendor.
   (I)   Notice of location for inspections, administrative warrant. The mobile
food vendor may provide the locations where the vendor operates on social
media. A mobile food vendor who does not provide the locations where the vendor
operates on social media shall submit periodic itineraries to Grant County
Health Department using the database created under division (E). The mobile
food vendor may request the Grant County Health Department obtain an
administrative warrant prior to conducting an inspection.
(Ord. 11-2024, passed 7-2-2024)
§ 112.06 LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND APPEALS.
   (A)   The Director of the Planning and Zoning Department may deny, suspend
or revoke a license issued under this chapter. A license may be denied,
suspended or revoked only for the following reasons:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement contained in the
application for a license.
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement made in connection
with the selling of food.
      (3)   Any facts or conditions that would justify the denial of the
original application.
      (4)   Three or more violations of this chapter over a period of 12
months.
      (5)   The receipt of an “F” grade during an inspection or an
investigation in response to a complaint.
   (B)   Any person who has been notified regarding the denial of their mobile
food vending application or the possible suspension or revocation of their
mobile food vending license may appeal to the Planning and Zoning Department
within 14 calendar days of receipt of said notice. Other than as described in
division (C) of this section, no license shall be suspended or revoked prior to
a hearing if a mobile food vendor requests a hearing within the 14-day period
required. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the City Court shall hold a
hearing within 14 calendar days and issue findings of fact, conclusions of law
and a decision.
   (C)   When circumstances demonstrate that continued operation by a mobile
food vendor poses an imminent threat to the public's health and safety, the
Planning and Zoning Department may immediately suspend or revoke a mobile food
vending license. The mobile food vendor may request a hearing before the City
Court regarding the suspension or revocation within 14 calendar days of
receiving notice of the suspension or revocation. Any hearing regarding the
summary suspension or revocation of a license shall be given priority over all
potential license denial, suspension or revocation proceedings and shall be
held within seven calendar days from the date the Planning and Zoning
Department receives a mobile food vendor's request for a hearing. The Planning
and Zoning Department shall issue findings of fact, conclusions of law and a
decision.
   (D)   It is unlawful for a mobile food vendor whose license has been
suspended or revoked to operate. If the Planning and Zoning Department suspends
or revokes a license, the mobile food vendor shall immediately cease all food
vending operations.
   (E)   A mobile food vendor aggrieved by an order issued by the Planning and
Zoning Department may appeal the order to state district court.
(Ord. 11-2024, passed 7-2-2024)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to locate, operate, or maintain a mobile food
vending vehicle, in violation of any regulation in or provisions of this
chapter, or any regulation enacted hereunder by the Common Council. The city
may institute a suit for mandatory injunction directing the removal of the
mobile food vending vehicle in violation of this chapter. Any mobile food
vending vehicle that violates this chapter shall be deemed a common nuisance
and the owner of the food vending vehicle shall be liable for maintaining a
common nuisance. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty:
      (1)   A fine not to exceed $150 for the first violation;
      (2)   A fine not to exceed $250 for a second violation within one year of
any prior violation; or
      (3)   A fine not to exceed $500 for three or more violations within one
year of the first.
   (B)   Any police officer, code enforcement officer, or building inspector
may, upon discovering a mobile food vending vehicle, stopped or standing in
violation of this chapter, cause that food vending vehicle to be removed by the
private towing contractors engaged by the city. Any such mobile food vendor
shall be removed to the designated impoundment sites and shall not be released
to any person until the city has received payment for all costs and expenses in
towing and storing that mobile food vendor.
(Ord. 11-2024, passed 7-2-2024)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
Curfew
   
130.01   Curfew for minors
   
130.02   Law enforcement
   
130.03   Defenses
   
130.04   Violation
Firearms
   
130.15   Prohibition; general
   
130.16   Prohibition; minors
   
130.17   Prohibition; property under control
   
130.18   Exemptions
   
130.99   Penalty
CURFEW
§ 130.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   Except as provided in §
130.03:
   (A)   It is a violation of this subchapter for a child under 15 years of age
to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street, or
highway, or alley or other public place within the city after 11:00 p.m. and
before 5:00 a.m. on any day (prohibited conduct);
   (B)   It is a violation of this subchapter for a child 15 years of age and
under 18 years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building,
place, street, highway, or other public place within the city:
      (1)   Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday;
or
      (2)   After 11:00 p.m. Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday
and before 5:00 a.m. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday
(prohibited conduct).
   (C)   It is a violation of this subchapter for a parent, guardian, or
custodian to knowingly permit a person in his or her custody to violate
divisions (A) or (B) above (except where one or more of the exceptions
(defenses) listed in §
130.03 applies).
(Ord. 5-2008, passed 8-5-2008) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 LAW ENFORCEMENT.
   A law enforcement officer may not detain a child or take a child into
custody based on a violation of this subchapter unless the law enforcement
officer, after making a reasonable determination and upon consideration of the
facts and surrounding circumstances, reasonably believes that:
   (A)   The juvenile has violated §
130.01(A) or (B); and
   (B)   There is no legal defense to the violation as provided in §
130.03.
(Ord. 5-2008, passed 8-5-2008)
§ 130.03 DEFENSES.
   It is a defense to a violation of this subchapter if, at the time the
juvenile has engaged in the prohibited conduct:
   (A)   The child is emancipated:
      (1)   Under I.C. 31-36-19-27 or I.C. 31-6-4-15.7 (before its repeal);
      (2)   By virtue of having married; or
      (3)   In accordance with the laws of another state or jurisdiction.
   (B)   The child is engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the child’s parent, guardian, or custodian;
      (2)   Accompanied by an adult specified by the child’s parent, guardian,
or custodian;
      (3)   Participating, going to, or returning from:
         (a)   Lawful employment;
         (b)   School sanctioned activity;
         (c)   A religious event;
         (d)   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from eminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
         (e)   An activity involving exercise of a child’s rights protected
under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article One, §
31 of the state’s Constitution, or both, such as freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; or
         (f)   An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that
provides education, training, or other care under the supervision of one or
more adults.
      (4)   Participating in an activity or undertaking with the prior written
direction of the child’s parent, guardian, or custodian; or
      (5)   Engaged in interstate or international travel from a location
outside the state to another location outside the state.
(Ord. 5-2008, passed 8-5-2008)
§ 130.04 VIOLATION.
   A person who commits a violation of this subchapter is subject to
enforcement provisions provided in I.C. 36-1-6 and I.C. 34-28-5. A complaint
against a person alleging a violation of this subchapter shall be filed in the
City Court; and in the case of a complaint against a juvenile, a copy of the
complaint shall be directed to the juvenile’s parents, guardian, or custodian,
provided such parent, guardian, or custodian is known or can be identified by
reasonable inquiry.
(Ord. 5-2008, passed 8-5-2008)
FIREARMS
§ 130.15 PROHIBITION; GENERAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to point, aim, fire, discharge, or to
suffer, permit, or allow to be pointed, aimed, fired, or discharged, any
pistol, rifle, shotgun, BB gun, pellet gun, airgun, gas gun, dart gun, spring
loaded gun, electric gun, bow and arrow, crossbow, blowgun, slingshot, or any
device designed to propel a projectile by explosives within the corporate
limits of the city in a reckless, negligent, dangerous, or such manner that a
projectile if or when fired could, does, or has caused a substantial risk of
damage or injury to another person or the property of another.
(Ord. 1-2022, passed 4-5-2022) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.16 PROHIBITION; MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other adult person having
the care and custody of a minor under the age of 18 years old to knowingly
permit such minor to violate §
130.15.
(Ord. 1-2022, passed 4-5-2022) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.17 PROHIBITION; PROPERTY UNDER CONTROL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit violations of §§
130.15 or
130.16 to occur on real property owned or otherwise legally controlled by said
person, or to permit violations of §§
130.15 or
130.16 to be committed from any vehicle owned or driven by said person.
(Ord. 1-2022, passed 4-5-2022) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.18 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Persons acting for any governmental unit in pursuance of duties and in
compliance with law;
   (B)   Any person in defense of his or her life or the life of another person
or the protection of his or her property or property entrusted to him or her by
another person and in compliance with law;
   (C)   Any person attacked by a vicious animal; or
   (D)   Any sanctioned or sponsored training or shooting activity held in a
proper location and approved by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 1-2022, passed 4-5-2022)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A violation of §§
130.01 through
130.04 shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $50 for
a first offense; not less than $50 nor more than $75 for a second offense; and
not less than $75 nor more than $100 for a third and subsequent offense; and
the Court may, in addition to such fine, order such injunctive relief as
appropriate and as within the Court’s jurisdiction to discourage further
violation of §§
130.01 through
130.04.
      (2)   A parent, guardian, or custodian of such juvenile found in
violation of §§
130.01 through
130.04 who is found to have knowingly permitted the juvenile to be in violation
hereof shall be subject to a fine of not more than $25 for the first offense.
If any such child over whom a parent, guardian, or custodian of such juvenile
is held to be in violation of §§
130.01 through
130.04 within a 12-month period, then such parent, guardian, or custodian shall
be fined not more than $50; and if a juvenile is found to be in violation of §§
130.01 through
130.04, a third or subsequent time during a 12-month period, then the parent,
guardian, or custodian shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $200 for
the third or each such subsequent violation.
      (3)   In addition to the penalties listed in divisions (B)(1) and (2)
above, court costs in an amount as now exists or may hereafter be determined by
ordinance or statute.
   (C)   Any person convicted of violating any section of §§
130.15 through
130.18 shall be fined a minimum of $100 but not more than $500.
(Ord. 5-2008, passed 8-5-2008; Ord. 1-2022, passed 4-5-2022)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
151.   ZONING
      
152.   BUILDINGS
      
153.   PUBLIC WAYS
      
154.   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
      
155.   STORM-WATER MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 150: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Title
   
150.002   Policy
   
150.003   Purpose
   
150.004   Authority and jurisdiction
   
150.005   Enactment
   
150.006   Interpretation and conflict
   
150.007   Saving provision
   
150.008   Amendments
   
150.009   Conditions
   
150.010   Resubdivision of land
   
150.011   Vacation of plats
   
150.012   Variances
   
150.013   General regulations
   
150.014   Definitions
Application and Approval Procedures
   
150.025   General procedures
   
150.026   Major and minor subdivisions; sketch plan application
   
150.027   Major subdivisions
   
150.028   Minor subdivisions
   
150.029   Exempt divisions
Requirements for Improvements, Reservations, and Design
   
150.040   General improvements
   
150.041   Lot improvements
   
150.042   Drainage and storm sewers
   
150.043   Water facilities
   
150.044   Sewerage facilities
   
150.045   Sidewalks
   
150.046   Utilities
   
150.047   Public uses
   
150.048   Preservation of natural features and amenities
   
150.049   Nonresidential subdivisions
Streets
   
150.060   General
   
150.061   Construction
   
150.062   Design standards
   
150.063   Dedications and reservations
Assurance for Completion of Improvements
   
150.075   Improvements and performance bond
   
150.076   Inspection of public improvements
   
150.077   Maintenance of public improvements
   
150.078   Issuance of building permits
Specifications for Documents
   
150.090   Sketch plan
   
150.091   Preliminary plat
   
150.092   Construction plans
   
150.093   Final subdivision plat
   
150.094   Exempt I divisions
   
150.095   Exempt II divisions
 
   
150.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall hereafter be known and cited as the “Subdivision
Regulations of the City of Gas City, Indiana.”
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.002 POLICY.
   (A)   The declared policy of the city is to consider the subdivision of land
and the subsequent development of subdivided plat as being subject to the
official Comprehensive Plan and related policies as embodied in the city zoning
ordinance for the orderly and efficient development of the city.
   (B)   Land to be subdivided shall be of such a character that it can be
developed without peril to health or peril from flood, fire, or other menace,
and land shall not be subdivided until having access to available existing
public facilities and until improvements and proper provision have been made
for drainage, water, sewerage, other necessary new public improvements such as
schools, parks, recreation facilities, and transportation facilities adequate
for serving the subdivision.
   (C)   Both existing and proposed public facilities serving the subdivision
shall be properly related and conform to the official City Comprehensive Land
Use Plan, related policies, and implementation programs including the capital
budget, official map, thoroughfare plan, zoning ordinance, and Housing and
Building Codes.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.003 PURPOSE.
   (A)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the city;
   (B)   To guide the future development and renewal of the city in accordance
with the Comprehensive Plan and related policies;
   (C)   To provide for the safety, comfort, and soundness of the built
environment and related open spaces;
   (D)   To protect the compatibility, character, economic stability, and
orderliness of all development through reasonable design standards; and
   (E)   To guide public and private policy and action adequate and efficient
public and private facilities, the most aesthetically pleasing and beneficial
interrelationship between land uses, conserve natural resources such as natural
beauty, woodlands, open spaces, and energy both during and after development.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.004 AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The ordinance from which this chapter is derived was enacted pursuant
to Indiana home rule and planning enabling legislation (I.C. 36-1-3-4 and 36-7-
4-700, as amended) authorizes the City Advisory Plan Commission to review and
approve or disapprove plats for subdivision throughout the city, which show
lots, blocks, or sites with or without new streets or highways. This authority
extends to the development or resubdivision of undeveloped portions of already
recorded plats.
   (B)   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision after the effective
date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of these subdivision
regulations, and no excavation of land or construction of any public or private
improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with the
regulations contained herein and in conformity with construction standards
adopted by the city.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.005 ENACTMENT.
   In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes and
policies, these subdivision regulations are hereby adopted.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.006 INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT.
   (A)   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   Conflict with public and private provisions.
      (1)   Public provisions. The regulations are not intended to interfere
with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, statute, or
other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these
regulations or any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, or other provision of
law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall
control.
      (2)   Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate
any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement or restriction, provided
that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private
agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
Where the provisions of the easement, covenant, or private agreement or
restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or higher standards
than the requirements of these regulations, or the determinations of the
Commission in approving a subdivision or in enforcing these regulations, and
such private provisions are not inconsistent with these regulations or
determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and
supplemental to these regulations and determinations made thereunder.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.007 SAVING PROVISION.
   These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending
under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to
accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any section or provision existing at the
time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any rights
obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful action of the city
except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.008 AMENDMENTS.
   For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety, and general
welfare, the city, on recommendation of the Commission, may from time to time
amend the provisions imposed by these subdivision regulations. Public hearings
on all proposed amendments shall be held by the Commission and/or the city in
the manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.009 CONDITIONS.
   Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated
by the state to this city. The developer has the duty of compliance with
reasonable conditions laid down by the Commission for design, dedication,
improvement, and restrictive use of the land in order to conform to the
physical and economical development of the city and to the safety and general
welfare of the future plot owners in the subdivision and of the city at large.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.010 RESUBDIVISION OF LAND.
   (A)   Procedure for resubdivision. For any changes in a map of an approved
or recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on
such map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, of if it
affects any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any
regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be approved by the
Commission by the same procedure, rules, and regulations as for a subdivision.
   (B)   Procedure for subdivisions where future resubdivision is indicated.
Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or
more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that
such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller building sites, the
Commission may require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening
and extension of such streets may be made a requirement of the plat.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.011 VACATION OF PLATS.
   Any recorded plat or part of any recorded plat may be vacated only in
accordance with I.C. 36-7-3, as amended in 1982, 1983, and 1986.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.012 VARIANCES.
   (A)   General. Where the Commission finds that extraordinary hardships or
practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations
and/or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by
an alternative proposal, the Commission may approve variances to these
subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest secured, provided that such variances shall not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further provided
the Commission shall not approve variances unless it shall make findings based
upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
      (1)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other nearby property;
      (2)   The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property;
      (3)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out; and
      (4)   The variance will not in any manner contravene the provisions of
the zoning ordinance, Comprehensive Plan, or official map as interpreted by the
Commission and the City Engineer.
   (B)   Conditions. In approving variances, the Commission may require such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements of these regulations.
   (C)   Procedures. A petition for any such variance may be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for
the consideration of the Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds
for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.013 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Administrator to enforce these
regulations and to bring any violations or lack of compliance to the attention
of the Commission Attorney.
      (2)   No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a
proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a plat of
such subdivision has been approved by the Commission, in accordance with the
provisions of these regulations, and filed with the County Recorder.
      (3)   The division of any lot or any parcel of land into a subdivision,
as defined in this chapter, by the use of metes and bounds description for the
purpose of sale, or transfer, or lease resulting in the creation of one or more
new building sites shall not be permitted. All such described divisions shall
be subject to all of the appropriate requirements of this chapter.
      (4)   No improvement location permit or building permit required under
the Uniform Building Code, the zoning ordinance, or this chapter shall be
issued on any property subject to this chapter until compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Restraining provisions.
      (1)   Any land within the participating jurisdictions subdivided in
violation of the terms of this chapter after the effective date hereof, is
hereby declared to be a common nuisance, which may be restrained, enjoined, or
abated in any appropriate action or proceeding.
      (2)   The Commission may institute an injunction suit requesting an
individual or governmental unit be directed to remove a structure erected in
violation of this chapter, or to make the same comply with its terms. If the
Commission is successful in its suit, the respondent shall pay the Commission’s
reasonable attorney fees and all costs related to the enforcement of this
chapter.
      (3)   The Commission may institute a suit for mandatory injunction
requesting an individual or governmental unit be directed, where such
individual or governmental unit has violated any provisions of this chapter, to
comply with the provisions of this chapter. If the Commission is successful in
its suit, the respondent shall pay the Commission’s reasonable attorney fees
and all costs related to the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.014 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations,
terms, and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set
forth in this section.
   (B)   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in
the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number
include the singular; the word HEREIN means IN THESE REGULATIONS; the word
REGULATIONS means THESE REGULATIONS.
   (C)   A PERSON includes a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated
association of persons such as a club; SHALL is always mandatory; USED or
OCCUPIED as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the
words INTENDED, ARRANGED, OR DESIGNATED TO BE USED OR OCCUPIED.
      ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate structure, the use of which is
incidental to that of the dominant use of the principal building or land.
      ADMINISTRATOR. The officer appointed by and/or delegated the
responsibility for the administration of these regulations by the Planning
Commission. This term shall be construed to include those planning staff
members working under the direction of the ADMINISTRATOR in the exercise of his
or her responsibilities in regard to the processing of these subdivision
regulations.
      ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION. A plan commission serving a single local
government jurisdiction established as defined under I.C. 36-7-1-2, as amended.
      AGENCY. See PUBLIC AGENCY.
      ALLEY. A public or private vehicular right-of-way primarily designed to
serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose
principal frontage is on some other street.
      APPLICANT. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his or her
agent or his or her legal representative.
      ARTERIAL. Either a primary arterial or a secondary arterial as defined in
this section.
      AVERAGE DENSITY PROCEDURES. Procedures for calculating overall density of
development prescribed in the zoning ordinance as a flexible tool for
maintaining overall densities while
allowing individual lot sizes to vary from the minimum size allowed in a given
zone. (See FLEXIBLE ZONING also.)
      BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, shorelines of waterways,
or boundary lines of municipalities.
      BOND. Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form
satisfactory to the Advisory Plan Commission. All BONDS shall be approved by
the Commission wherever a BOND is required by these regulations.
      BUFFER LANDSCAPING. Any trees, shrubs, walls, fences, berms, or related
landscaping features required under this chapter or the zoning ordinance on
private lots and privately maintained for buffering lots from adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way for the purpose of increasing sound and/or
visual privacy. (See SCREENING also.)
      BUILDING. Any roofed structure built for the support, shelter, or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind.
      BUILDING CODE. The city ordinance or group of ordinances which
establishes and controls the standards for construction of buildings,
utilities, mechanical equipment, and all forms of structures and permanent
installations and related matters, within the city. The ordinance referred to
herein as the CITY BUILDING CODE.
      BUILDING PERMIT. A certificate issued by the building permit official of
a governing body permitting a person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any
building or structure within its jurisdiction, or cause the same to be done.
      BUILDING PERMIT OFFICIAL. That official of local government authorized to
issue building permits.
      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM. A proposed schedule of all future projects
listed in order of construction priority together with cost estimates and the
anticipated means of financing each project. All major projects requiring the
expenditure of public funds, over and above the annual local government’s
operating expenses, for the purchase, construction, or replacement of the more
durable, longer lived physical assets for the community are included.
      CENTRAL SEWERAGE SYSTEM. A community sewer system, including collection
and treatment facilities, established by the developer to serve a new
subdivision or an existing public sewer system.
      CENTRAL WATER SYSTEM. A community water supply system, including existing
and new wells and/or surface water sources and intakes, treatment facilities,
and distribution lines, and includes such of the above facilities established
by the developer to serve a new subdivision.
      CERTIFICATE. The signed and attested document which indicates that a
subdivision has been granted secondary approval by the Commission subsequent to
proper public notice of its hearing.
      CHECKPOINT AGENCY. A public agency or organization called upon by the
Commission to provide expert counsel with regard to a specific aspect of
community development or required by law to give its assent before subdivision
may occur.
      CITY ATTORNEY. The licensed attorney designated by the legally authorized
body to furnish legal assistance for the administration of these regulations in
lieu of the Commission having its own attorney.
      CITY BUILDING CODE. See BUILDING CODE.
      CITY DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE. A committee established by the city to
provide technical services to the Advisory Plan Commission in the
administration of these regulations.
      CITY ENGINEER. The licensed engineer designated by the city to furnish
engineering assistance in the administration of these regulations.
      CITY GOVERNMENT. The governmental body of the city empowered to adopt
planning and public policy ordinances.
      CLERK TREASURER. The city official empowered to examine and settle all
accounts and demands that are chargeable against the city and not otherwise
provided for by statute.
      COLLECTOR STREET. A street intended to move traffic from local streets to
secondary arterials. A COLLECTOR STREET serves a neighborhood or large
subdivision and should be designed so that no residential properties face onto
it and no driveway access to it is permitted unless the property is to be in
multi-family use for four or more dwelling units.
      COMMISSION. The City Advisory Plan Commission as referred to herein.
      COMMISSION ATTORNEY. The licensed attorney designated by the Commission
to furnish legal assistance for the administration of this chapter or as
provided by statute.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Inclusive physical, social, economic plans and
policies in graphic and verbal statement forms for the development of the city
prepared and adopted by the Commission and, pursuant to state acts, including
any part of such plan and/or policy separately adopted and any amendment to
such plan or policies or parts thereof.
      CONDOMINIUM. The division of building(s) and the related land into
horizontal property interest meeting the requirements of and controlled by
state statutes for CONDOMINIUMS and prescribed by I.C. 32-25.
      CONSTRUCTION PLAN(S). The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision
plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be
installed for the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter as a condition of the approval of the plat.
      COUNTY AUDITOR. The county official empowered to examine and settle all
accounts and demands that are chargeable against the county and not otherwise
provided for by statute.
      COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER. See HEALTH OFFICER.
      COUNTY RECORDER. The county official empowered to record and file land
description plats.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate
terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement, including
public safety vehicles.
      DEAD-END STREET. A street or a portion of a street with only one
vehicular traffic outlet, and no turnaround at the terminal end.
      DEPARTMENT. See PUBLIC AGENCY.
      DESIGNATED OFFICIALS. The President and Secretary of the Commission who
are designated in the subdivision ordinance as required signatories for the
execution of secondary approval.
      DEVELOPER. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his or her
representative. Consent for making applications for development approval shall
be required from the legal owner of the premises.
      DRIVES, PRIVATE. Vehicular street and driveways, paved or unpaved, which
are wholly within private property except where they intersect with other
streets within public rights-of-way.
      EASEMENT. An authorization grant by a property owner for the use by
another of any designated part of his or her property for a clearly specified
purpose(s).
      ESCROW. A deposit of cash with the Commission in lieu of an amount
required and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond. Such ESCROW
FUNDS shall be held by the Clerk Treasurer.
      EXEMPT DIVISIONS. See definition of SUBDIVISION.
      FINAL PLAT. The map, drawing, or plan described in this chapter of a
subdivision and any accompanying material submitted to the Commission for
secondary approval, and which, if approved and signed by the designated
officials, may be submitted to the County Recorder for recording.
      FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Those floodplains which have not been adequately
protected from flooding by the regulatory flood by means of dikes, levees, or
reservoirs, and are shown on the floodway-flood boundary maps of the Federal
Insurance Administration or maps provided to the Commission from the State
Natural Resources Commission.
      FLOODPLAIN. The area adjoining the river or stream which has been or may
hereafter be covered by flood water from the regulatory flood.
      FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE. The elevation of the lowest point around the
perimeter of a building at which flood waters may enter the interior of the
building.
      FLOODWAY. See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
      FLOODWAY FRINGE. Those portions of the flood hazard areas lying outside
the floodway, shown on the floodway-flood boundary maps of the Federal
Insurance Administration.
      FOUNDATION. The supporting member of a wall or structure.
      FRONTAGE. The side of a lot abutting on a street or way and ordinarily
regarded as the front of the lot. Lots shall not be considered to front on stub
ends of streets and in the case of corner lots will be considered to front on
both intersecting streets. (No access for any one lot is permitted to more than
one street and that street generally will be the one calculated to have lower
traffic volumes and less frequent intersections.)
      FRONTAGE STREET. Any street to be constructed by the developer or any
existing street in which development shall take place on both sides.
      FRONT YARD. A yard defined herein, encompassing the horizontal space
between the nearest foundation of a building to the right-of-way line and that
right-of-way line, extending to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the
shortest distance from that foundation to the right-of-way line. The FRONT YARD
of a corner lot shall be that yard abutting the street upon which the lot has
its least frontage.
      GOVERNING BODY. The City Council.
      GRADE. The slope of a street, or other public way, specified in
percentage (%) terms.
      HEALTH DEPARTMENT and COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER. The agency and person
designated by the county to administer the health regulations within the
county’s jurisdiction.
      HIGH DENSITY. Those residential zoning districts in which the density is
equal to or greater than one dwelling unit per 10,000 square feet.
      HIGHWAY, LIMITED ACCESS. A freeway, or expressway, providing for through
traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands
and other persons have no legal right to access to or from the same, except at
such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority
having jurisdiction over such a highway.
      HOUSING CODE. The city ordinance controlling the continuing safety and
healthfulness of buildings for human occupation within the city’s jurisdiction.
The ordinance referred to herein as the CITY HOUSING CODE.
      IMPROVEMENTS. See LOT IMPROVEMENTS or PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
      INDIANA CODE. The Burns Indiana Statutes Code Edition, which codifies all
state statutes for reference purposes. The latest edition with any amending
supplements must be referred to for the laws “now” in force and applicable.
(Usually abbreviated as I.C. herein.)
      INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A septic tank, seepage tile sewage
disposal system, or any other approved sewage treatment device approved by the
Health Department.
      INTERESTED PARTIES. Those parties who are the owners of properties
adjoining or adjacent to the proposed subdivision as shown on the sketch plan.
      JOINT OWNERSHIP. Joint ownership among persons shall be construed as the
same owner; CONSTRUCTIVE OWNERSHIP for the purpose of imposing subdivision
regulations.
      LAND DIVIDER. The owner of a parcel of land to be further divided through
making an exempt division.
      LANDSCAPING. See BUFFER LANDSCAPING, SCREENING, and SHADE TREES.
      LOCAL STREET. A street intended to provide access to other streets from
individual properties and to provide right-of-way beneath it for sewer, water,
and storm drainage pipes.
      LOT. A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or of building development.
      LOT CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the
interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.
      LOT IMPROVEMENT. Any building, structure, work of art, or other object,
or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical
betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. Certain LOT
IMPROVEMENTS shall be properly bonded as provided in these regulations.
      LOW DENSITY. Those residential zoning districts in which the density is
equal or less than one dwelling unit per 40,000 square feet.
      MAJOR STREET. A collector or arterial street.
      MAJOR STREET PLAN. See OFFICIAL MAP.
      MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision,
including, but not limited to, subdivisions of four or more lots, or any size
subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the local governmental
facilities, or the creation of any public improvements.
      MAP. A representation of a part or the whole of the earth’s surface, in
signs and symbols, on a plane surface, at an established scale, with a method
of orientation indicated.
      MARKER. A stake, pipe, rod, nail, or any other object which is not
intended to be a permanent point for record purposes.
      MASTER PLAN. See COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
      MEDIUM DENSITY. Those residential zoning districts in which the density
is between 10,000 and 40,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
      MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision containing not more than three lots
fronting on an existing street which is an improved right-of-way maintained by
the city not involving any new street or extension of municipal facilities, or
the creation of any public improvements, and not adversely affecting the
remainder of the parcel or adjoining property and not in conflict with any
revision or portion of the Comprehensive Plan, official map, zoning ordinance,
or this chapter.
      MODEL HOME. A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typifies the kind of units that will be constructed in the subdivision. Such
dwelling units may be erected, at the discretion of the Commission, by
permitting a portion of a major subdivision involving no more than two lots to
be created according to the procedures for minor subdivisions, as set out in
these regulations.
      MONUMENT. A physical structure which marks the location of a corner or
other survey point.
      NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. A subdivision whose intended use is other
than residential, such as commercial or industrial. Such subdivision shall
comply with the applicable provisions of these regulations.
      OFF-SITE. Any premises not located within the area of the property to be
subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for
subdivision approval.
      OFFICIAL MAP. The map or maps established by the city pursuant to law
showing existing and proposed street, highways, parks, drainage systems, and
setback lines heretofore laid out, adopted, and established by law, and any
amendments or additions thereto adopted by the city or additions thereto
resulting from the approval of subdivision plats by the Commission and the
subsequent filing of such approved plats.
      OFFICIAL MASTER PLAN. See COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
      ORDINANCE. Any legislative action, however denominated, of a local
government which has the force of law, including any amendment or repeal of any
ORDINANCE.
      OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient
proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these
regulations.
      PARCEL. A part or portion of land having a legal description formally set
forth in a conveyance, together with the boundaries thereof, in order to make
possible its easy identification.
      PERIMETER STREET. Any existing street to which the parcel of land to be
subdivided abuts on only one side.
      PLAN COMMISSION. The city’s advisory plan body as established in
accordance with state law, often referred to herein simply as the COMMISSION.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A means of land regulation which permits large
scale, unified land development in a configuration and possibly a mix of uses
not otherwise permitted “as of right” under the city zoning ordinance but
requiring under that ordinance or a special ordinance a special review and
approval process.
      PLAT. A map indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of land filed or
intended to be filed for record with the County Recorder.
      PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these
regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be
submitted to the Commission for approval.
      PRIMARY APPROVAL. An approval (or approval with conditions imposed)
granted to a subdivision by the Commission after having determined in a public
hearing that the subdivision complied with the standards prescribed in this
chapter (per I.C. 36-7-4-700 series: Subdivision Control).
      PRIMARY ARTERIAL. A street intended to move through-traffic to and from
such major attractors as central business districts, regional shopping centers,
colleges and/or universities, military installations, major industrial areas,
and similar traffic generators within the county; and/or as a route for traffic
between communities; a major thoroughfare.
      PRINCIPAL USE BUILDING. A building in which the principal use of the lot
or parcel is conducted. Standards recognized by the state’s Administrative
Building Council shall be used to determine whether a given structure
constitutes one or more buildings in cases where ambiguities exist.
      PUBLIC AGENCY. An agency or government department acting under the aegis
of and representing an elected or appointed council, commission, or other
policy-making or advisory body of federal, state, or local government to whom
it is responsible.
      PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any drainage ditch, street, highway, parkway,
sidewalk, pedestrian-way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement,
or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an
improvement for which local government responsibility is established. (All such
IMPROVEMENTS shall be properly bonded.)
      REAR YARD. A yard as defined herein, encompassing the horizontal space
between the nearest foundation measured as the shortest distance from that
foundation to the rear lot line. The REAR YARD of a corner lot shall be that
yard at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
      REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor properly licensed and
registered in the state, permitted to practice in the state through
reciprocity.
      REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer properly licensed and
registered in the state or permitted to practice in the state through
reciprocity.
      REGULATORY FLOOD. That flood having a peak discharge which can be equaled
or exceeded on the average of once in a 100-year period, as calculated by a
method and procedure which is acceptable to and approved by the State Natural
Resources Commission; this FLOOD is equivalent to a flood having a probability
of occurrence of 1% in any given year.
      REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION. The maximum elevation, as established by the
State Department of Natural Resources, reached by the regulatory flood at the
locations in questions relevant to approval of a given subdivision.
      REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions
of the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flow of the regulatory flood of any
river or stream shown on the floodway-flood boundary maps of the Federal
Insurance Administration.
      RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS. Limitations of various kinds on the usage of lots
or parcels of land within a subdivision which are proposed by the subdivider,
and, in the case of public health, safety, and welfare by the Commission, that
are recorded with the plat and run with the land.
      RESUBDIVISION. A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision
plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved
thereon for public use, or any lot line, or setback; or if it affects any map
or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivisions.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, pedestrian-way, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or
gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, special landscaping, or
for another special use. The usage of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY for land platting
purposes shall mean that every RIGHT-OF-WAY hereafter established and shown on
a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining
such RIGHT-OF-WAY and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots
or parcels. RIGHTS-OF-WAY intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm drains, screening, or special landscaping, or any other
use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use
by the subdivider on whose plat such RIGHT-OF-WAY is established.
      ROAD(S). See STREET(S).
      SALE or LEASE. Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or any
possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise,
intestate succession, or transfer of an interest in a subdivision or part
thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease, devise,
intestate succession, or other written instrument.
      SAME OWNERSHIP. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity,
partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by different
corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations, in
which a stockholder, partner, or associate, or a member of his or her family
owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or
unincorporated association.
      SCREENING.
         (a)   Either:
            1.   A strip of at least ten feet wide, densely planted (or having
equivalent natural growth) with shrubs or trees at least four feet high at the
time of planting, of a type that will form a year- round dense screen at least
six feet high; or
            2.   An opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least
six feet high.
         (b)   Either division (a)1. or (a)2. above shall be maintained in good
condition at all times and may have no signs affixed to or hung in relation to
the outside thereof except as permitted or required under the zoning ordinance.
Where required by the zoning ordinance, a screen shall be installed along or
within the lines or a plot as a protection for adjoining or nearby properties.
Earth berms shall be incorporated as part of such SCREENING measures where
appropriate.
      SECONDARY APPROVAL. The stage of application for formal Plan Commission
approval of a final plat of a subdivision the construction of which has been
completed or substantially completed which, if approved and signed by the
designated officials may be submitted to the County Recorder for recording.
      SECONDARY ARTERIAL. A street intended to collect and distribute traffic
in a manner similar to primary arterials, except that these streets service
minor traffic generating areas such as community-commercial areas, primary and
secondary educational plants, hospitals, major recreational areas, churches,
and offices, and/or designed to carry traffic from collector streets to the
system of primary arterials.
      SETBACK. A line parallel to and equidistant from the relevant lot line
(front, back, side) between which no buildings or structures may be erected as
prescribed in the city zoning ordinance.
      SHADE TREE. A tree in a public place, special easement, or right-of-way
adjoining a street as provided in these regulations.
      SIDE LOT LINES. Any lines separating two lots other than front or rear
lot lines.
      SKETCH PLAN. The initially submitted graphic representation of a proposed
major subdivision, drawn to approximate scale, either superimposed upon a print
of a topographic survey, or presented in any other suitable graphic medium or
form acceptable to the Commission; and, in the case of a minor subdivision, the
drawing or drawings indicating the proposed manner of layout of the subdivision
meeting the conditions of the subdivision ordinance to be submitted to the
Commission for primary approval.
      SPECIAL LANDSCAPING. Areas of tree planting, shrubs, or other landscape
features serving a public purpose and maintained by the county. (See also
BUFFER LANDSCAPING and SCREENING.)
      STATE ACTS. Such legislative acts of the state as they affect these
regulations.
      STATE PLANE COORDINATES SYSTEM. A system of plane coordinates, based on
the Transverse Mercator Projection for the Western zone of the state,
established by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey for the State of
Indiana.
      STREET, DEAD-END. A street or a portion of a street with only one
vehicular traffic outlet.
      STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH. The distance between property lines measured
at right angles to the center line of the street.
      STREETS, CLASSIFICATION. For the purpose of providing for the development
of the streets, highways, and rights-of-way in the governmental unit, and for
their future improvement, reconstruction, realignment, and necessary widening,
including provision for curbs and sidewalks, each existing street, highway, and
right-of-way, and those located on approved and recorded plats, have been
designated on the official map of the city or thoroughfare plan and classified
therein. The CLASSIFICATION of each street, highway, and right-of-way is based
upon its location in the respective zoning districts of the city and its
present and estimated future traffic volume and its relative importance and
function as specified in the City Comprehensive Plan and/or its thoroughfare
plan component. The required improvements shall be measured as set forth for
each street classification on the official map.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on or
in the ground or is attached to something having a location on or in the
ground.
      SUBDIVIDER. Any person who:
         (a)   Having a proprietary interest in land, causes it, directly or
indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision;
         (b)   Directly or indirectly sells, leases, or develops, or offers to
sell, lease, or develop, or advertises for sale, lease, or development, any
interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision;
         (c)   Engages directly, or through an agent, in the business of
selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or development a
subdivision of any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision;
or
         (d)   Is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct or
indirect common control, with any of the forgoing.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots,
parcels, sites, units, plats, or interests for the purpose of offer, sale,
lease, or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other
plans, terms, and conditions, including resubdivision. SUBDIVISION includes the
division or development of land zoned for residential and nonresidential uses,
whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map,
plat, or other recorded instrument. The following kinds of divisions of
existing parcels of land are herein called EXEMPT DIVISIONS and are classified
into two categories: EXEMPT I and EXEMPT II. These divisions are exempt from
most provisions of this chapter. EXEMPT I DIVISIONS must be one of the
following types of division:
         (a)   A division of land into two or more tracts of which all tracts
are least ten acres in size;
         (b)   A division of land for the transfer of a tract or tracts to
correct errors in an existing legal description, provided that no additional
building sites other than for accessory buildings are created by the division;
         (c)   A division of land pursuant to an allocation of land in the
settlement of a decedent’s estate or a court decree for the distribution of
property;
         (d)   A division of land for federal, state, or local government to
acquire street right-of-way;
         (e)   A division of land for the transfer of a tract or tracts between
adjoining lots provided that no additional principal use building sites are
created by the division. The lots so created hereunder shall have only one
principal use building site each (see PRINCIPAL USE BUILDING); or
         (f)   A division of land into cemetery plots for the purpose of burial
of corpses, EXEMPT I DIVISIONS are subject only to the provisions of §§
150.029 and
150.094, but shall be exempt from other provisions of this chapter not
specified or referred to in those sections. EXEMPT II DIVISIONS are divisions
of land into not more than four parcels two acres or more in size but less than
ten acres. Such divisions shall conform to §§
150.029 and
150.095 but shall be exempt from other provisions of this chapter not specified
or referred to in those sections.
      SUBDIVISION AGENT. Any person who represents, or acts for or on behalf
of, a subdivider or developer, in selling, leasing, or developing, or offering
to sell or lease, or develop any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site, or plat in
a subdivision, except an attorney-at-law whose representation of another person
consists solely of rendering legal services, and is not involved in developing,
marketing, or selling real property in the subdivision.
      SUBDIVISION, EXEMPT. See SUBDIVISION.
      SUBDIVISION, MAJOR. See MAJOR SUBDIVISION.
      SUBDIVISION, MINOR. See MINOR SUBDIVISION.
      TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT. Improvements built and maintained by a subdivider
during construction of the subdivision and intended to be replaced by a
permanent improvement prior to release of the performance bond or turnaround
improvements at the ends of stub streets intended to be replaced when the
adjoining area is developed and the through street connection made.
      THOROUGHFARE PLAN. See OFFICIAL MAP.
      YARD. A space on the same lot with a principal building, such space being
open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to
sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted.
      ZONING ORDINANCE. That city ordinance setting forth the regulations
controlling use of land in the incorporated area of the city. The ordinance
referred to as the city zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
§ 150.025 GENERAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Discussion of requirements; predesign conference. Prior to submitting
any of the materials required by this chapter, the applicant or his or her
representative should discuss with the Administrator the nature of the land
division being proposed, so that the applicant may be instructed concerning the
classification of his or her subdivision and what regulatory procedures apply
to it and must be followed under this chapter in order to secure primary and
secondary approval. Where applicable, requirements concerning the general
layout of streets and for reservations of land, street improvements, drainage,
sewerage, fire protection, and similar matters, as well as the availability of
existing services should be discussed. The Administrator shall also advise the
applicant, where appropriate, to discuss the proposed land division with those
other officials who must eventually approve those aspects of the subdivision
plat coming within their jurisdiction. The distinction between major and minor
subdivisions and exempt divisions as defined in this chapter, shall be made by
the Administrator when the applicant submits an application for sketch plan
approval in the case of major and minor subdivisions or, in the case of exempt
divisions, provides the Administrator at a predesign conference with adequate
information to enable him or her to determine that the proposed division is an
exempt division.
   (B)   Classification of land divisions.
      (1)   All land to be divided shall be categorized into one of the three
main classes of land division indicated in this chapter’s definition of
subdivision. These classes are:
         (a)   Major subdivisions;
         (b)   Minor subdivision; and
         (c)   Exempt divisions.
      (2)   Exempt divisions are not subject to the requirements of this
chapter beyond the determination by the Commission that they meet all the
requirements for exempt divisions set forth in §
150.029. However, lots created by Exempt I divisions (except Exemption F) shall
be ten or more acres in size to be eligible as principal use building sites
(Exemption A in the definition of subdivision), unless such lots have been
created by order of a court (Exemption C). No building site for principal use
created through Exemption A shall be reduced below ten acres unless through
subdivision or by order of a court (Exemption C). For purposes of this
paragraph, a lot is “created” on the date of its recording. (See § 150.014 for
the definition of a principal use building.)
      (3)   Before any permit shall be granted for a structure to be erected on
land to be subdivided into a major or minor subdivision, the subdividing owner
or his or her subdivision agent shall apply for and secure approval of the
proposed subdivision in accordance with §
150.026 and either §§
150.027 or
150.028 as appropriate. Before any permit shall be granted for a structure to
be erected on a parcel of land to be created or altered by an exempt division,
the land divider or his or her agent shall certify to the satisfaction of the
Commission that all requirements for exemption have been met, as detailed in §
150.029, in order to exempt the land division from all other requirements of
this chapter.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.026 MAJOR AND MINOR SUBDIVISIONS; SKETCH PLAN APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application requirements. In order to begin the subdivision process,
the applicant shall file an application for review of sketch plan and
certificate with the Administrator and be entitled to a signed receipt for
same. This application shall:
      (1)   Be made on forms available at the office of the Commission and
signed by the owner;
      (2)   Include indication of all contiguous holdings of the owner
including land in the same ownership, with an indication of the portion which
is proposed to be subdivided, accompanied by an affidavit of ownership, which
shall include the dates the respective holdings of land were acquired, together
with the book and page of each conveyance to the present owner as recorded in
the County Recorder’s office. The affidavit shall advise as to the legal owner
of the property, the contract owner of the property, optionee of the property,
and the date on which the contract of sale was executed. If any corporations
are involved, the Administrator may request a complete list of all directors,
officers, and a listing of stockholders if less than ten in number;
      (3)   Be presented to the Administrator in duplicate;
      (4)   Be accompanied by a minimum of three copies of the sketch plan;
      (5)   Be accompanied by a fee of $50 plus $5 per lot in excess of four
lots;
      (6)   Include an address and telephone number of an agent located within
the territory of the Commission, who shall be authorized to receive all notices
required by this chapter; and
      (7)   Include a listing signed by the checkpoint agencies indicating that
they have received a copy of the proposed sketch plan or a certification that
it has been sent.
   (B)   Checkpoint submission.
      (1)   In order to fulfill this last application requirement, a copy of
the proposed plan shall be submitted to each of the checkpoint agencies so that
their comment may be made to the Administrator. The checkpoint agencies are:
         (a)   City Engineer;
         (b)   County Board of Health;
         (c)   City Board of Works;
         (d)   City Fire Chief;
         (e)   City Police Chief;
         (f)   Mississinewa Community School Corporation; and
         (g)   City Review Board.
      (2)   The Administrator shall request that all officials and agencies to
whom a request for review has been made submit a written report to him or her
within 15 days after receipt of the request. No response from an agency shall
be interpreted as meaning “no objection.”
   (C)   Classification of subdivision. After an application for sketch plan
approval has been submitted, and at the time of sketch plan review, the
Administrator shall classify the proposed subdivision as either major or minor
as defined in this chapter. The required procedures and approvals for major
subdivisions are described in §
150.027; corresponding information concerning the minor subdivision approval
process is provided in §
150.028.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.027 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General procedures for primary and secondary approval. If the
Administrator, during sketch plan review, classifies the proposed land division
as a major subdivision, the subdivider shall follow the procedures and be
subject to the processes outlined in division (H) below, and detailed in this
section. In addition to a sketch plan submitted by applicant which is reviewed
by the Administrator and checkpoint agencies, the applicant seeking approval of
a major subdivision shall submit a preliminary subdivision plat to be approved,
conditionally approved, or rejected by the Commission at a public hearing.
Subsequently the applicant shall submit for secondary approval a final
subdivision plat which must be found in compliance with the preliminary plat as
approved by the Commission at a public hearing in order to be signed and
recorded.
   (B)   Official submission dates. The deadline for submittal of a sketch plan
and application for certificate of approval shall be 61 calendar days prior to
the date of the public hearing at which the subdivider intends to have his or
her preliminary plat submission heard, and 31 calendar days prior to the
deadline for the submission of the preliminary plat. Thus, as a minimum, sketch
plan submission shall precede preliminary plat submission by no less than 31
calendar days, which in turn shall precede the public hearing at which it is
intended to be heard by no less than 30 calendar days.
   (C)   Sketch plan review process. Within 20 calendar days of the
subdivider’s sketch plan application submittal, the Administrator shall have
studied the proposal, reviewed checkpoint reports received, and met with the
subdivider to discuss pertinent aspects of the possible modifications and/or
changes that may be suggested or required by this chapter. The Administrator
shall request that a representative of each checkpoint agency wishing to be
involved in a sketch plan review be present to participate in the sketch plan
review meeting. In taking into consideration the requirements of this chapter,
particular attention shall be given to the arrangement, location, and width of
streets, their relation to the topography of the land, sewage disposal
drainage, lot size, and arrangement, the further development of adjoining lands
as yet unsubdivided, and the requirements of the official map or thoroughfare
plan, and Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the city. Subsequent to this
meeting, the Administrator shall provide the participants with a written record
of the proceedings of that meeting.
   (D)   Preliminary plat procedures for primary approval.
      (1)   Submission requirements. Following the submission, review, and
report on the sketch plan application, the subdivider may file for primary
approval of a preliminary plat. This submission shall:
         (a)   Be made on forms available at the office of the Commission and
be submitted with a fee of $5 per lot for each lot which was not included in
the sketch plan;
         (b)   Include indication of all land which the applicant proposes to
subdivide and all land immediately adjacent and across any street or railroad
right-of-way, extending 600 feet therefrom, but not more than two property
owners deep from the proposed subdivision, with the names and addresses of the
title owners as shown in the County Auditor’s files. This information may be
shown on a separate current plat map reproduction from the County Auditor’s
office showing the boundaries of the subdivision superimposed thereon;
         (c)   Be presented in duplicate to the Administrator no later than 30
calendar days prior to the regular meeting of the Commission at which it is
intended to be heard;
         (d)   Be accompanied by ten copies of the preliminary plat as
described in this chapter; and
         (e)   Generally comply with the sketch plan as reviewed.
      (2)   Placement on the Commission agenda. Subsequent to the submission
for primary approval, the Commission shall place the matter on its next regular
meeting agenda for formal action.
      (3)   Administrative review. Subsequent to placement on the agenda, and
prior to the date of the public hearing, the Administrator and other
appropriate members of the Commission shall review the proposal and prepare a
written report to the Commission and applicant indicating a recommendation with
regard to the subdivision being proposed.
      (4)   Public hearing notification and sign posting requirements. The
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat and notice of
such hearing shall be in one local newspaper of general circulation ten days
prior to the hearing (per I.C. 5-3-1) at the applicant’s expense. At the time
of the public hearing, the applicant shall submit an affidavit stating that the
applicant has placed posters provided by the Administrator (advising interested
parties of the hearing) at the locations designated by the Administrator on the
proposed subdivision property at least ten days prior to the public hearing and
show proof of publication that the notice of public hearing was published at
least ten days prior to the public hearing. Interested parties shall also be
notified by the applicant of the date, time, place, and purpose of the public
hearing on the subdivision at least ten days in advance of the hearing by
certified mail with return receipt requested. The applicant shall file with the
Commission at the time of the public hearing an affidavit so testifying along
with the proof of mailing by certified mail, with return receipt requested as
date mailed by the post office as to the time of mailing and with any return
receipts actually received by applicant prior to the public hearing.
      (5)   Primary approval of the preliminary plat. After the Commission has
held a hearing upon the preliminary plat, the Administrator’s report,
checkpoint recommendations, testimony, and exhibits submitted at the public
hearing, the applicant shall be advised on any required changes and/or
additions. The Commission shall, at a public hearing, grant primary approval,
or disapprove the preliminary plat. One copy of the preliminary plat shall be
returned to the applicant with the date of approval, conditional approval, or
disapproval and the reasons therefor accompanying the plat within five days of
the public hearing. Primary approval by the Commission is subject to review by
certiorari. Secondary approval of a subdivision cannot occur until a minimum of
30 days has elapsed since the granting of primary approval.
      (6)   Field trip. The Commission, at its discretion, upon hearing the
request for primary approval, may elect to continue the matter until its next
regularly scheduled public meeting, and may schedule a field trip to the site
of the proposed subdivision, accompanied by the applicant or his or her
representative, or any other person or persons, at the discretion of the
Commission.
      (7)   Effective period of primary approval. Unless extended, the primary
approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of five years
after the date of primary approval, at the end of which time, secondary
approval of the subdivision must have been obtained and certified by the
President and Secretary of the Commission. Any plats not receiving secondary
approval within the period of time set forth herein shall be null and void, and
the developer shall be required to resubmit a new application for sketch plan
review and certificate subject to all the zoning restrictions and subdivision
regulations in effect at the time of resubmission. Upon request of the
applicant, the Commission may extend the primary approval of a preliminary plat
in increments of two years beyond an expiration date without further notice and
public hearing.
   (E)   Approval of construction plans.
      (1)   Submission procedure and requirements. Following the review of the
sketch plan and prior to submission of the final plat for secondary approval,
the applicant, if he or she wishes to proceed with the subdivision, shall file
with the Administrator before starting work on any improvements three sets of
the detailed plans and specifications thereof for approval.
      (2)   Review process. The Administrator shall immediately refer these
plans to the checkpoint agencies for review. Once these agencies indicate their
approval of the construction plans or 14 working days have elapsed since their
distribution without a written response, the Administrator shall stamp the
plans approved and return one set to the applicant. In no event shall secondary
approval (of the final plat) be given prior to approval of the construction
plans.
      (3)   Installation of improvements. The installation of improvements
shall be inspected by the Administrator. Such inspections are required in all
instances regardless of whether the work is performed before or after secondary
approval. Failure to request or to procure inspection of work performed after
the date of this chapter and before secondary approval may be cause for denial
of secondary approval.
   (F)   Final plat procedure (secondary approval).
      (1)   Submission requirements. Following primary approval or conditional
primary approval of the preliminary plat and approval of the construction
plans, the applicant, if he or she wishes to proceed with the subdivision,
shall file with the Administrator a request for secondary approval of a final
plat. The applicant shall:
         (a)   Be submitted on forms available at the office of the Commission;
         (b)   Include the entire subdivision, or section thereof;
         (c)   Be accompanied by ten copies of the final subdivision plat as
described in this chapter;
         (d)   Totally comply with the chapter and the terms and conditions of
primary approval;
         (e)   Be accompanied by the performance bond, if required, in a form
satisfactory to the Commission Attorney and in an amount established by the
Commission and shall guarantee the completion of all required subdivision and
off-site public improvements; and
         (f)   Be accompanied by any restrictive covenants in a form approved
by the Commission, where proposed by the subdivider or required by the
Commission.
      (2)   Determination of conformance (secondary approval).
         (a)   In order to be recorded, a final subdivision plat shall be found
to be in conformance with the primary approval by the Commission at a public
meeting. The subdivider shall request Commission review in writing no less than
30 calendar days prior to the date of the public meeting at which he or she
intends to have his or her final plat reviewed. The Commission shall place the
matter on its next regular meeting agenda. The Administrator shall review the
proposal and submit a written report and recommendations to the Commission and
the applicant; and, at the public meeting, the Commission shall give secondary
approval or disapproval of the final plat.
         (b)   If granted secondary approval, the final plat shall be signed by
the designated officials of the Commission. If not granted secondary approval,
the subdivider shall be informed as to the insufficiency of his or her
submittal. In the event the final subdivision plat deviates from the
preliminary plat that received primary approval, the subdivision shall be
resubmitted to the Commission at a public hearing for a new primary approval.
      (3)   Sectionalizing plats.
         (a)   Prior to granting secondary approval of a major subdivision
plat, the Commission may permit the plat to be divided into two or more
sections and may impose such conditions upon the filing of the sections as it
may deem necessary to assure the orderly development of the plat. The
Commission may require that the performance bond be in such amount as will be
commensurate with the section or sections of the plat to be filed and may defer
the remaining required performance bond principal amount until the remaining
sections of the plat are offered for filing. Such sections must contain at
least 20 lots or 10% of the total number of lots contained in the approved
plat, whichever is less.
         (b)   The approval of all remaining sections not filed with the
Administrator shall automatically expire after five years from the date of
primary approval of the preliminary plat, unless the expiration date has been
extended.
   (G)   Signing and recording plat.
      (1)   Signing of plat.
         (a)   When the filing of a performance bond is required, the
designated officials of the Commission shall endorse approval on the plat by
signing the certificate only after the bond and the construction plans have
been approved, and all the conditions of the primary approval have been
satisfied.
         (b)   When installation of improvements is required, the designated
officials of the Commission shall endorse secondary approval of the plat by
signing the certificate after all conditions of the primary approval have been
satisfied, all improvements satisfactorily completed and accepted for public
maintenance (when required), “as built” construction plans submitted (as
required by § 150.075(B)(5) and a maintenance bond provided (as required by §
150.077(B). Written evidence shall be furnished that the required public
facilities have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the City Board of
Works as shown by a certificate signed by the City Board of Works.
      (2)   Assurance to subdivider. If the subdivider elects to install all
improvements before he or she applies for secondary approval and it is shown
that the conditions of the chapter have been met, and if the final plat
completely conforms to the primary approval, the Commission shall have no other
recourse than to grant secondary approval.
      (3)   Recording of final plat.
         (a)   The designated officials shall sign the certificate which shall
be part of the tracing cloth or reproducible Mylar of the subdivision plat,
plus two Mylar prints of the subdivision plat. The Mylar prints shall be
returned to the subdivider and his or her engineer or surveyor.
         (b)   The subdivider, in the presence of the Administrator or his or
her designee, shall record the plat with the County Recorder within 30 days of
the date of signature. Failure of the subdivider to file the plat as herein
provided within 30 days shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   (H)   Approval process for major subdivisions.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5845d03809c2b13194ec9ac2486edd9aec822e0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1189.jpg]
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.028 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General procedures for primary approval and secondary approval. If the
Administrator, upon examination of the sketch plan application, classifies the
proposed land division as a minor subdivision, the subdivider shall follow the
procedures and be subject to the process outlined in division (I) below, and
detailed in this section. In addition to a sketch plan for a minor subdivision
submitted by applicant which is reviewed by the Administrator and checkpoint
agencies, the Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or reject the
sketch plan at a public hearing. Subsequently, the applicant shall submit for
secondary approval a final subdivision plat which must be found in compliance
with the sketch plan as approved by the Commission at public hearing in order
to be signed and recorded.
   (B)   Official submission date and placement on the agenda. An application
for sketch plan approval shall be submitted no less than 30 calendar days prior
to a regularly scheduled public meeting of the Commission at which the proposal
is intended to be acted upon. The Administrator shall place such application on
the agenda of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission to occur
30 days after the date on which a complete application is submitted.
   (C)   Sketch plan review process. Within 20 calendar days of the
subdivider’s sketch plan application submittal, the Administrator shall have
studied the proposal, reviewed checkpoint reports received, and met with the
subdivider to discuss pertinent aspects of the proposed subdivision and
possible modifications and/or changes that may be suggested or required by this
chapter. The Administrator shall request that a representative of each
checkpoint agency that wishes to be involved in a sketch plan review be present
to participate in the sketch plan review meeting. In taking into consideration
the requirements of this chapter, particular attention shall be given to sewage
disposal, drainage, lot size, and arrangement, the further development of
adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided, and the requirements of the official map
or thoroughfare plan and Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the city. Subsequent
to the meeting, the Administrator shall provide the participants with a written
record of the proceedings of that meeting.
   (D)   Administrative review. Subsequent to placement of the agenda, and
prior to the date of public hearing, the Administrator and other appropriate
members of the Commission shall review the proposal and prepare a written
report to the Commission and applicant indicating a recommendation with regard
to the subdivision being proposed.
   (E)   Public hearing notification and sign posting requirements. The
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the sketch plan, and notice of such
hearing shall be in one local newspaper of general circulation ten days prior
to the hearing (per I.C. 5-3-1) at the applicant’s expense. At the time of the
public hearing, the applicant shall submit an affidavit stating that the
applicant has placed posters provided by the Administrator (advising interested
parties of the hearing) at the locations designated by him or her on the
proposed subdivision property at least ten days prior to the public hearing and
show proof of publication that the notice of public hearing was published at
least ten days prior to the public hearing. Interested parties shall be
notified by the applicant of the date, time, place, and purpose of the public
hearing on the subdivision at least ten days in advance of the hearing by
certified mail with return receipt requested. The applicant shall file with the
Commission at the time of the public hearing an affidavit so testifying, along
with the proof of mailing by certified mail with return receipt requested as
date mailed by the post office as to the time of mailing and with any return
receipts actually received by applicant prior to the public hearing.
   (F)   Primary approval of the sketch plan. After the Commission has, at a
regularly scheduled hearing, examined the sketch plan, Administrator’s report,
checkpoint recommendations, testimony, and exhibits submitted, the Commission
shall, at a regularly scheduled hearing, approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the sketch plan. One copy of the sketch plan shall be returned to
the applicant with the date of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval
and the reasons therefor accompanying the sketch plan within five days after
the public hearing. Primary approval by the Commission is subject to review by
certiorari. Secondary approval of a subdivision cannot occur until the minimum
of 30 days has elapsed since the granting of primary approval or conditional
approval or conditional primary approval.
   (G)   Effective period of primary approval. Unless extended, the primary
approval of a minor subdivision sketch plan shall be effective for a period of
two years after the date of primary approval, at the end of which time,
secondary approval of the subdivision must have been obtained and certified by
the President and Secretary of the Commission. Any plats not receiving
secondary approval within the period of time set forth herein shall be null and
void, and the developer shall be required to resubmit a new application for
sketch plan review and certificate, subject to all the zoning restrictions and
subdivision regulations in effect at the time of resubmission. Upon written
application of the applicant, the Commission may extend the primary approval of
a minor sketch plan in increments of two years beyond an expiration date
without further notice and public hearing.
   (H)   Final subdivision plat procedure for secondary approval.
      (1)   Application requirements.
         (a)   Following approval or conditional approval of the sketch plan,
the applicant, if he or she wishes to proceed with the subdivision, shall file
with the Administrator an application for secondary approval of a subdivision
plat. The application shall:
            1.   Be submitted on forms available at the office of the
Commission;
            2.   Include the entire subdivision or section thereof;
            3.   Be accompanied by ten copies of the final subdivision plat as
described in this chapter;
            4.   Totally comply with this chapter and the terms and conditions
of primary approval; and
            5.   Be accompanied by the performance bond, if required, in a form
satisfactory to the Commission Attorney and in an amount established by the
Commission and shall guarantee the completion of all required subdivision and
off-site public improvements.
         (b)   When installation of improvements is required, the designated
officials of the Commission shall endorse secondary approval on the plat by
signing the certificate after all conditions of the primary approval have been
satisfied, all improvements satisfactorily completed and accepted for public
maintenance (when required), “as built” construction plans submitted (as
required by § 150.075(B)(5), and a maintenance bond provided (as required by §
150.077(B). Written evidence shall be furnished that the required public
facilities have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the City Board of
Works as shown by a certificate signed by the City Board of Works.
      (2)   Assurance to subdivider. If the subdivider elects to install all
improvements before he or she applies for secondary approval and it is shown
that the conditions of the chapter have been met, and if the final plat
completely conforms to the primary approval, the Commission shall have no other
recourse than to grant secondary approval.
      (3)   Recording of plat.
         (a)   The designated officials shall sign the certificate granting
secondary approval which shall be part of the tracing cloth or reproducible
Mylar of the subdivision plat, plus two Mylar prints of the subdivision plat.
The Mylar prints shall be returned to the applicant and his or her engineer or
surveyor.
         (b)   The subdivider in the presence of the Administrator or his or
her designee shall record the plat with the County Recorder within 30 days of
the date of signature. Failure of the subdivider to file the plat as herein
provided within 30 days shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   (I)   Approval process for minor subdivisions.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5845d03809c2b13194ec9ac2486edd9aec822e0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1191.jpg]
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.029 EXEMPT DIVISIONS.
   (A)   General provisions for Exempt I divisions. In order for a land
division to be considered an Exempt I division, the information prescribed for
the applicable type of subdivision under §
150.094 as exhibits to a petition for a certificate of exclusion for Exempt I
division shall be submitted to the Administrator. The Administrator shall place
the matter on the Commission’s next regular meeting agenda. At such public
meeting, the Commission shall determine whether the proposed land division
meets the provisions of the definitions under §§
150.014 and
150.025 for this classification. If the Commission determines that the proposed
land division is an Exempt I division, the Commission shall issue a certificate
of exclusion for an Exempt I division signed by the designated officials of the
Commission. Both the subdivider and the Commission shall hold copies of the
certificate of exclusion for an Exempt I division. When the parcel so exempted
by this certificate of exclusion is conveyed to another party, the original
certificate of exclusion shall be filed and recorded with the County Auditor
and County Recorder, respectively, along with the conveyance of the parcel.
   (B)   General procedure for Exempt II divisions. In order for a land
division to be considered an Exempt II division, the information required under
§
150.095 in compliance with the conditions under division (C) below as exhibits
to a petition for a certificate of exclusion for Exempt II division shall be
submitted to the Administrator. The Administrator shall place the matter on the
Commission’s next regular meeting agenda. At such public meeting, the
Commissioner shall determine whether the proposed land division meets the
provisions of the definitions under §§
150.014 and
150.025 for this classification and complies with the conditions under division
(C) below. If the Commission determines that the proposed land division is an
Exempt II division, the Commission shall issue a certificate of exclusion for
an Exempt II division signed by the designated officials of the Commission.
Both the subdivider and the Commission shall hold copies of the certificate of
exclusion for an Exempt II division. When the parcel so exempted by this
certificate of exclusion is conveyed to another party the original certificate
of exclusion shall be filed and recorded with the County Auditor and County
Recorder, respectively, along with the conveyance(s) of the parcel(s).
   (C)   Necessary conditions for Exempt II divisions. In addition to
definitional requirements of §§
150.014 and
150.025, a land division qualifying as an Exempt II division shall be shown as
meeting the following conditions.
      (1)   Sewer service. If a parcel created by such an exempt division does
not have sanitary sewer service available to it, the tract shall contain within
its boundaries sufficient soil of a kind defined by Indiana State Board of
Health Bulletin HSE 25-R or its successor to allow for the proper installation
of an on-site septic sewage disposal system.
      (2)   Dedication of right-of-way. If a parcel created by such an exempt
division has frontage on a public road, the land divider shall dedicate to the
public real property of a width sufficient to meet one-half of the required
right-of-way for that specific public road as indicated on the city
thoroughfare plan or the official map and a length along that public road equal
to the length of that parcel along that roadway.
      (3)   Depth of parcel. If a parcel created by such an exempt division has
frontage on a public road, the depth of that parcel shall not be greater than
twice the length of that frontage, such depth being measured from the front lot
line to the rear line of the parcel.
      (4)   Private roadways. If a parcel created by such an exempt division
requires a private roadway because such parcel lacks frontage on a public road,
such roadway shall either be fully constructed in accordance with the following
minimum standards prior to the issuance of a building permit or be adequately
assured to the permit issuer’s satisfaction that it will be constructed to the
following minimum standards:
         (a)   Minimum width of 16 feet; and
         (b)   Minimum depth of eight inches of Type P or O made stone or
gravel. Such private roadway need only provide access as far as the parcel’s
property line and is not intended to include any individual drive within the
parcel.
      (5)   Certificate of Exempt II divisions. As the conditions in division
(B) above apply, the land divider shall provide to the Administrator:
         (a)   Written evidence that the County Board of Health has been
satisfied by a duly authorized representative of a qualified soil testing
service as to the presence within the parcel of sufficient soil of a kind
defined by Indiana State Board of Health Bulletin HSE 25-R or its successor to
allow for the proper installation of an on-site septic sewage disposal system;
         (b)   Official documentation indicating the dedication of right-of-way
to the city;
         (c)   A metes and bounds description of the parcel being created
indicating that its depth is no more than twice the frontage; and
         (d)   A notarized affidavit assuring construction of a private roadway
to the standards previously indicated, prior to the issuance of a building
permit for that parcel.
      (6)   Dissolution.
         (a)   A recorded Exempt II division or portion thereof may be
dissolved by the property owner or owners if, in doing so, no provision of this
or any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, or provision of law is
violated. To do so, ten copies of a statement dissolving the Exempt II division
(or any part of it) shall be submitted to the Administrator for review of
compliance with the above-stated ordinances, rules, and the like. This
statement, signed by all legal owners, contract buyers, and optionees of the
property and notarized, shall contain the Exempt II division number assigned by
the Administrator and legal descriptions of the parcels involved. The
Administrator shall place the matter on the Commission’s next regular meeting
agenda.
         (b)   Upon a finding of compliance at such public meeting, the
Commission, by the designated officials of the Commission, shall sign all ten
statements. Once signed, the approved dissolution is eligible to be recorded.
         (c)   The land divider, in the presence of the Administrator or his or
her designee, shall file and record the approved dissolution with the County
Auditor and County Recorder, respectively, within 30 days of the date of
signature. Failure of the land divider to so file and record shall
automatically invalidate the approval, rendering the approval null and void and
requiring a complete resubmittal for approval.
         (d)   Upon recording the dissolution statement, the landowner is once
more eligible to pursue the full Exempt II division process as per this
section. The land involved, for purposes of land division, is restored to its
pre-exempt division status.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS, AND DESIGN
§ 150.040 GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. In addition to the
requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with the
following laws, rules, and regulations:
      (1)   All applicable state and local statutory provisions;
      (2)   The city zoning ordinance, Building and Housing Codes, and all
other applicable laws and ordinances of the appropriate jurisdictions;
      (3)   The Comprehensive Plan, official map, or thoroughfare plan, public
utilities plan, and capital improvements program of the city, including all
streets, drainage systems, and parks shown on the official map or Comprehensive
Plan as adopted;
      (4)   The special requirements of these regulations and any rules of the
Health Department and/or appropriate state agencies;
      (5)   The rules and regulations of the State Department of Highways if
the subdivision or any lot contained therein abut a state highway or state
frontage road;
      (6)   The highways and drainage standards and regulations adopted by the
City Engineer and all boards, commissions, agencies, and officials of the city;
and
      (7)   All pertinent standards contained within still valid planning
guides published by the Plan Commission.
   (B)   Withholding of plat approval. Plat approval may be withheld if a
subdivision is not in conformity with the guides and requirements in division
(A) above or with the policies and purposes of these regulations established in
§
150.004.
   (C)   Self-imposed restrictions. If the owner places restrictions on any of
the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the zoning
ordinance or these regulations, such restrictions or reference thereto may be
required to be indicated on the subdivision plat, or the Commission may require
that restrictive covenants be recorded with the County Recorder in a form to be
approved by the Commission Attorney.
   (D)   Plats straddling municipal boundaries. Whenever access to the
subdivision is required across land in another jurisdiction, the Commission may
request assurance from the City Attorney that such access is legally
established, and from the City Engineer that the access road is adequately
improved, or that a performance bond has been duly executed and is sufficient
in the amount to assure the construction of the access road. Lot lines shall be
laid out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines.
   (E)   Boundary improvements.
      (1)   The subdivider shall have placed, under the supervision of a
registered land surveyor, concrete monuments four inches square or four inches
in diameter and 40 inches long with an iron pipe cast in the center, at each
corner or angle of the ultimate outside boundary. They shall be set following
grading of each phase of the subdivision.
      (2)   The subdivider shall have placed, under the supervision of a
registered land surveyor, pipes or steel rods, three-quarters of an inch in
diameter by 30 inches in length at the corners of each lot. They shall be set
prior to the issuance of any building permit.
   (F)   Character of land. Land which the Commission finds to be unsuitable
for subdivision or development because of flooding, improper drainage, steep
slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility
easements, or other features which might reasonably be harmful to the safety,
health, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the
subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or developed
unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the
Commission, upon recommendation of the City Engineer, to solve the problems
created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for
such uses permitted by the zoning ordinance as shall not involve any such
danger.
   (G)   Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not
duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other
subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. The Commission shall have
final authority to designate the name of the subdivision which shall be
determined at the time of primary approval.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.041 LOT IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be
no foreseeable difficulties for reasons of topography or other conditions in
securing building permits to build on each of the created lots in compliance
with the zoning ordinance and health regulations and in providing driveway
access to buildings on such lots from the appropriate approved street.
   (B)   Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards
in the zoning ordinance. Where lots are more than double the minimum required
area for the zoning district, the Commission may require that such lots be
arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets
where they would be necessary to serve all such potential lots in compliance
with the zoning ordinance and these regulations. In general, side lot lines
shall be at right angles to the street lines (or radial to curving street
lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan.
Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of
buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from both streets. Depth
and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for all of the off-street
parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development
contemplated, as established in the zoning ordinance.
   (C)   Double frontage lots and access to lots.
      (1)   Double frontage lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots
shall be avoided except where necessary to provide for the separation of
residential development from the traffic on bordering arterials or to overcome
specific disadvantages of topography and orientation affecting the subdivided
lots.
      (2)   Access from primary and secondary arterials. Lots shall not, in
general, derive access from a primary or secondary arterial street. Where
driveway access from a primary or secondary arterial street may be the only
possible access for several adjoining lots, the Commission may require that
such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible
traffic hazards from multiple access to such streets. Where possible, driveways
should be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into
traffic on primary or secondary arterials.
   (D)   Soil preservation, grading, and seeding.
      (1)   Soil preservation and final grading. No certificates of occupancy
shall be issued until final grading has been completed in accordance with the
approved construction plans and the lot precovered with topsoil having an
average depth of at least six inches, which shall contain no particles over two
inches in diameter over the entire area of the lot, except that portion covered
by buildings or included in streets, or where the grade has not been changed or
natural vegetation seriously damaged. Topsoil shall not be removed from
residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide
at least six inches of cover between the sidewalks and curbs, and shall be
stabilized by seeding or planting.
      (2)   Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive
drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be
coordinated with the general storm water drainage pattern for the area.
Drainage shall be designated so as to avoid the accumulation of storm water on
any one or more lots from adjacent lots. It shall be the responsibility of the
lot owner to maintain the lot grade, as it applies to drainage, as provided for
in the approved construction plans.
      (3)   Lawn-grass seed and sod. Lawn-grass seed shall be sown at not less
than four pounds to each 1,000 square feet of land area. The seed shall be sown
between March 15 and September 30. The seed shall consist of a minimum of 10%
rye grass by weight and a minimum of 90% of permanent bluegrass and/or fescue
grass by weight. All seed shall have been tested for germination within one
year of the date of seeding, and the date of testing shall be on the label
containing the seed analysis. All lots shall be seeded from the roadside edge
of the unpaved right-of-way back to a distance of 25 feet behind the principal
residence on the lot. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until
respreading of soil and seeding of lawn has been completed; except that between
October 15 and March 15 and between May 15 and August 15, the applicant shall
submit an agreement in writing signed by the developer and property owner, with
a copy to the building permit official, that respreading of soil and seeding of
the lawn will be done during the immediately following planting season as set
forth above in this section, and leave a cash escrow for performance in such
amount as shall be determined by the building permit official. Sod may be used
to comply with any requirement of seeding set forth herein.
   (E)   Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones,
soil, junk, rubbish, or other waste material of any kind shall be buried in any
land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of occupancy within
a subdivision, nor shall any be left or deposited in any area of the
subdivision at the time of expiration of the performance bond or dedication of
public improvements, whichever is sooner.
   (F)   Fencing. Each subdivider and/or developer shall be required to furnish
and install fences wherever the Commission determines that a hazardous
condition may exist. The fences shall be constructed according to standards
established by the City Engineer and shall be noted as to height and material
on the final plat. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until said fence
improvements have been duly installed.
   (G)   Water bodies and watercourses. If a tract being subdivided contains a
water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be drawn as to distribute the
entire ownership of the water body among the fees of adjacent lots. The
Commission may approve an alternative allocation of interests whereby the
ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body is so
placed that it will not become a local government responsibility. No part of
the minimum area of a lot required under the zoning ordinance may be satisfied
by land which is underwater. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area
of a lot from the street from which it has access, provisions shall be made for
installation of a culvert or other structure of a design approved by the City
Engineer.
   (H)   Performance bond to include lot improvement. The performance bond
shall include an amount to guarantee completion of all requirements contained
in this section, including, but not limited to, soil preservation, final
grading, lot drainage, lawn-grass seeding, removal of debris and waste,
fencing, and all other lot improvements required by the Commission. Whether or
not a certificate of occupancy has been issued, at the expiration of the
performance bond, the city may enforce the provisions of the bond where
compliance with the provisions of this section or any other applicable law,
ordinance, or regulation has not occurred.
   (I)   Lot and frontage examples.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5845d03809c2b13194ec9ac2486edd9aec822e0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1193.jpg]
J)   Yard aeas and street improvements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5845d03809c2b13194ec9ac2486edd9aec822e0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1195.jpg]
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.042 DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   General requirements. The Commission shall not recommend for approval
any subdivision plat which does not make adequate provision for storm or flood
water runoff does not make adequate provision for storm or flood water runoff
channels or basins. The storm water drainage system shall be separate and
independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required, shall
be designed by the Rational Method, or other methods as approved by the
Commission and the City Engineer, and a copy of the design computations shall
be submitted along with the plans. (The Rational Method is described in Chapter
Three of the County Storm Drainage Manual by Christopher B. Burke, Project for
Indiana Counties and Cities, School of Civil Engineering, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, May 1981, hereinafter referred to as Drainage Manual.) Inlets
shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any
intersection, nor for a distance of more than 600 feet in the gutter or when
the encroachment of storm water into the street disrupts traffic (Drainage
Manual, p. 5-27). When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded
at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and
catch basins or inlets shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface
water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block.
   (B)   Nature of storm facilities.
      (1)   Location. The applicant may be required by the Commission to carry
away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist, either
previously to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities
shall be located in the street right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual,
unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in
accordance with the city’s construction standards and specifications.
      (2)   Accessibility to public storm sewers.
         (a)   Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall
install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable
distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of storm water,
subject to the specifications of the City Engineer. However, in subdivisions
containing lots of less than 15,000 square feet in area and in business and
industrial districts, underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed
throughout the subdivision and be conducted to an approved outfall. Inspection
of facilities shall be conducted by the City Engineer.
         (b)   If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided
eventually, as determined by the City Engineer and the Commission, the
developer shall make arrangements for future storm water disposal by the public
utility system at the time the plat receives final approval. Cost provision(s)
for such connection(s) shall be incorporated by inclusion in the amount of the
performance bond or equivalent required for the subdivision plat.
      (3)   Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other
drainage facility shall, in each case, be large enough to accommodate potential
runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the
subdivision. The City Engineer shall determine the necessary size of the
facility, based on the provisions of the required construction standards and
specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development
permitted by the zoning ordinance.
      (4)   Effect on downstream drainage areas. The City Engineer shall
determine the effect of each proposed subdivision on existing drainage
facilities outside the area of the subdivision. County and city drainage
studies, together with such other studies as may be available and appropriate,
shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the
additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload
an existing downstream drainage facility, the Commission may withhold secondary
approval of the subdivision until provision (such as a storage facility) has
been made for the improvement of said potential condition in such sum as the
Commission shall determine. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate
drainage from it will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or
facility.
      (5)   Areas of poor drainage. Areas which are not in the floodplain but
contain soils which are subject to flooding may be approved for subdivision by
the Commission, provided that the subdivider fills the affected areas of said
subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place building sites and streets two
feet above ponding levels.
      (6)   Areas of high seasonal water tables. In areas characterized by
soils having a high seasonal water table as determined by the County Soil and
Water Conservation District, lots shall be limited to a slab type construction
unless the Commission determines that appropriate engineering techniques will
be applied to alleviate the subsurface problem.
      (7)   Floodway areas. If a subdivision of land is proposed within the
floodplain, floodways shall be preserved and not diminished in capacity by
filing or obstruction, except as approved by the Natural Resources Commission
in writing. No residential building site may be located within the floodway.
      (8)   Floodway fringe areas. Where a subdivision is proposed within an
area of the floodplain designated as a floodway fringe, the Commission may
approve such subdivision provided that: all streets are elevated sufficiently
to be above the regulatory flood elevation; all lots for residential usage have
a flood protection grade two feet above the regulatory flood elevation; where
provided, water and sanitary sewer facilities are constructed to eliminate
contamination of or by, flood water; and approval to fill the area from the
Natural Resource Commission has been obtained in writing. Lands below the
regulatory flood elevation shall not be used for computing the area requirement
for any lot.
      (9)   Floodplain areas.
         (a)   General. Where a subdivision is proposed within an area of the
floodplain for which floodway and floodway fringe designations have not been
made, the Commission shall not approve such a subdivision unless all streets
are raised sufficiently to be above the regulatory flood elevation; all lots
for residential usage have a flood protection grade of two feet above the
regulatory flood elevation; where provided, public water and sanitary sewer
facilities are constructed to eliminate contamination of or by flood water;
and, filling to achieve the above will not raise the level of the regulatory
flood elevation more than one-tenth of one foot for that reach of the stream.
All filling in the floodplain must be approved in writing by the state’s
Natural Resources Commission. Lands below the regulatory flood elevation shall
not be used for computing the area requirement for any lot.
         (b)   Subdivisions of floodplain.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5845d03809c2b13194ec9ac2486edd9aec822e0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1197.jpg]
         (c)   Floodplain delineation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5845d03809c2b13194ec9ac2486edd9aec822e0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1199.jpg]
      (10)   Recording of plats in the floodplain and floodway fringe. All
final plats having within their boundaries areas whose elevation is below that
of the regulatory flood elevation shall show and label the regulatory flood
boundary and elevation, as of the date the final plat is drawn, on the final
plat for recording.
   (C)   Dedication of drainage easements.
      (1)   General requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
drainage course, drainageway channel, or stream, a storm water easement or
drainage right-of-way shall be provided, granted, or dedicated to the city
conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width
and construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose of both drainage
and maintenance of the right-of-way. Wherever possible, it is desirable that
the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and
adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow.
      (2)   Drainage easements.
         (a)   Where topography or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within street rights-of-way,
perpetual unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for such drainage
facilities shall be provided across property outside the right-of-way lines and
with satisfactory access to the street. Easements shall be indicated on the
plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the street to a natural
watercourse or to other drainage facilities.
         (b)   The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or
conservation, easement land on both sides of existing watercourses of a width
to be determined by the Commission and, in the case of legal drains, the County
Drainage Board.
         (c)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private
land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and
indicated on the plat.
         (d)   Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or
overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for
dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as
drainageways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be
included in the computations for determining the number of lots allowable under
average density procedures nor for computing the area requirement for any
individual lot.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.043 WATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   The applicant shall take all actions necessary to extend or create
a water-supply district for the purpose of providing a water-supply system
capable of providing for domestic water use and fire protection.
      (2)   Where a public water main is accessible, the subdivider shall
install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) conforming to the
requirements and specifications of the state or local authorities. All water
mains shall be least six inches in diameter.
      (3)   Water main extensions shall be approved by the officially
designated agency of the state or city.
      (4)   To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, water
supply improvements, and the boundary lines of proposed districts indicating
all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the preliminary plat,
and the cost of installing same shall be included in the performance bond to be
furnished by the subdivider.
      (5)   The design of all water facilities shall conform to or exceed the
standards described in the latest edition of Recommended Standards for Water
Works as published by Health Education Service, Inc., Albany, New York.
   (B)   Individual wells and central water systems.
      (1)   In low-intensity zoning districts, if a public water system is not
available, at the discretion of the Commission, individual wells may be used or
a central water system provided in such a manner that an adequate supply of
potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision. Water sample
test results shall be submitted to the Health Department for its approval, and
individual wells and central water systems shall be approved by the appropriate
health authorities. These approvals shall be submitted to the Commission.
      (2)   If the Commission requires that a connection to a public water main
eventually provided as a condition for approval of an individual well or
central water system, the applicant shall make arrangements for future water
service at the time the plat receives secondary approval. Performance or cash
bonds may be required to ensure compliance.
   (C)   Fire hydrants. Hydrants should be provided at each street intersection
and at intermediate points between intersections as recommended by the State
Insurance Services Office and the local Fire Department. Generally, hydrant
spacing may range from 350 to 600 feet depending on the nature of the area
being served as determined by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.044 SEWERAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. The subdivider shall install sanitary sewer
facilities in a manner prescribed by the city construction standards and
specifications. All plans shall be designed in accordance with the rules,
regulations, and standards of the City Engineer, Health Department, and other
appropriate state and federal agencies. In addition, the design shall meet or
exceed the minimum standards described in the latest edition of Recommended
Standards for Sewage Works as published by the Health Education Service,
Albany, New York, and plans shall be approved by all state and federal agencies
where required by those agencies.
   (B)   Sanitary sewerage system requirements. Where provided, sanitary
sewerage facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewerage systems, and
shall be installed to serve each lot to grades and sizes required by approving
officials and agencies. Sanitary sewerage facilities (including the
installation of laterals in the right-of-way) shall be subject to the
specifications, rules, regulations, and guidelines of the Health Officer,
participating jurisdiction, and appropriate state agency.
   (C)   Individual disposal system requirements. If public sewer facilities
are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot
areas shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance and any
ordinance of any participating jurisdiction (where applicable) establishing lot
areas for individual sewerage disposal systems.
   (D)   Selected design criteria.
      (1)   Alignment. All sewers shall be laid with a straight alignment
between manholes, unless otherwise directed or approved by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Manhole location. Manholes shall be installed at the end of each
line, and at distances not greater than 400 feet for sewers 18 inches in
diameter and larger.
      (3)   Manholes. The difference in elevation between any incoming sewer
and the manhole invert shall not exceed 12 inches where required to match
crowns. The use of drop manholes requires approval by the City Engineer. The
minimum inside diameter of the manholes shall conform to those specified by the
City Engineer. Inside drop manholes will require special consideration;
however, in no case shall the minimum clear distance be less than that
indicated herein. The relationships between intersection sewer lines shall meet
the standards required by the City Engineer. (See division (D)(1) above.)
      (4)   Sewerage locations. Sanitary sewers shall be located within street
or alley rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in
easements on private property, access shall be provided to all manholes. Where
sewer lines in private easements cross public street or alley rights-of-way, a
manhole shall be provided in such rights-of-way where possible. Imposed loading
shall be considered at all manhole locations. Not less than six feet of cover
shall be provided over the top of pipe in street and alley rights-of-way or
three feet in all other areas.
      (5)   Cleanouts. Cleanouts will not be permitted.
      (6)   Water supply interconnections. There shall be no physical
connection between a public or private potable water supply system and a sewer
which will permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable
water system. Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or other
water supply sources and structures.
      (7)   Relation of sewers to water mains. A minimum horizontal distance of
ten feet shall be maintained between parallel water and sewer lines. At points
where sewers cross water mains, the sewer shall be constructed of cast iron
pipe or encased in concrete for a distance of ten feet in each direction from
the crossing, measured perpendicular to the water line. This will not be
required when the water line is at least two feet above the sewer line.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.045 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Required improvements.
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated, unpaved portions
of the rights-of-way of all streets as follows.
 
Required Sidewalks in Urban Cross-Section
Street Type                                               Standard Width
All residential: place, local street, collecter, arterial Four feet
Arterial                                                  Six feet
Nonresidential: local street, collector                   Four feet
 
      (2)   Concrete curbs are required for all streets where sidewalks are
required by these regulations or required at the discretion of the Commission.
      (3)   A grassed or landscaped median strip at least two feet wide shall
separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs. The median strip shall be improved
according to §
150.041(B).
   (B)   Pedestrian accesses. In order to facilitate pedestrian access from the
street to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other nearby streets, the Commission
may require perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width. Such
easements shall be indicated on both the preliminary and final plats.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.046 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Location. All utility lines, including, but not limited to, gas,
electric power, telephone, and CATV cables shall be located underground
throughout the subdivision. Wherever existing lines are located above ground,
except on public roads and rights-of-way, they shall be removed and placed
underground. All utility lines and other facilities existing and proposed
throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat or sketch
plan in the case of a minor subdivision. Underground service connections to the
street property line of each platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider’s
expense. At the discretion of the Commission, the requirement for service
connections to each lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be
retained in single ownership intended to be developed for the same primary use.
   (B)   Easements.
      (1)   Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for
utilities (private and municipal). Such easements shall be at least ten feet
wide. Proper coordination shall be established between the subdivider and the
applicable utility companies for the coordination of utility easements with
those established in adjoining properties.
      (2)   Where topographical or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines, perpetual
unobserved easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided along side
lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines. All easements
shall be indicated on preliminary and final plats.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.047 PUBLIC USES.
   (A)   Parks, playgrounds, and recreation areas.
      (1)   Recreation standards. The Commission shall require that land be
reserved for parks and playgrounds or other recreational purposes in locations
designated on the Comprehensive Plan or otherwise where such reservations would
be appropriate. Each reservation shall be of suitable size, dimension,
topography, and general character and shall have adequate road access for the
particular purposes envisioned by the Commission. The area shall be shown and
marked on the plat: “reserved for park and/or recreational purposes.” When
recreation areas are required, the Commission shall determine the number of
acres to be reserved from the following table, which has been prepared on the
basis of providing three acres of recreation area for every 100 dwelling units.
The Commission may refer such proposed reservations to the local government
official or agency in charge of parks and recreation for recommendation. If
approved by such official or agency, the developer shall dedicate all such
recreation areas to the local government as a condition of secondary approval.
         (a)   Recreation requirements are as follows.
Recreation Requirements
Single-Family Lots    Percentage of Total Land in Subdivision to be Reserved
Size of Lot (Sq. ft.) for Recreation Purposes
Recreation Requirements
Single-Family Lots    Percentage of Total Land in Subdivision to be Reserved
Size of Lot (Sq. ft.) for Recreation Purposes
80,000 and greater    1.5%
50,000                2.5%
40,000                3%
35,000                3.5%
25,000                5%
15,000                8%
 
         (b)   In general, land reserved for recreation purposes shall have an
area of at least four acres. When the Commission may require that the
recreation area be located at a suitable place on the edge of the subdivision
so that additional land may be added at such time as the adjacent land is
subdivided. In no case shall an area of less than two acres be reserved for
recreational purposes where it is impractical or impossible to secure
additional lands in order to increase its area. When recreational land in any
subdivision is not reserved, or the land reserved is less than the percentage
indicated in division (A)(1)(a) above, the provisions of division (A)(4) below
shall be applicable.
      (2)   Recreation sites. Land to be reserved for recreation purposes shall
be of a character and location suitable for use as playground, play field, or
other active recreation purposes and shall be relatively level and dry. It
shall be improved by the developer to the standards required by the Commission,
and the cost of the improvements shall be included in the amount of the
performance bond. Passive recreation areas along stream valleys may be accepted
by the Commission as part of the required area if adequate flat land is also
provided for space-consuming recreation activities. A recreation site shall
have a total frontage on one or more streets of at least 200 feet except for
stream-valley and other linear passive recreation areas which shall at no point
be narrower than 50 feet. The Commission may refer any subdivision intended to
contain a dedicated park to the local government official, department, or
agency in charge of parks and recreation for a recommendation. All land to be
reserved for dedication to the city for park purposes shall have the prior
approval of the city and shall be shown as a plat as “reserved for park or
recreation purposes.”
      (3)   Applicability to land using average density provisions. Any
subdivision plat in which the principal of flexible zoning has been used shall
not be exempt from the provisions of this section except as to any portion of
the land area which is actually dedicated to the city for park and recreation
purposes. If no additional area, other than the area to be reserved through
averaging, is required by the Commissions, the full fee shall be paid as
required in division (A)(4) below. If further land is required for reservation,
apart from the reserved by averaging, credit shall be given as provided by
division (A)(4) below.
      (4)   Other recreation reservations. The provisions of this section are
minimum standards. None of the preceding sections of this chapter shall be
construed as prohibiting a developer from reserving other land for recreation
purposes in addition to the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Other public uses.
      (1)   Plat to provide for public uses. Whenever a tract to be subdivided
includes a school, recreation areas, (in excess of the requirements of division
(A) above), or other public uses as indicated on the Comprehensive Plan or any
portion thereof, such space shall be suitably incorporated by the applicant
into his or her sketch plan except when an applicant uses planned unit
development procedures in which land is set aside by the developer for public
use as required under those procedures in the zoning ordinance. After proper
determination of its necessity by the Commission and the appropriate city
official or other public agency involved in the acquisition and use of each
such site and a determination has been made to acquire the site by the public
agency, the site shall be suitably incorporated by the applicant into the
preliminary and final plats. Upon such determination by the Commission, the
following shall apply.
         (a)   Referral to public agency. The Commission shall refer the sketch
plan to the public agency concerned with acquisition for its consideration and
report. The Commission may propose alternate areas for such acquisition and
shall allow the public agency 30 days for reply. The public agency’s
recommendation, if affirmative, shall include a map showing the boundaries and
area of the parcel to be acquired and an estimate of the time within five years
required to complete the acquisition.
         (b)   Notice to property owner. Upon a receipt of an affirmative
report the Commission shall notify the property owner and the Administrator
shall designate on the preliminary and final plats each area proposed to be
acquired by a public agency.
      (2)   Duration of land reservation. The acquisition of land reserved by a
public agency on the final plat shall be initiated within five years of
notification in writing from the owner that he or she intends to develop the
land. Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a site plan of the proposed
development and a tentative schedule of construction. Failure on the part of a
public agency to initiate acquisition within the prescribed five years shall
result in the removal of the “reserved” designation from the property involved
and the freeing of the property for development in accordance with these
regulations.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.048 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES.
   (A)   General. Existing features which would add value to the type of
intended development or to the city as a whole, such as trees, watercourses
falls, beaches, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be
preserved in the design of the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any
subdivision nor any change of grade of the land affected until primary approval
of the preliminary plat has been granted. All trees on the plat which are
required to be retained shall be preserved, and all trees, where needed, shall
be welled and protected against change of grade. The sketch plan shall show the
number and location of existing trees, as required by these regulations, and
shall further indicate all those marked for retention and the location of all
proposed shade trees required along the street side(s) of each lot as required
by these regulations.
   (B)   Shade trees planted by developer.
      (1)   As a requirement for subdivision secondary approval, the applicant
shall plant trees on the property of the subdivision. Such trees are to be
planted within five feet of the right-of-way of the street or streets within
and abutting the subdivision, or at the discretion of the Commission and the
City Engineer, within the right-of-way of such streets. One tree shall be
planted for every 40 feet of frontage along each street unless the Commission,
upon recommendation of the City Engineer, shall grant a waiver in accordance
with §
150.012. Such waiver shall be granted only if there are existing trees growing
along such a right-of-way or on the abutting property which, in the opinion of
the Commission, comply with these regulations.
      (2)   New trees to be provided pursuant to these regulations shall be
approved by the City Engineer shall be planted in accordance with the
regulations of the City Engineer. Such trees have a minimum trunk diameter
(measured 12 inches above ground level) of not less than two inches. Only Oak,
Honey Locust, Hard Maples, Ginkgo, or other long-lived shade trees acceptable
to the City Engineer and to the Commission, shall be planted.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.049 NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for
commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect
to such land shall meet such special provisions as the Commission finds
appropriate and requires. A nonresidential subdivision shall also be subject to
all the requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance. Site plan approval and
nonresidential subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the
discretion of the Planning Commission. A nonresidential subdivision shall be
subject to all the requirements of these regulations as well as such additional
standards required by the Commission and shall conform to the proposed land use
and standards established in the Comprehensive Plan, official map, and zoning
ordinance, except that where lot lines are to be established incrementally,
they need not be shown on the sketch plan or the preliminary plat for primary
approval. All shopping centers and other nonresidential subdivisions of
buildings for leasehold shall be subject to the relevant provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in these
regulations which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the
applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the
street, parcel, and block pattern proposed for the uses anticipated and
adequately take into account other uses in the vicinity. The following
principles and standards shall be observed.
      (1)   Proposed commercial or industrial parcels shall be suitable in
minimum area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated.
Proposals for incremental lot by lot subdivision must be made clear in a
statement on the preliminary plat which is satisfactory to the Commission.
      (2)   Street rights-of-way and pavement construction shall be adequate to
accommodate the type and volume of traffic to be generated thereupon.
      (3)   Special requirements may be imposed by the Commission upon
recommendation of the city with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk
design and construction.
      (4)   Special requirements may be imposed by the Commission with respect
to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and storm
water drainage and preprocessing of sewage. Special requirements may also be
imposed regarding the storage and disposal of toxic materials.
      (5)   Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas
from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision,
including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing onto existing or
potential residential development and provision of a permanently landscaped
buffer strip where necessary.
      (6)   Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic,
shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or
potential residential areas.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
STREETS
§ 150.060 GENERAL.
   (A)   Frontage on improved streets. No subdivision shall be approved unless
the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access from an existing
street on the official map, or if there is not an official map, unless such a
street is:
      (1)   An existing state, county, or township highway; or
      (2)   A street shown upon a plat approved by the Commission and recorded
in the office of the County Recorder. Such street or highway must be suitably
improved as required by the highway rules, regulation specifications, or
orders, or be secured by a performance bond required under these regulations,
with the width and right-of-way required by these regulations or as indicated
on the official map or thoroughfare plan. Whenever the area to be subdivided is
to use an existing street frontage, such street shall be suitably improved as
provided hereinabove.
   (B)   Grading and improvement plan. Streets shall be graded and improved and
conform to the city construction standards and specifications and shall be
approved as to design and specifications by the City Engineer, in accordance
with the construction plans required to be submitted prior to secondary
approval.
   (C)   Topography and arrangement.
      (1)   Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography. All
streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building
sites at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform
as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep
grades and sharp curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in
the design standards of these regulations.
      (2)   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established on
the official map or thoroughfare plan, and/or Comprehensive Plan.
      (3)   All arterials and collector streets shall be properly related to
special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools,
churches, and shopping centers, to population densities, and to the pattern of
existing and proposed land uses.
      (4)   Minor or local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as
possible to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit
efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of
streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to the property.
      (5)   Rigid, rectangular “gridiron” street patterns are generally to be
avoided, and the use of casually curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs, or loop
streets shall be encouraged where such use will result in a more desirable
layout and relate better to the existing topography. On flat land, innovative,
varying geometrical street patterns shall be encouraged where they are likely
to enhance visual interest and a sense of order for those using them (e.g.,
non-grid rectilinear, trapezoidal, polygonal, or other geometric patterns).
      (6)   Proposed streets shall, where appropriate, be extended to the
boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided unless this is prevented by
topography or other physical conditions, or unless, in the opinion of the
Commission, such extension(s) is/are not necessary or desirable for the
coordination of the layout of the subdivision under consideration with the
existing street layout or for the most advantageous future development of
adjacent tracts (see § 150.061(A)).
      (7)   In business and industrial developments, the streets and other
accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings,
location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and
maneuvering areas, walkways, bikeways, and parking areas so as to minimize
conflict of movement between the various types of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
   (D)   Blocks.
      (1)   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots
of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be
permitted in blocks adjacent to arterial streets, railroads, and waterways.
      (2)   The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but
block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 2,600 feet nor be less than
400 feet in length. Blocks along arterial and collector streets shall not be
less than 1,000 feet in length.
      (3)   In long blocks, the Commission may require the reservation of
easements through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or
pedestrian traffic. Pedestrianways or crosswalks not less than ten feet wide
may be required by the Commission through the center of blocks more than 800
feet long or at other appropriate locations and at the ends of the cul-de-sacs
where deemed essential to provide for circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community facilities.
Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and width as may be
determined to be suitable by the Commission for the intended use.
   (E)   Access to collector streets. Where possible, lots in single family
residential subdivisions fronting on collector streets shall be avoided and
lots at the corners of intersections between local and collector streets shall
front on the local street and have driveway access to it only and not to the
collector street. In multiple-family residential areas entrances to group
parking lots shall have access only to collector streets (where possible), and
such entrances shall be widely spaced.
   (F)   Access to primary arterials. Where a subdivision borders on or
contains an existing or proposed primary arterial, the Commission may require
that access to it be limited by one of the following means:
      (1)   The subdivision of the lots so as to back onto the primary arterial
and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be provided for the
primary arterial, and screening shall be provided within a strip of land along
the rear property line of such lots;
      (2)   The series of cul-de-sacs, or loop streets entered from, and
designed generally to be at right angles to an access street that is at some
distance from and parallel to the arterial street, with the rear lines of their
terminal lots backing onto the arterial; and
      (3)   A marginal access or service road (separated from the primary
arterial by a landscaped and/or decoratively fenced grass trip and having
access thereto at widely spaced suitable points).
   (G)   Street names. The sketch plan, as submitted, shall indicate names of
proposed streets. As part of his or her review, the Administrator shall refer
proposed street names to the local postmaster for his or her comments regarding
duplication of names and possible confusion. After reviewing them, the
Administrator shall inform the subdivider of his or her recommendations for
their possible revision during the sketch plan review. Names shall be
sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from other street names in the
county or other nearby areas so as to avoid confusion. A street which is, or is
planned as, a continuation of an existing street shall bear the same name.
   (H)   Street regulatory signs. The applicant shall provide and install a
street sign at every street intersection within his or her subdivision as
required by the City Engineer. The city shall inspect and approve all street
signs before issuance of certificates of occupancy for any residence on the
approved streets.
   (I)   Street lights. Installation of street lights shall be required in
accordance with design and specification standards approved by the City
Engineer. Street light standards and fixtures shall also be in accordance with
the visual design standards of the City Engineer.
   (J)   Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted
adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access to it from
adjacent property if such street is a local service street rather than a
collector or arterial street. (See divisions (E) and (F) above).
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.061 CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Construction of streets other than cul-de-sacs. The arrangement of
streets shall provide for the continuation of streets between adjacent
subdivisions or other properties when such continuation is necessary for the
convenient movement of traffic, for effective fire protection, for efficient
provision of utilities, and where such continuation is in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must
be a dead-end (stub) street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be provided for
all such temporary dead-end streets, with the notation on the subdivision plan
that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutters
whenever the street is continued. Temporary turnarounds must be provided at the
ends of such stub streets. The Commission may limit the length of temporary
dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards in these regulations.
   (B)   Cul-de-sacs (permanent dead-end streets). Where a street does not
extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not
required by the Commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall
normally not be nearer to such boundary than 50 feet. However, the Commission
may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage
facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be
provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street in accordance with city
construction standards and specifications available from the City Engineer’s
office. For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire
protection, permanent dead-end streets shall be limited in length in accordance
with the design standards in these regulations.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.062 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   General. In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width,
and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory
access for police, firefighting, snow removal, sanitation, and street
maintenance equipment, and to coordinate street location in order to achieve a
convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the
following design standards for streets are hereby required. (Street
classifications may be indicated in the Comprehensive Plan, thoroughfare plan,
or on the official map; otherwise, they shall be determined by the Commission.)
   (B)   Street surfacing and improvements. After sewer and water utilities
have been installed by the developer, the applicant shall construct curbs and
gutters and shall surface or cause the roadways to be surfaced to the widths
prescribed in these regulations. Said surfacing shall be of such character as
is suitable for the expected traffic and in harmony with similar improvements
in the surrounding areas. Types of pavement shall be as determined by the City
Engineer. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges.
All street pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements, and structures, curbs,
turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and
specifications adopted by the Commission, City Engineer, or the city and shall
be incorporated into the construction plans required to be submitted by the
developer for plat approval.
   (C)   Excess right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards
designed in these regulations shall be required whenever, due to topography,
additional width is necessary to provide for adequate and stable earth slopes.
Such slopes shall not be in excess of three to one.
   (D)   Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad rights-of-way and
limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of
adjoining lands shall be treated as follows.
      (1)   In residential districts, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth
in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall be
provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This
strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat:
“this strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structures hereon other
than earth berms, walls, fences, and other landscape screening devices approved
by the Commission is prohibited.”
      (2)   In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses,
the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to a railroad
shall, wherever practical, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure a
suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.
      (3)   Streets parallel to a railroad when intersecting a street which
crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a
distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance
shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for
future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.
   (E)   Intersections.
      (1)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less
than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be
approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet therefrom. Not more than
two streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by
the Commission.
      (2)   Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street
shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersection on the
opposite side of such street. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than
150 feet shall not be permitted except where the intersected street has
separated, dual drives, without median breaks at either such intersection.
Where local streets intersect with arterials, their alignment shall be
continuous. Intersections of arterials shall be at least 800 feet apart.
      (3)   Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local streets shall
be at least 20 feet, and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a
collector street shall be at least 25 feet. Alley intersections and abrupt
changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in
accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular
movement.
      (4)   Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a
leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a 2% grade at a
distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the
intersection street.
      (5)   Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing
vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting
visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including
trimming trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to
the extent deemed necessary by the City Engineer to provide an adequate sight
distance.
      (6)   The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall be
3% or less.
   (F)   Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined by
the Commission, shall be constructed at the full expense of the applicant
without reimbursement from the city. The sharing of expense for the
construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined
by the Commission, will be fixed by special agreement between the city and the
applicant. Said cost shall be charged to the applicant pro-rata as the
percentage of his or her land developed and so served.
   (G)   Typical rural cross-sections for major streets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5845d03809c2b13194ec9ac2486edd9aec822e0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1201.jpg]
   (H)   Typical urban cross-sections for major streets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5845d03809c2b13194ec9ac2486edd9aec822e0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1203.jpg]
   (I)   Design standards for streets.
       Min.  Min.   Min.                 Min.   Min.             Min.
       Width Pvmnt. Side  Min.     Max   Radius Length  Min.     Corner Min.
Street R-O-  Width  Ditch Shoulder Grade of     of      Sight    Radius Turnaround
Type   W     (1)    Width Width    (%)   Curve  Tangent Distance (4)    (5) (ft.)
       (ft.) (ft.)  (ft.) (ft.)         (ft.)  (3)     (ft.)    (ft.)   
                                           (ft.)            
                                                 
                               Min.  Min.   Min.                 Min.   Min.             Min.
                               Width Pvmnt. Side  Min.     Max   Radius Length  Min.     Corner Min.
                               R-O-  Width  Ditch Shoulder Grade of     of      Sight    Radius Turnaround
Street Type                    W     (1)    Width Width    (%)   Curve  Tangent Distance (4)    (5) (ft.)
                               (ft.) (ft.)  (ft.) (ft.)         (ft.)  (3)     (ft.)    (ft.)   
                                                                   (ft.)            
                                                                         
        Resident.    Place     40    18     N/A   N/A      7.5   100    100     200      20     80/60
        (6)          Local     50    26     N/A   N/A      7.5   100    100     200      20     100/80
                    Street
Urban                Collector 60    33     N/A   N/A      7.0   100    150     240      25     N/A
Cross-  Nonresident. Local     60    30     N/A   N/A      6.0   200    200     200      40     160/140
Section             Street
                    Collector 70    40     N/A   N/A      6.0   200    200     240      40     N/A
                     Secondary 70    44     N/A   N/A      (2)   (2)    (2)     (2)      (2)    N/A
        Arterial     Primary   80    54     N/A   N/A      (2)   (2)    (2)     (2)      (2)    N/A
                    Divided   100   2-24   N/A   N/A      (2)   (2)    (2)     (2)      (2)    N/A
                     Primary
        Resident.    Place     50    18     10    6        7.5   100    100     200      20     100/76
        (6)          Local     60    26     10    6        7.5   100    100     200      20     100/76
                    Street
Rural                Collector 65    33     10    6        7.0   100    150     240      25     N/A
Cross-  Nonresident. Local     65    30     10    6        6.0   200    200     200      40     160/140
Section             Street
                    Collector 75    40     10    6        6.0   200    200     240      40     N/A
                     Secondary 80    24     22    6        (2)   (2)    (2)     (2)      (2)    N/A
        Arterial     Primary   120   48     28    8        (2)   (2)    (2)     (2)      (2)    N/A
                    Divided   150   2-24   31    10       (2)   (2)    (2)     (2)      (2)    N/A
                     Primary
Notes to table:
(1)   Curb and gutter is in addition on urban cross-sections (combined two-foot minimum on each side).
(2)   As required by the Local Government Engineer and/or State Highway Commission.
(3)   Between reverse curves.
(4)   Measured at curb on urban cross-sections, at pavement edge on rural cross-sections. Transitional
curve into the turnaround within cul-de-sac: residential - 50 feet; nonresidential - 100 feet.
(5)   Diameter, measured at edge of right-of-way/edge of pavement, or back to back or curb on urban cross-
sections.
(6)   Includes subdivisions for uses permitted in residential districts as a matter of right or through
special exception.
 
   (J)   Standards applied to all streets.
      (1)   Minimum grade: 0.5%;
      (2)   Minimum block length: 400 feet (1,000 feet between collectors along
arterials);
      (3)   Maximum block length: 2,600 feet;
      (4)   Maximum cul-de-sac length: 800 feet;
      (5)   Maximum length of temporary dead-end street: 1,000 feet; and
      (6)   Minimum length of vertical curves: 100 feet, but not less than 20
feet for each percent of algebraic difference in grade.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.063 DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS.
   (A)   New perimeter streets. Street systems in new subdivisions shall be
laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an
existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the
street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The Commission may
authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates
the entire required right-of-way width within his or her own subdivision’s
boundaries.
   (B)   Widening and realignment of existing streets. Where a subdivision
borders an existing narrow
street or when the Comprehensive Plan, thoroughfare plan, or zoning setback
regulations indicate plans for realignment or widening of a street that would
require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be
required to improve and dedicate such streets at his or her own expense. Such
frontage streets and other streets on which subdivision lots front shall be
improved and dedicated by the applicant at his or her own expense to the full
width required by these subdivision regulations. Land reserved for any street
purposes may not be counted in satisfying the yard or area requirements of the
zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
§ 150.075 IMPROVEMENTS AND PERFORMANCE BOND.
   (A)   Completion of improvements. Before the plan is signed by the
designated officials, all applicants shall be required to complete, in
accordance with the Commission’s decision and to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer, all the streets, sanitary, and other public improvements, including
lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision as required in this
chapter, specified in the approved construction plans and on the final
subdivision plat, and as approved by the Commission and to dedicate the public
improvements to the city, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the
property and public improvements thus dedicated.
   (B)   Performance bond.
      (1)   The Commission, in its sole discretion, may waive the requirement
that the applicant complete all public improvements prior to the approval of
the final subdivision plat or section thereof, and that, in lieu thereof, the
applicant shall post bond securable to city, hereinafter referred to as
“performance bond,” in an amount equivalent to 100% of the estimated cost of
completion of the required public improvements. This amount of bond shall be
sufficient to secure to the city jurisdiction the satisfactory construction and
installation of the uncompleted portion of required public improvements, as
provided for in §§
150.027(G)(1)(a) and 150.028(H)(1)(a).
      (2)   In lieu of such a bond, the subdivider may submit a certified check
made payable to the city in an amount equivalent to 100% of the estimated cost
of completion of the uncompleted portion of required public improvements as
provided for in §§
150.027(G)(1)(a) and 150.028(H)(1)(a). Any such check shall be held by the
Clerk Treasurer of the city.
      (3)   In lieu of such a bond, the subdivider may submit irrevocable
letters of credit on behalf of the subdivider and securable by the city in an
amount equivalent to 100% of the estimated cost of completion of the
uncompleted portion of required public improvements as provided in §§
150.027(G)(1)(a) and 150.028(H)(1)(a). In the event an irrevocable letter of
credit is used, it shall be written for a maximum length of two years. The
Commission, two months prior to the expiration of the letter of credit, shall
determine if the public improvements have been accepted for maintenance by the
city or other units of government having jurisdiction over them, and if they
have not been accepted, shall so notify the subdivider of the city’s intent to
secure the funds pledged by such letter of credit or, at the discretion of the
Commission, to grant an extension of the original period fixed by the
Commission. No extension shall exceed one year, and the subdivider filing with
the Commission a new letter of credit for the period so extended.
      (4)   In lieu of such a bond, the subdivider may submit a certificate of
deposit made out to either the city and the subdivider to be held by the Clerk
Treasurer of the city in the amount equivalent to 100% of the cost of
completion of the uncompleted portion of required public improvements as
provided for §§
150.027(G)(1)(a) and 150.028(H)(1)(a). The subdivider must endorse the
certificate of deposit before submitting it to the Commission so the said city
may secure the funds.
      (5)   A performance bond furnished pursuant to this chapter shall comply
with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the Commission
Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution as set forth in this
chapter. (See Appendix A for forms.) The period within which required public
improvements must be completed shall be specified by the Commission in the
primary approval of the preliminary plat and shall be incorporated into the
bond and shall not in any event exceed two years from date of secondary
approval. Such bond shall be approved by the participating jurisdiction as to
amount. The Commission may, upon proof of difficulty, grant an extension of the
completion date set forth in such bond for a maximum period of one additional
year, provided that the bond submitted for this extension period meets all
other requirements herein. The Commission may, at any time during the term of
such bond, accept a substitution of principal or sureties on the bond.
   (C)   Temporary public improvements. The applicant shall build and pay for
all costs of temporary improvements required by the Commission and shall
maintain same for the period specified by the Commission. Prior to construction
of any temporary public facility or improvement, the subdivider shall file with
the Commission a separate suitable bond for temporary facilities. This bond
shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed,
maintained, and removed (except for turnaround at ends of the peripheral stub
streets intended for connection into adjacent future subdivisions).
   (D)   Cost of public improvements. All required public improvements shall be
made by the applicant at his or her expense without reimbursement by the city
or any public improvement district therein, unless sharing of expenses is
agreed upon by the city.
   (E)   Governmental units. Governmental units to which these bond provisions
apply may file a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agencies
authorized to act in their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of
this section in lieu of said bond.
   (F)   Failure to complete public improvements. For subdivisions for which no
performance bond has been posted, if the public improvements are not completed
within the period specified by the Commission in the primary approval of the
preliminary plat, or the sketch plan in the case of a minor subdivision, the
approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where a performance
bond has been posted and the required public improvements have not been
installed within the terms of such performance bond, the participating
jurisdiction may thereupon request the city to declare the bond to be in
default and cause all public improvements to be installed according to
secondary approval regardless of the extent of the building development at the
time the bond is declared to be in default.
   (G)   Acceptance of dedication offers. The approval by the Commission of a
subdivider plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by
the city of any street, easement, or park shown on said plat. The Commission
may require said plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. The
approval relates only to the real property itself.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.076 INSPECTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   General procedure.
      (1)   If the city finds upon inspection per §§
150.027(G)(1)(a) and 150.028(H)(1)(a) that any of the improvements have not
been constructed in accordance with the approved construction plans, the
applicant shall be responsible for completing the public improvements according
to such plans.
      (2)   Where the cost of the public improvements is covered by a
performance bond, the applicant and the bonding company shall be severally and
jointly liable for completing the public improvements according to
specifications.
   (B)   Release or reduction of performance bond.
      (1)   Certificate of satisfactory completion.
         (a)   The city shall not accept required public improvements, nor the
Commission release nor reduce a performance bond, until the city has submitted
to it a certificate stating that all required public improvements or a pro rata
part in the case of a reduction have been satisfactorily completed.
         (b)   The applicant’s engineer or surveyor shall provide the
participating jurisdiction with detailed “as built” construction plans of the
public improvements, indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other
information required by the Commission or participating jurisdiction.
         (c)   Upon such certification, the city shall thereafter accept the
public improvements for maintenance in accordance with the established
procedures unless the city has reliable information as to noncompliance with
the plans and specifications.
      (2)   Reduction of performance bond. A performance bond shall be reduced
upon actual acceptance of public improvements, but only by the amount
originally estimated for the completion of said public improvements.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.077 MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The applicant shall be required to maintain all public improvements on
the individual subdivided lots and provide for snow removal on streets and
sidewalks (where required) until acceptance of said public improvements by the
city.
   (B)   (1)   The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance bond with
the Commission prior to acceptance, in an amount not to exceed 10% of the cost
of all public improvements, and in form satisfactory to the Commission
Attorney.
      (2)   The maintenance bond is provided to assure the satisfactory
condition of the required public improvements for a period of three years after
the date of their acceptance by the city.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.078 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permits shall be issued for the last 10% of lots in a final
subdivision plat or section thereof, or if 10% be less than two, for the last
two lots of a subdivision or section thereof, until all public improvements
required by the Commission for the plat with the exception of sidewalks have
been fully completed and accepted for maintenance by the city.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
SPECIFICATIONS FOR DOCUMENTS
§ 150.090 SKETCH PLAN.
   Sketch plans submitted to the Commission, prepared in pen or pencil, shall
be drawn to a convenient scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch and shall
show the following information.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5845d03809c2b13194ec9ac2486edd9aec822e0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1205.jpg]
   (A)   Name.
      (1)   Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision;
      (2)   Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The
proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any subdivision plat previously
recorded nor for which primary approval is still in effect; and
      (3)   Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen. (This is
commonly the name by which the property is locally known.)
   (B)   Ownership.
      (1)   Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner or
agent of property, and citation of last instrument conveying title to each
parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving granter,
grantee, date, and land records reference;
      (2)   Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting
the property;
      (3)   A complete copy of any existing covenants on the property; and
      (4)   Name and address, including telephone number, of the professional
person(s) responsible for subdivision design, for the design of the public
improvements, and for surveys.
   (C)   Description. Location of property, name of local jurisdiction, lot,
section, township, range, and county, graphic scale, north arrow, and date.
   (D)   Features to be included on sketch plans.
      (1)   Location of property lines, existing easements, burial grounds,
railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, and existing wooded areas or trees eight
inches or more in diameter, measured four feet above ground level (see §
150.048(A)); location, width, and names of all existing or platted streets or
other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract, names of
adjacent and adjoining property owners (from the latest assessment rolls);
      (2)   Location, sizes, elevations, and slopes of existing sewers, water
mains, culverts, and other underground structures within the tract and
immediately adjacent thereto; existing permanent buildings and utility poles on
or immediately adjacent to the site and utility rights-of-way;
      (3)   Approximate topography, at the same scale as the sketch plan
(normally showing two-foot contour intervals but the Administrator may require
one-foot intervals on very flat land or permit five- foot intervals on very
steep slopes);
      (4)   The approximate location and widths of proposed streets;
      (5)   Preliminary proposals for connection with existing water supply and
sanitary sewage systems, or alternative means of providing water supply and
sanitary waste treatment and disposal; preliminary provisions for collecting
and discharging surface water drainage;
      (6)   The approximate location, dimensions, and areas of all proposed of
existing lots;
      (7)   The approximate locations, dimensions, and areas of all parcels of
land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public use,
or for the use of property owners in the proposed subdivision;
      (8)   The location of temporary stakes to enable the Commission to find
and appraise features of the sketch plan in the field;
      (9)   Whenever the sketch plan covers only a part of an applicant’s
contiguous holdings, the applicant shall submit, at the scale of no more than
200 feet to the inch, a sketch in pen or pencil of the proposed subdivision
area, together with its proposed street system, and an indication of the
probable future street and drainage system of the remaining portion of the
tract;
      (10)   A vicinity map showing streets and other general development of
the surrounding area. The sketch plan shall show all schools and improvement
district lines with the zones properly designated; and
      (11)   If the subdivision is classified as a minor subdivision, the
sketch plan must also comply with §
150.091.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.091 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Preparation.
      (1)   The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor at a
convenient scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, may be prepared in pen
or pencil, and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more than one sheet
is used and shall be of such size as is acceptable for filing in the office of
the County Recorder, but shall not be larger than 24 by 36 inches.
      (2)   It should be noted that the map prepared for the preliminary plat
may also be used for the final subdivision plat and, therefore, should be drawn
on tracing cloth or reproducible Mylar; preparation in pencil will make
required changes and additions easier.
    (B)   Features. The preliminary plat shall show the following:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5845d03809c2b13194ec9ac2486edd9aec822e0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1207.jpg]
      (1)   The location of the property with respect to surrounding property
and streets, the names of all adjoining property owners of record, or the names
of adjoining developments; and the names of adjoining streets;
      (2)   The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property
to be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot;
      (3)   The location of existing streets, easements, water bodies, streams,
and other pertinent features such as swamps, floodplains, railroads, buildings,
parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, bridges, and topography (at the same scale
as the sketch plan);
      (4)   The location and width of all existing and proposed streets,
alleys, and other public ways and their rights-of-way, and of easements and
building setback lines, utilities, fire hydrants, and storm water facilities;
      (5)   The locations, dimensions, bearings, and areas of all proposed or
existing lots;
      (6)   The location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set
aside for park or playground use, or other public or private reservation, with
designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication
or reservation;
      (7)   The name and address of the owner or owners of land to be
subdivided, the name and address of the subdivider if other than the owner, and
the name and registration number of the land surveyor;
      (8)   The date of the map, approximate true north point, scale, and title
of the subdivision;
      (9)   Sufficient data acceptable to the City Engineer to determine
readily the location, bearing, and length of all lines, and to reproduce such
lines upon the ground; also, the location of all proposed monuments;
      (10)   Names of the subdivision and all new streets subject to approval
by the Commission;
      (11)   Indication of the use of any lot (single-family, two-family,
multi-family, townhouses) and all uses other than residential proposed by the
subdivider;
      (12)   Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical
order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name
shall be numbered or lettered consecutively throughout the several additions;
      (13)   All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered. Outlets
shall be lettered in alphabetical order. If blocks are numbered or lettered,
outlets shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each block; and
      (14)   All information required on the sketch plan should also be shown
on the preliminary plat, and the following notation shall also be shown:
         (a)   Explanation of drainage easements, if any;
         (b)   Explanation of site easements, if any;
         (c)   Explanation of site reservations, if any; and
         (d)   Endorsement of owner, as follows:
 
Owner ____________________ Date _____________________
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.092 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   (A)   General construction plans shall be prepared for all required
improvements. Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than one inch equals
50 feet, and map sheets shall be of the same size as the preliminary plat.
   (B)   The following shall be shown:
      (1)   Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations lines of all
streets. Where a proposed street intersects an existing street or streets, the
elevation along the center line of the existing line of the existing street or
streets within 100 feet of the intersection, shall be shown. Radii of all
curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all streets;
      (2)   The Commission may require, where steep slopes exist, that cross-
sections of all proposed streets at 100-foot stations shall be shown at five
points as follows: on a line at right angles to the center line of the street,
and all elevation points shall be at the center line of the street, each
property line, and points 25 feet inside each property line;
      (3)   Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross-section
of street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements,
servitude, rights-of-way, manholes, and catch basins; the locations of street
trees, street lighting standards, and street signs; the location, size, and
invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, storm water drains,
and fire hydrants, showing connection to any existing or proposed utility
systems; and exact location and size of all water, gas, or other underground
utilities or structures;
      (4)   Location, size elevation, and other appropriate description of any
existing facilities or utilities, including, but not limited to, existing
streets, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water bodies, streams,
floodplains, and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings,
features noted on the official map or Comprehensive Plan at the point of
connection to proposed facilities and utilities within the subdivision, and
each tree with a diameter of eight inches or more, measured four feet above
ground level. The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of
the survey, and the approximate high- and low-water elevations of such lakes or
streams. All elevations shall be referred to the U.S.G.S. datum plane. If the
subdivision borders a lake, river, or stream, the distances and bearings of a
meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the ordinary high-
water mark of such waterways;
      (5)   Topography at the same scale as the sketch plan with a contour
interval of two feet, referred to the sea-level datum. All date provided shall
be the latest applicable U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey data and should be so
noted on the plat;
      (6)   All specifications and references required by the city’s
construction standards and specifications, including a site-grading plan for
the entire subdivision;
      (7)   Notification of approval as follows:
 
Owner __________________________________   Date __________________
Commission President _____________________ Date __________________
 
      (8)   Title, name, address, signature, registration number, and number of
the professional engineer and/or surveyor, and date, including revision dates.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.093 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT.
   (A)   Preparation. The final subdivision plat shall be presented in India
ink on tracing cloth or reproducible Mylar at an appropriate scale and contain
the same information as on the preliminary plat, except for any changes or
additions required by the conditions of primary approval (see Figure 6-3). The
preliminary plat may be used as the final subdivision plat if it meets these
requirements and is revised in accordance with the Commission’s approval. The
final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor licensed by the
state.
   (B)   Features. All revision dates must be shown as well as the following:
      (1)   Notation of any self-imposed restrictions, and locations of any
building lines proposed to be established in this manner, if required by the
Commission in accordance with these regulations; and
      (2)   All monuments erected, corners, and other points established in the
field shall be shown and noted in their places on the plat. The legend for
metal monuments shall indicate the kind of metal, the diameter, length, and
weight per lineal foot of the monuments.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.094 EXEMPT I DIVISIONS.
   (A)   The information that must be provided in order for the decision to be
made that a division is an Exempt I division varies as follows according to the
definition for each type of Exempt I division listed under the definition of
subdivision in §
150.014.
   (B)   Thus:
      (1)   Type “A” divisions. A metes and bounds legal description of the
exempt division and the land from which it is being divided must be provided;
      (2)   Type “B” divisions. The old legal and new legal descriptions must
be provided;
      (3)   Type “C” divisions. A copy of the court decree showing by legal
description how the land is to be divided must be provided;
      (4)   Type “D” divisions. A legal description and plot plan showing the
parcel and the location of the street right-of-way must be provided;
      (5)   Type “E” divisions. A legal description and plot plan showing the
tract to be divided and the tract(s) to be added to must be provided; and
      (6)   Type “F” divisions. A plat of the cemetery showing the layout of
the private drives, parking areas, and size of burial lots must be provided.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.095 EXEMPT II DIVISIONS.
   See §
150.029(C) for the certification documents required of Exempt II divisions.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter or any regulations
herein contained or fails to perform any duty lawfully or supply any
information lawfully required within the time prescribed by this chapter or any
regulations herein contained shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance
violation, and, upon entry of a judgment finding an ordinance violation
pursuant to I.C. 34-28-5-4, shall be fined not less than $25, and not more than
$1,000. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate ordinance
violation.
(Ord. 5-1992, passed 7-21-1992)
CHAPTER 151: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Comprehensive Plan adopted by reference
   
151.002   Title
   
151.003   Authority
   
151.004   Compliance
   
151.005   Jurisdictional area
   
151.006   Application
   
151.007   Definitions
   
151.008   Fees
District Regulations
   
151.020   Zone map
   
151.021   Zone districts
   
151.022   District boundaries
   
151.023   Residential districts
   
151.024   Business districts
   
151.025   Industrial district
   
151.026   Conservation district
   
151.027   Permitted uses
   
151.028   Lot and yard requirements
   
151.029   Height regulations
   
151.030   Standards for manufactured homes
General Regulations
   
151.045   Nonconforming uses
   
151.046   Private swimming pools
   
151.047   Off-street parking
   
151.048   Manufactured housing and mobile homes
   
151.049   Planned unit residential, business, and industrial projects
   
151.050   Temporary structures
   
151.051   Signs
   
151.052   Home occupation
   
151.053   Sanitary cleanouts
   
151.054   Cleanouts
   
151.055   Wastewater grease trap requirements
   
151.056   Registration of vacant or distressed properties
Administration and Enforcement
   
151.070   Administrative officer
   
151.071   Zoning-building permits
   
151.072   Violations
   
151.073   Method of appeal
Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals
   
151.085   General
   
151.086   Appeals
   
151.087   Variances from development standards
   
151.088   Use variance
   
151.089   Special exceptions
   
151.090   Performance standards
   
151.091   Nonconforming uses
   
151.092   Commitments
Amendments
   
151.105   General
   
151.106   Petition
   
151.107   Referral
   
151.108   Action
Commercial Solar Energy Systems
   
151.120   Definitions
   
151.121   Setback requirements
   
151.122   Ground cover
   
151.123   Fencing
   
151.124   Underground cables
   
151.125   Glare minimization
   
151.126   Signal interference
   
151.127   Damage to drainage infrastructure
   
151.128   Decommissioning plan
   
151.129   Presumed abandonment
   
151.130   Force majeure
   
151.131   Road use agreement
 
   
151.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Local zoning ordinances, see I.C. 36-7-4-600
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The City Comprehensive Plan is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference
into this section. Two copies of the Comprehensive Plan are on file in the
office of the Clerk Treasurer and are available for public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-500) (Res. 1967-2, passed 2-2-1967; Ord. 1985-4, passed
11-19-1985)
Statutory reference:
   Comprehensive Plan, see I.C. 36-7-4-500
§ 151.002 TITLE.
   The official title of this chapter is “Zoning Ordinance of Gas City,
Indiana.”
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-101) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.003 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4, and all acts supplemental
and amendatory thereto.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-103) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.004 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved,
converted, or enlarged; nor shall any structure or land be used or be designed
to be used, except in full compliance with all the provisions of this chapter
and after the lawful issuances of the permits required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-104) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.005 JURISDICTIONAL AREA.
   This chapter shall apply to all incorporated land within the city.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-106) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.006 APPLICATION.
   (A)   It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, abrogate, or
amend any existing easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties,
nor is it intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way
interfere with any existing provisions of laws or ordinances, or any rules,
regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law relating
to the use of buildings or premises.
   (B)   Provided however, that where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or premises than is imposed or required
by any such existing provisions of law or by such rules, regulations,
agreements, covenants, or permits, the provisions of this chapter shall
control; but where such private covenants, permits, agreements, rules, or
regulations imposed lesser restrictions than those imposed by this chapter, the
greater restriction shall control.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-107) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.007 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words used in the
present tense shall include the future; and the singular number shall include
the plural; and the plural the singular; and the word SHALL is mandatory and
not permissive.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal
use and located on the same lot as the principal use.
   AREA. Area of a lot or site shall be calculated from the dimensions derived
by horizontal projection of the site.
   BASEMENT. A story having more than 50% of its clear height below finished
grade.
   BOARD. The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals as established by this chapter.
   CLINIC. Any establishment where human patients are examined and treated by
doctors or dentists without being hospitalized overnight.
   CLUB, PRIVATE. An establishment operated for social, recreational, or
educational purposes, but open only to members and not the general public.
   CONDOMINIUM. Ownership in common with others of a parcel of land and certain
parts of a building drawn which would normally be used by all the occupants,
such as yards, foundations, basements, floors, walls, hallways, stairways,
elevators, and all other related common elements, together with individual
ownership in fee of a particular unit or portion of such building.
   COOPERATIVE. A building or land in which an individual owns stock in a
corporation with a right through a proprietary lease to occupy a portion of the
land or a part of the building.
   COVERAGE. That percentage of the lot area covered by principal and accessory
use structures.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any structure or part of a structure designed or used as the
living quarters for one family. The structure, whether site built or
manufactured, shall be at least 24 feet in width at the smallest dimension; and
this structure, whether site built or manufactured, shall contain a minimum of
950 square feet of occupied space.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance
by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground
or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution
systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduit cables,
fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, street signs,
and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably
necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or
municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or
general welfare, but not including buildings.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house,
lodging house, club, fraternity, or hotel.
   HOME OCCUPATIONS. An occupation carried on in a dwelling unit which is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the building for dwelling
purposes, and which does not change the character thereof.
   I.C. 36-7-4-602. Enabling legislation requiring the State Department of Fire
Prevention and Building Safety to adopt rules and regulations for the
construction, repair, or maintenance of factory constructed one- and two-family
dwellings.
   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL. The processing and fabrication of certain materials and
products where no process involved will produce noise, vibration, air
pollution, fire hazard, or noxious emission which will disturb or endanger
neighboring properties.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one or more
structures.
   LOT, DEPTH OF. A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF. The horizontally projected area of a lot computed
exclusive of any portion of the right-of-way of any public thoroughfare.
   LOT OF RECORD. Any lot which individually or as part of a subdivision, has
been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county.
   LOT, WIDTH OF. The mean width measured at right angles to its depth.
   MANUFACTURED HOMES. A dwelling unit fabricated on or after June 15, 1976, in
an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building
site, bearing a seal certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction Safety Standards Act of 1974, being 42 U.S.C.
§§ 5401 et seq. or I.C. 36-7-4-602, as promulgated by the State Department of
Fire Prevention and Building Safety.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING CONSTRUCTION SAFETY STANDARD ACT. Title IV of the
Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.), as
amended (previously known as the Federal Home Construction and Safety Act),
rules and regulations adopted thereunder, which include HUD approved
information supplied by the home manufacturer, and regulations and
interpretations of said code by the State Department of Fire Preventions and
Building Safety.
   MOBILE HOME.
      (1)   A transportation structure built prior to June 15, 1976, effective
date for the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction Safety Standards Act of
1974, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq. larger than 320 square feet, and designed
to be used as a year-round residential dwelling.
      (2)   A recreational vehicle, as defined herein, shall be considered a
MOBILE HOME if occupied.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure designed, converted, or adapted for a
use prior to the adoption of provisions prohibiting such use in such location.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any use or arrangement of land or structures legally
existing at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this
chapter is derived, or any of its amendments, which does not conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
   ONE AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE, INDIANA. The nationally recognized model
building code prepared by the Council of American Building Officials, adopted
by the State Department of Fire Preventions and Building Safety as mandated
through I.C. 36-7-4-602, and which includes those supplements and amendments
promulgated by the State Department of Fire Prevention and Building Safety.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A portable vehicular structure not built to Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction Safety Standards Act of 1974, being 42 U.S.C.
§§ 5401 et seq. (or the obsolete ANSI 119.1 mobile home designed in
construction standard) designed for travel, recreational camping or vacation
purposes, either having its own motor or mounted on or to be drawn by another
vehicle, and including, but not limited to, travel and camping trailers, truck
campers, and motor homes.
   RENEWABLE ENERGY.
      (1)   Any of the following sources, clean sources, alternative
technologies, or programs used in connection with the production or
conservation of energy or electricity:
         (a)   Solar energy.
         (b)   Photovoltaic cells and panels.
         (c)   Fuel cells.
         (d)   Hydrogen.
         (e)   Energy storage systems or technologies.
         (f)   Geothermal energy.
         (g)   Electricity that is:
            1.   Generated by a customer-owned distributed generation facility
that is interconnected to the electricity supplier's distribution system in
accordance with the Commission's interconnection standards set forth in 170 IAC
4-4.3; and
            2.   Supplied back to the electricity supplier for use in meeting
the electricity supplier's electricity demand requirements in accordance with
the Commission's net metering rules set forth in 170 IAC 4-4.2.
      (2)   Does not include any wind energy systems or energy generated from
the incineration, burning, or heating of any of the following:
         (a)   Tires.
         (b)   General household, institutional, commercial, industrial,
lunchroom, office, or landscape waste.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a
fixed location on the ground, including buildings, billboards, carports,
porches, decks, patios, and other building features, but not including
sidewalks and drives.
   SUPPLY YARD. A commercial establishment storing or offering for sale
building supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain, and
similar goods. SUPPLY YARDS do not include the wrecking, salvaging,
dismantling, or storage of automobiles and similar vehicles.
   VISION CLEARANCE ON CORNER LOTS. Triangular space at the street corner of a
corner lot, free from any kind of obstruction to vision between the heights of
zero and 12 feet above established grade of the street, determined by a
diagonal line connecting two points measured 15 feet equal distance from the
street corner along each property line.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-701) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6- 1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980- 8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985; Ord. 26-2024, passed 11-6-2024)
§ 151.008 FEES.
   (A)   The Advisory Plan Commission will propose and recommend to the City
Council from time to time the fees to be charged for applications for zoning
changes, application for variance from development standards, application for
use variance, and application for special exception and building permits.
   (B)   The schedule of fees are as follows.
Permit Type Fee
Permit Type            Fee
Developmental variance $10
Special exception      $10
Use variance           $10
Building Permit
$0 to $5,000           $5
$5,000 to $100,000     $10
Over $100,000          $25
 
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-801) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 151.020 ZONE MAP.
   A map entitled “Gas City Zone Map” is hereby adopted as part of this
chapter. The zone map shall be kept on file and available for examination in
the office of the City Clerk Treasurer in the City Hall.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-801) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.021 ZONE DISTRICTS.
   The city is hereby divided into the zoning districts stated in this chapter
as shown by the district boundaries on the zone map. The districts are:
 
C-1 Conservation
B-1 Business
B-2 Business
I-1 Industrial
R-1 Residential
R-2 Residential
R-3 Residential
 
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-202) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.022 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   District boundaries shown within the lines of streets, streams, and
transportation rights-of-way shall be deemed to follow the center lines. The
vacation of streets shall not affect the location of such district boundaries.
When the Administrative Officer cannot definitely determine the location of a
district boundary by such center lines, by the scale or dimensions stated on
the zone map, or by the fact that it clearly coincides with a property line, he
or she shall refuse action, and the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals, upon
appeal, shall interpret the location of the district boundary with reference to
the scale of the zone map and the purpose set forth in all relevant provisions
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-203) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.023 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Districts designated for residential use, R-1, R-2, and R-3, are limited to
dwellings and public or semi-public uses which are normally associated with
residential neighborhoods. The only uses permitted in the residential districts
are those which would not detract from the residential character of the
neighborhood. The purpose of these three districts shall be to create an
attractive, stable, and orderly residential environment. However, the families
per dwelling and the lot and yard requirements are different in the three
districts to provide for the various housing needs and desires of the citizens.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-204) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.024 BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
   The districts designated for business, B-1 and B-2, are limited to business,
public, and certain residential uses. By establishing compact districts for
such uses, more efficient traffic movement, parking facilities, fire
protection, and police protection may be provided. Industrial uses are excluded
in order to reduce the hazards caused by extensive truck and rail movements
normally associated with such uses. The purpose of those districts is to
provide unified shopping districts conveniently located.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-205) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.025 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   The district designated for industry, I-1, provides suitable space for
existing industries and their expansion, as well as for future industrial
development. Performance standards, parking specifications, and yard
regulations are set forth in this chapter in order to ensure safe industrial
development compatible with adjacent uses.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-206) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.026 CONSERVATION DISTRICT.
   The district designated for conservation, C-1, is limited to recreational
and certain other open land uses. Residential and related uses are permitted if
approved by the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals. The purpose of this district
is to prevent intensive development of land that is unsuitable for development
because of topography, soil conditions, or periodic flooding.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-207) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.027 PERMITTED USES.
   The permitted uses and special exceptions for each district are listed in
the following table. Uses given in the following categories shall be according
to the common meaning of the term or according to definitions given in §
151.007. Uses not specifically listed or defined to be included in the
categories under this subchapter shall not be permitted.
   (A)   R-1 Residential.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Single-family dwellings;
         (b)   Public and parochial school;
         (c)   Parks and playgrounds;
         (d)   Churches;
         (e)   Essential services; and
         (f)   Accessory uses.
      (2)   Special exceptions (§
151.089).
         (a)   Nursery schools;
         (b)   Hospitals, clinics, and nursing homes;
         (c)   Public utility buildings;
         (d)   Swimming pools;
         (e)   Fire stations;
         (f)   Municipal buildings and libraries;
         (g)   Planned unit residential projects;
         (h)   Cemeteries;
         (i)   Private clubs;
         (j)   Parking lots;
         (k)   Golf courses;
         (l)   Home occupations;
         (m)   Funeral homes; and
         (n)   Manufactured housing and mobile homes.
   (B)   R-2 Residential.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Single-family dwellings;
         (b)   Two-family dwellings;
         (c)   Public schools;
         (d)   Public parks and playgrounds;
         (e)   Churches;
         (f)   Essential uses;
         (g)   Accessory uses; and
         (h)   Parochial schools.
      (2)   Special exceptions (§
151.089).
         (a)   Nursery schools;
         (b)   Hospitals, clinics, and nursing homes;
         (c)   Public utility buildings;
         (d)   Swimming pools;
         (e)   Fire stations;
         (f)   Municipal buildings and libraries;
         (g)   Planned unit residential projects;
         (h)   Private clubs;
         (i)   Parking lots;
         (j)   Home occupations;
         (k)   Funeral homes;
         (l)   Manufactured housing and mobile homes;
         (m)   Condominiums; and
         (n)   Cooperatives.
   (C)   R-3 Residential.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Single-family dwelling;
         (b)   Two-family dwelling;
         (c)   Multiple-family dwellings;
         (d)   Public and parochial schools;
         (e)   Churches;
         (f)   Public parks and playgrounds;
         (g)   Essential services; and
         (h)   Accessory uses.
      (2)   Special exceptions.
         (a)   Nursery schools;
         (b)   Hospitals, clinics, and nursing homes;
         (c)   Public utility buildings;
         (d)   Swimming pools;
         (e)   Fire stations;
         (f)   Municipal buildings and libraries;
         (g)   Planned unit residential projects;
         (h)   Private clubs;
         (i)   Parking lots;
         (j)   Home occupations;
         (k)   Funeral homes;
         (l)   Manufactured housing and mobile homes;
         (m)   Condominiums; and
         (n)   Cooperatives.
   (D)   B-1 Business.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Retail businesses;
         (b)   Eating establishments;
         (c)   Offices and banks;
         (d)   Personal and professional services;
         (e)   Fire station and municipal buildings;
         (f)   Public parks;
         (g)   Parking lots;
         (h)   Essential services; and
         (i)   Accessory uses.
      (2)   Special exceptions.
         (a)   Theaters;
         (b)   Planned unit, business project;
         (c)   Auto sales, service and repair;
         (d)   Wholesale business;
         (e)   Hotels and motels;
         (f)   Commercial schools;
         (g)   Commercial recreation;
         (h)   Public utility buildings;
         (i)   Printing shops;
         (j)   Churches;
         (k)   Schools, public and parochial;
         (l)   Multiple-family dwellings;
         (m)   Funeral homes;
         (n)   Any eating or drinking establishment selling any type of
alcoholic beverage; and
         (o)   Manufactured housing and mobile homes.
   (E)   B-2 Business.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Retail business;
         (b)   Eating establishments;
         (c)   Offices and banks;
         (d)   Personal and professional services;
         (e)   Printing shops;
         (f)   Public utility buildings;
         (g)   Parking lots;
         (h)   Public parks;
         (i)   Accessory uses;
         (j)   Essential uses;
         (k)   Auto sales, service and repair;
         (l)   Hotels and motels; and
         (m)   Cleaners and laundries.
      (2)   Special exceptions.
         (a)   Theaters;
         (b)   Supply yards;
         (c)   Commercial recreation;
         (d)   Planned unit business projects;
         (e)   Dairies;
         (f)   Wholesale businesses;
         (g)   Warehouses;
         (h)   Commercial schools;
         (i)   Churches;
         (j)   Schools, public and parochial;
         (k)   Hospitals, clinics, and nursing homes;
         (l)   Mobile home parks;
         (m)   Funeral homes;
         (n)   Any eating or drinking establishment selling any type of
alcoholic beverage; and
         (o)   Manufactured housing and mobile homes.
   (F)   I-1 Industrial.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Research and testing laboratories;
         (b)   Offices;
         (c)   Warehouses;
         (d)   Parking lots;
         (e)   Light industrial;
         (f)   Essential services;
         (g)   Accessory uses;
         (h)   Wholesale businesses;
         (i)   Public parks;
         (j)   Mining or quarrying operations, including on-site sale of
products;
         (k)   Concrete or asphalt plant operations, including on-site sale of
products;
         (l)   Mineral processing, storage, and distribution, including on-site
sale of products; and
         (m)   Renewable energy.
      (2)   Special exceptions (§
151.089).
         (a)   Motels;
         (b)   Planned unit industrial projects;
         (c)   Restaurants;
         (d)   Truck and railroad terminals;
         (e)   Supply yards;
         (f)   Fire stations and municipal buildings;
         (g)   Water and sewage treatment plants; and
         (h)   Manufactured housing and mobile homes.
   (G)   C-1 Conservation.
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         (a)   Public parks and playgrounds;
         (b)   Game preserves;
         (c)   Essential services; and
         (d)   Accessory uses.
      (2)   Special exceptions.
         (a)   Single-family dwellings;
         (b)   Riding stables;
         (c)   Parking lots;
         (d)   Swimming pools;
         (e)   Cemeteries;
         (f)   Golf courses;
         (g)   Water and sewage treatment plants;
         (h)   Public and parochial schools; and
         (i)   Manufactured housing and homes.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-208) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6- 1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980- 8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985; Ord. 2, passed 5-19-1992; Ord. 26-2024, passed
11-6-2024)
§ 151.028 LOT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The minimum lot area, minimum width of lots, minimum depth of front
yards, minimum width of each side yard, and the minimum depth of rear yards for
each district shall be as shown on the following table.
         Minimum Lot Minimum Lot             Minimum     Minimum    Minimum
District Area (Sq.   Area Per    Minimum Lot Depth Front Width Side Depth Rear
         ft.)        Family (Sq. Width (ft.) Yard (ft.)  Yard (ft.) Yard (ft.)
                     ft.)
         Minimum Lot Minimum Lot             Minimum     Minimum    Minimum
District Area (Sq.   Area Per    Minimum Lot Depth Front Width Side Depth Rear
         ft.)        Family (Sq. Width (ft.) Yard (ft.)  Yard (ft.) Yard (ft.)
                     ft.)
B-1      3,000       3,000       30          0           0          0
B-2      5,000       5,000       50          20          10         0
C-1      40,000      40,000      150         40          20         4
I-1      20,000      N/A         100         30          20         0
R-1      7,200       7,200       60          30          5          4
R-2      7,200       3,600       50          30          5          4
R-3      7,200       3,500       45          30          5          4
 
   (B)   Lots which abut more than one street shall provide the required front
yards along every street.
   (C)   All structures, whether attached to the principal structure or not,
and whether open or closed, including garages, porches, carports, balconies,
roofs, or platforms above normal grade level, shall not project into any
minimum front, side, or rear yard.
   (D)   Any lot of record existing on the effective date of this chapter and
then held in separate ownership different from the ownership of adjoining lots
may be used for the erection of a structure conforming to the use regulations
of the district in which it is located, even though its area and width are less
than the minimum requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Any fence in a front yard shall not exceed four feet in height and any
fence in a side yard or back yard shall not exceed seven feet in height, and
such fencing shall be located entirely within property of the owner of the real
estate and shall not extend into any dedicated easement for street, alley, and
sidewalk purposes. In addition, any front or side yard fence shall be subject
to the vision clearance on corner lots as set forth in §
151.007.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.029 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No principal structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above average
ground level, and no accessory building shall exceed 16 feet in height above
average ground level unless approved by the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (B)   The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize a variance to the
height regulations in any district if:
      (1)   All front yards and side yards depth are increased one foot for
each additional foot of height; or
      (2)   The structure is any of the following and does not constitute a
hazard to an established airport: television and radio towers, church spires,
belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers and scenery
lofts, cooling towers, ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, silos, elevator
bulkheads, smokestacks, conveyors, or flagpoles.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.030 STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   Permitted placement. The establishment, location, and use of
manufactured homes as scattered- site residences shall be permitted in any zone
permitting installation of a dwelling unit subject to requirements and
limitations applying generally to such residential use in the district and
provided such homes shall meet the following requirements and limitations.
      (1)   The manufactured home shall meet all requirements applicable to
single-family dwellings and possess all necessary improvement location,
building, and occupancy permits and other certificates required by I.C. 36-7-4-
602.
      (2)   The manufactured home shall be larger than 950 square feet of
occupied space.
      (3)   The manufactured home shall be attached and anchored to a permanent
perimeter foundation in conformance with the regulations in the Indiana One and
Two-Family Dwelling Code and with manufacturer’s installation specifications.
      (4)   The manufactured home shall be covered with an exterior material
customarily used on on- site built residential dwellings.
      (5)   The manufactured home shall have a roof composed of a material
customarily used on on- site built residential dwellings, such as asbestos,
fiberglass, shake, asphalt, or tile, which shall be installed onto a surface
appropriately pitched for the materials used.
      (6)   The manufactured home shall have been constructed after January 1,
1981.
   (B)   Placement with permit. Manufactured homes not meeting the terms of
division (A) above, and mobile homes, shall be permitted within the city only
after receiving a special exception from the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals
pursuant to §
151.089.
   (C)   Structural alteration. Due to a manufactured or mobile home’s integral
design, any structural alteration or modification of a manufactured or mobile
home after it is placed on the site must be approved by the Administrative
Officer of the city.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
151.999
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 151.045 NONCONFORMING USES.
   The following provisions shall apply to all nonconforming uses.
   (A)   A nonconforming use may be continued but may not be extended,
expanded, or changed unless to a conforming use, except as permitted by the
Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Any nonconforming structure damaged by fire, flood, explosion, or
other casualty may be reconstructed and used as before if such reconstruction
is performed within 12 months of such casualty, and if the restored structure
has no greater coverage and contains no greater cubic content than before such
casualty.
   (C)   In the event that any nonconforming use, conducted in a structure or
otherwise, ceases, for whatever reason, for a period of one year, or is
abandoned for any period, such nonconforming use shall not be resumed.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.046 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS.
   A private swimming pool shall be permitted as an accessory use to any
permitted residential use provided.
   (A)   The pool is intended for private accessory use only, and not for
commercial or club purposes.
   (B)   For an in-ground or surface (above ground) swimming pool, the property
upon which said pool is located shall be enclosed by a fence of a type which
effectively controls the entrance by children to the pool area. The fence must
be at least five feet in height. Wooden fences with boards placed vertically
shall not have any opening wider than four inches per opening and wooden fences
with boards placed horizontally shall not have any opening wider than one inch
per opening. For an in-ground pool, a mechanically controlled cover can be used
in lieu of fencing requirements.
   (C)   For an above ground pool with a surrounding deck structure, the fence
and deck shall not exceed a total height of nine feet from finish grade,
pursuant to §
151.028(E).
   (D)   A pool (in-ground or above ground) shall not be located in any front
yard and shall not be closer than ten feet to any side of rear property line of
the property on which it is located.
   (E)   Gates installed for access to the property or pool area shall be
equipped with a self-closing and latching device to protect against
uncontrolled access to the property.
   (F)   For an above ground swimming pool, the pool shall be equipped with a
retractable type ladder, a removable ladder, or shall be fenced in accordance
with division (B) above. The ladder must be removed or retracted when the pool
is not being attended.
   (G)   If access to the pool is via a deck or porch, then no access from the
ground is permitted to the deck area unless the property or the ground access
to the deck is fenced in accordance with division (B) above.
   (H)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner whereof to
maintain all pool covers, fences, gates, and closure devices in good operating
condition.
   (I)   Enclosed pools shall be considered structures for purposes of
regulations limiting lot coverage.
   (J)   Pool placement shall not be constructed under overhead power lines.
(Ord. 13 2020, passed 8-18-2020) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.047 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
specifications in this section in all districts, except the B-1, business
district, whenever any new use is established or existing use is enlarged.
Use Parking Space Required
Use                                     Parking Space Required
Bowling alleys                          Five for each alley
Church                                  One per six seats in principal assembly
                                        room
Hospitals and rest homes                One per three beds and for each two
                                        employees on the maximum working shift
Hotels and motels                       One per each rentable room
Industrial                              One for each two employees on maximum
                                        working shift
Private club or lodge                   One per four members
Professional offices, wholesale houses, One for every 250 square feet of floor
and medical clinics                     space
Recreational or assembly places; e.g.,  One for every 100 square feet of floor
dance halls, night clubs, funeral homes space
Residential                             Two per dwelling unit
Retail businesses, eating or drinking   One for every 100 square feet of floor
establishments selling any type of      space
alcoholic beverage
Theater                                 One per four seats
 
   (B)   Parking spaces may be located on a lot other than that containing the
principal use with the approval of the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (C)   Any off-street parking lot for more than five vehicles shall be graded
for proper drainage and surfaces so as to provide a durable and dustless
surface.
   (D)   Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking lot shall be so
arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises in any R
district.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.048 MANUFACTURED HOUSING AND MOBILE HOMES.
   (A)   Manufactured homes not meeting the terms of §
151.030(A), and mobile homes, shall be permitted only in developments which
meet the requirements of this section. Occupied recreational vehicles as
defined in this chapter shall meet all requirements specified for manufactured
housing not meeting the terms of §
151.030(A), and mobile homes.
   (B)   No development shall have an area of less than five acres.
   (C)   Each home site within the development shall have a minimum area of
3,000 square feet.
   (D)   No manufactured home not meeting the terms of §
151.030(A), and mobile homes, shall be closer than 35 feet to any adjacent
property.
   (E)   Not less than 10% of the gross area of the development shall be
improved for recreational activities for the residents of the development.
   (F)   The development shall be appropriately landscaped and screened from
adjacent properties.
   (G)   The development shall meet all applicable requirements of the city’s
subdivision control ordinance and the State Board of Health.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.049 PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL, BUSINESS, AND INDUSTRIAL PROJECTS.
   (A)   The district regulations of this chapter may be modified by the
Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals, in the case of a plan utilizing an unusual
concept of development which meets the requirements of this section. The
planned unit projects provision is intended to encourage original and
imaginative development and subdivision design which preserves the natural
amenities of the site and provides for the general welfare of the city. After
the unit plan is approved, all development, construction, and use shall be in
accordance with that plan unless a new planned unit project plan is submitted
to and approved by the Board as required by this chapter. Any development
contrary to the approved unit plan shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
   (B)   The area of land to be developed shall not be less than five acres.
   (C)   Properties adjacent to the unit plan shall not be adversely affected.
   (D)   In planned unit residential projects, the minimum lot and yard
requirements may be reduced, however, the average density of dwelling units in
the total unit plan shall not be higher than that permitted in the district in
which the plan is located.
   (E)   In planned unit business and industrial projects, the minimum lot and
yard requirements may be reduced, however, the total land area of the unit plan
shall equal the accumulative lot area requirements of each use or structure
contained within the unit plan.
   (F)   The unit plan shall permanently reserve land suitable for the common
use of the public or the owners in a particular development. This may be
accomplished by dedication, covenant, or easement. This land may be for future
public facilities, for recreational or scenic open space, or for a landscaped
buffer zone as approved by the Advisory Plan Commission. Provisions for
permanent control and maintenance of this land shall be outlined in a form
acceptable to the Advisory Plan Commission, Advisory Board, and City Attorney.
   (G)   The use of the land shall not differ substantially from the uses
permitted in the district in which the plan is located, except that limited
business facilities, intended to serve only the planned unit residential
project area and fully integrated into the design of the project, may be
considered, and multiple-family dwellings may be considered in single-family
residential districts if they are so designed and sited that they do not
detract from the character of the neighborhood in which they occur.
   (H)   The unit plan shall be consistent with the purpose of this chapter.
   (I)   The unit plan shall be reviewed, and recommendations made, by the
Advisory Plan Commission to determine if the proposed project is consistent
with the City Comprehensive Plan and in the best interests of the city.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.050 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.
   Temporary structures used in conjunction with construction work, seasonal
sales, or emergencies may be permitted by the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals
if the proposed site is acceptable and neighborhood uses are not adversely
affected. They shall be removed promptly when their function has been
fulfilled. Permits for temporary structures may be issued for a period not to
exceed six months. Residing in basement, foundation, or temporary structures
shall not be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-306) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.051 SIGNS.
   No sign, billboard, or exterior graphic display shall be permitted in any
district except as herein provided.
   (A)   In any district, a sign not exceeding two square feet in surface size
shall be permitted which announces the name, address, or professional activity
of the occupant of the premises on which the sign is located.
   (B)   A bulletin board not exceeding 24 square feet is permitted in
connection with any church, school, or similar public building.
   (C)   A temporary real estate or construction sign not exceeding eight
square feet is permitted on the property being sold, leased, or developed. Such
sign shall be removed promptly when it has fulfilled its function.
   (D)   Business signs shall be permitted in connection with any legal
business or industry when located in the same premises, and if they meet the
following requirements.
      (1)   Signs shall not contain information or advertising for any product
not sold or produced on the premises.
      (2)   Signs shall not have an aggregate surface size greater than five
feet for each one foot of width of the principal structure on the premises.
However, such signs shall not exceed an area of 50 square feet.
      (3)   Signs shall not be illuminated in any manner which causes undue
distraction, confusion, or hazard to vehicular traffic.
      (4)   Signs shall not project over the curb line onto the vehicle right-
of-way.
      (5)   Movable signs on wheels or on legs shall be permitted within the
city only after receiving a variance pursuant to §
151.087.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.052 HOME OCCUPATION.
   A home occupation may be permitted as a special exception if it complies
with the requirements of this section.
   (A)   The home occupation shall be carried on by a member of the family
residing in the dwelling unit with not more than one employee who is not part
of the family.
   (B)   The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal or
accessory structures.
   (C)   Exterior displays or signs other than those permitted under §
151.051(A), exterior storage of materials, and exterior indication of the home
occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal
structure shall not be permitted.
   (D)   Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance,
odors, heat, or glare shall not be produced.
   (E)   The home occupation shall not create any traffic or parking problems.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.053 SANITARY CLEANOUTS.
   This section shall govern the size, location, installation, and maintenance
of drainage pipe cleanouts.
   (A)   Cleanout plugs shall be brass or plastic, or other approved materials.
Brass cleanout plugs shall be utilized with metallic drain, waste, and vent
piping only and shall conform to ASTM A74, ASME A1112.3.1 or ASME A112.36.2M.
Cleanouts with plate-style access covers shall be fitted with corrosion-
resisting fasteners. Plastic cleanout plugs shall conform to the requirements
of 2012-I.P.C. § 702.4. Plugs shall have raised square or countersunk square
heads. Countersunk heads shall be installed where raised heads are a trip
hazard. Cleanout plugs with borosilicate glass systems shall be of borosilicate
glass. All sanitary cleanouts shall be of the type and size approved by the
Planning and Zoning Director.
   (B)   Where required, cleanouts shall be located in accordance with 2012-
I.P.C. §§ 708.3.1 through 708.3.5.
      (1)   All horizontal drains shall be provided with cleanouts located not
more than 100 feet (30,480 mm) apart.
      (2)   Building sewers shall be provided with cleanouts located not more
than 100 feet (30,480 mm) apart, measured from the upstream entrance of the
cleanout. For building sewer eight inches (203 mm) and larger, manholes shall
be provided and located not more than 200 feet (60,960 mm) from the junction of
the building drain and building sewer, at each change in direction and at
intervals of not more than 400 feet (122 m) apart. Manholes and manhole covers
shall be of an approved type.
      (3)   Cleanouts shall be installed at each change of direction greater
than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) in the building sewer, building drain, and
horizontal waste or soil lines. Where more than one change of direction occurs
in a run of piping, only one cleanout shall be required for each 40 feet
(12,192 mm) of developed length of the drainage piping.
      (4)   A cleanout shall be provided at the base of each waste or soil
stack.
      (5)   There shall be a cleanout near the building storm drain. The
cleanout shall be either inside or outside the building wall and shall be
brought up to the finished ground level or to the basement floor level. An
approved cleanout is allowed to be used at this location to serve as a required
cleanout for building storm drain. The cleanout at the junction of the building
storm drain shall not be required if the cleanout on a three-inch (76 mm) or
larger diameter soil stack is located within a developed length of ten feet
(3,048 mm) of the building storm drain connection. The minimum size of the
cleanout at the junction of the building storm and building shall comply with
2012-I.P.C. § 708.7. All building storm drains and cleanouts shall be of the
type and size approved by the Planning and Zoning Director.
   (C)   (1)   Cleanouts on concealed piping or piping under a floor slab or in
a crawl space of less than 24 inches (610 mm) in height or a plenum shall be
extended to the outside of the building.
      (2)   Cleanout plugs shall not be covered with cement, plaster, or any
other permanent finish material.
      (3)   Where it is necessary to conceal a cleanout or to terminate a
cleanout in an area subject to vehicular traffic, the covering plate, access
door, or cleanout shall be of an approved type designed and installed for this
purpose. All sanitary piping shall be of the type and size approved by the
Planning and Zoning Director.
   (D)   Every cleanout shall be installed to open to allow cleaning in the
direction of the flow of the drainage pipe or at right angles thereto.
   (E)   Cleanout shall be the same nominal size as the pipe they serve, up to
four inches (102 mm). For pipes larger than four inches (102 mm) nominal size,
the size of the cleanout shall be not less than four inches (102 mm).
   (F)   Cleanouts on six-inch (153 mm) and smaller pipes shall be provided
with a clearance of not less than 18 inches (457 mm) for rodding. Cleanouts on
eight-inch (203 mm) and larger pipes shall be provided with a clearance of not
less than 36 inches (914 mm) for rodding.
(Ord. 13 2020, passed 8-18-2020) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.054 CLEANOUTS.
   (A)   Each cleanout fitting for cast-iron shall consist of a cast-iron or
brass body and an approved plug. Each cleanout for galvanized wrought-iron,
galvanized steel, copper, or brass pipe shall consist of a brass plug as
specified in 2012-I.P.C. § 708.1.6, or a standard weight brass cap, or an
approved ABS or PVC plastic plug, or an approved stainless steel cleanout or
plug. Plugs shall have raised square heads or approved countersunk rectangular
slots.
   (B)   Each cleanout fitting and each cleanout plug or cap shall be of an
approved type. All sanitary fittings and cleanouts shall be of the type and
size approved by the Planning and Zoning Director.
   (C)   Cleanouts shall be designed to be gas and watertight.
   (D)   Each horizontal drainage pipe shall be provided with a cleanout at its
upper terminal, and each run of piping, that is more than 100 feet (30,480 mm)
in total developed length, shall be provided with a cleanout of each 100 feet
(30,480 mm), or fraction thereof, in length of such piping. An additional
cleanout shall be provided in a drainage line for each aggregate horizontal
change of direction exceeding 135 degrees (2.36 rad).
   (E)   Each cleanout shall be installed so that it opens to allow cleaning in
the direction of flow of the soil or waste or at right angles thereto and,
except in the case of wye branch and end-of-line cleanouts, shall be installed
vertically above the flow line of the pipe.
   (F)   Each cleanout extension shall be considered as drainage piping and
each 90 degrees (1.6 rad) cleanout extension shall be extended from a wye type
fitting or other approved fitting of equivalent sweep.
   (G)   Each cleanout for an interceptor shall be outside of such interceptor.
   (H)   Each cleanout, unless installed under an approved cover plate, shall
be above grade, readily accessible, and so located as to serve the purpose for
which it is intended. Cleanouts located under cover plates shall be so
installed as to provide the clearances and accessibility required by this
section. All cover plates shall be of the type and size approved by the
Planning and Zoning Director.
   (I)   Each cleanout in piping two inches (50 mm) or less in sizing shall be
so installed that there is a clearance of not less than 12 inches (305 mm) in
front of the cleanout. Cleanouts in piping exceeding two inches (50 mm) shall
have a clearance of not less than 18 inches (457 mm) in front of the cleanout.
Cleanout in under-floor piping shall be extended to or above the finished floor
or shall be extended outside the building when there is less than 18 inches
(457 mm) vertical overall, allowing for obstructions such as ducts, beams, and
piping, and 30 inches (762 mm) horizontal clearance from the means of access to
such cleanout. No under-floor cleanout shall be located exceeding 20 feet
(6,096 mm) from an access door, trap door, or crawl hole.
(Ord. 13 2020, passed 8-18-2020) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.055 WASTEWATER GREASE TRAP REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   New food service establishments. All proposed food service
establishments (FSE) that discharge wastewater into the city sanitary sewer
system shall be required to install an approved, properly operated, and
maintained grease interceptor. All interceptor units shall be of the type and
capacity approved by the city. Grease interceptors shall be located so as to
provide easy access to the manhole covers for maintenance and inspection
activities.
   (B)   Newly remodeled food service establishments. Newly remodeled FSEs are
required to install an approved, properly operated, and maintained grease
interceptor. Grease interceptors shall be located so as to provide easy access
to the manhole covers for maintenance and inspection activities. All
interceptor units shall be installed outdoors of the FSE’s building unless the
user can demonstrate to the Planning and Zoning Director. All grease traps
units shall be of the type and capacity approved by the Planning and Zoning
Director.
      (1)   In the event the city has to clean sewer laterals or mains, a
service fee of 150% of the standard going rate shall apply to cover all city
equipment and labor costs.
      (2)   All food service establishments shall maintain the grease traps at
their own expense.
   (C)   Design criteria.
      (1)   Domestic wastewater shall not be discharged into a grease retention
device.
      (2)   Wastewater from dishwashing sinks, mop sinks, hand sinks, and floor
drains shall be discharged into a grease retention device.
      (3)   Interior plumbing plans shall be submitted to the Director
depicting all fixtures proposed to be connected to a grease retention device.
      (4)   Grease retention device proposals shall be submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Director. Grease retention devices shall not be installed
without the prior approval of the Planning and Zoning Director.
      (5)   Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the
city’s Utility Standards and shall have a minimum of two compartments with
fittings designed for grease retention. The minimum size for a grease
interceptor is 750 gallons. Garbage disposals and dishwashers shall not be
connected to a properly sized grease interceptor.
      (6)   All grease interceptors shall be designed to allow for complete
access for inspection and maintenance of inner chambers as well as viewing and
sampling of wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer.
      (7)   Grease traps shall be designed to allow for complete access for
inspection and maintenance activities. Newly installed grease traps shall
include a filter that is designed to prevent the discharge of grease from the
unit. Dishwashers and garbage disposals shall not be connected to grease traps.
      (8)   Alternative grease retention devices or technologies shall be
subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Director. Such approval
shall be based on demonstrated removal efficiencies of the proposed technology.
   (D)   Best management practices. The following best management practices or
BMPs shall be implemented and adhered to by all FSEs.
      (1)   All new and existing FSEs are required to install a grease
retention device.
      (2)   All grease interceptors and traps shall be maintained by the user
at the user’s expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all
contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludges and
solids.
      (3)   Decanting or discharging of removed waste liquid back into the
interceptor or trap from which the waste was removed or any other grease
interceptor or trap, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be disposed, is
strictly prohibited.
      (4)   Grease interceptors must be pumped out completely a minimum of once
every 90 days or more frequently if the unit has accumulated waste, both
floatable and settleable, accounting for 25% of its wetted depth, as measured
from the static water level to the interior tank bottom.
      (5)   Grease hauler pumping receipts must be mailed, faxed, or
electronically submitted to the Director within 14 days of the date of grease
interceptor maintenance.
      (6)   (a)   Grease traps must be pumped/cleaned out completely a minimum
of once every 30 days or more frequently if the unit has accumulated waste,
both floatable and settleable, accounting for 25% of its wetted depth, as
measured from the static water level to the interior tank bottom.
         (b)   If the FSE hires a grease hauler to pump out the grease trap,
the FSE is required to submit the grease hauler’s receipts to the Planning and
Zoning Director. The receipts must be mailed, faxed, or electronically
submitted to the Director within 14 days of the date of grease trap
maintenance.
      (7)   The use of chemical treatments such as bacterial additives,
emulsifiers, drain cleaners, enzymes, acids, and other chemicals designed to
dissolve, purge, or remove grease from grease traps or grease interceptors is
strictly prohibited.
      (8)   FSEs are required to scrape food into the trash and “dry wipe”
grease from pots, pans, and dishwasher prior to dishwashing. Food waste is
required to be disposed of in the trash.
   (E)   Inspections. Authorized personnel of the city, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall have the right to enter upon all
properties subject to this program, at any time and without prior notification,
for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing, or
record review, as part of this program.
(Ord. 13 2020, passed 8-18-2020) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.056 REGISTRATION OF VACANT OR DISTRESSED PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of the city, through the
adoption of this section, to establish a vacant property registration program
as a mechanism to protect residential and commercial neighborhoods from
becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and for the security
of distressed properties and vacant properties.
   (B)   Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to all existing,
residential, commercial, multi- family, industrial, and institutional
properties and structures. This section does not relieve an owner from
compliance with all applicable city ordinances and regulations or all
applicable state laws and regulations.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BENEFICIARY. A lender or other entity under a note secured by a deed of
trust or mortgage lien.
      BUILDING. A structure with a roof supported by columns or walls to serve
as a shelter or enclosure.
      DEFAULT. A failure to perform a contractual obligation, monetary or
conditional.
      DISTRESSED PROPERTY.
         (a)   A property that is under a current:
            1.   Pending foreclosure or tax lien sale;
            2.   Properties that have been the subject of foreclosure sale
where the title was retained by the lender or beneficiary of a deed of trust
involved in the foreclosure; and/or
            3.   Any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure.
         (b)   DISTRESSED PROPERTY also can include property that is vacant as
a result of probate or the death of the owner of record.
      EVIDENCE OF VACANCY. Any condition that, on its own or combined with
other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the
property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to: overgrown
and/or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, and/or
mail; past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of
trash, junk, and/or debris; broken or boarded windows; abandoned vehicles and/
or auto parts or materials; the absence of window coverings such as curtains,
blinds, and/or shutters; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items
consistent with habitation; and/or statements by neighbors, passerby, delivery
agents, or government employees that the property is vacant.
      FORECLOSURE. The process by which a property, placed as security for a
real estate loan, is sold through the courts at auction to satisfy the debt if
the owner/borrower/mortgagor defaults.
      LENDER/MORTGAGEE. The person or entity who is the secured party under any
mortgage or deed of trust instrument, or who has a fiduciary interest in the
property, which can include the mortgage servicer.
      NOTICE OF DEFAULT. A notice that a default has occurred under a mortgage
or deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee’s
or foreclosure sale.
      OWNER. Any person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association,
limited liability entity, trust, personal representative of an estate, or
fiduciary having legal or equitable title to or interest in any real property.
      OWNER OF RECORD. The person having record title to the property as shown
in the land records of Montgomery County, Maryland.
      PROPERTY. Any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof,
situated in the city, and includes the buildings or structures located on the
PROPERTY, regardless of condition.
      RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The beneficiary that is pursuing foreclosure of a
property subject to this section secured by a mortgage, deed of trust, or
similar instrument or a property that has been acquired by the lender or
beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure. RESPONSIBLE PARTY
may also include a mortgage servicer or the property preservation company or
property management company instructed with the security and maintenance of the
property.
      SECURING. Such measures as may be directed by the City Manager, or his or
her designee, that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to
unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, the repairing of fences
and walls, chaining/padlocking of gates, the repair or boarding of door,
window, and/or other openings at the time the boarding is completed or
required. LOCKING includes measures that require a key, keycard, tool, or
special knowledge to open or gain access.
      VACANT. No person or persons currently conduct a lawful business or
lawfully reside or live in any part of the building or structure as a legal or
equitable owner(s) or tenant occupant(s) on a permanent, non-transient basis. A
property that is VACANT when there is no habitual presence of persons who have
a legal right to be on the premises, or all lawful business or construction
activity or residential occupancy has substantially ceased, or which is
substantially devoid of contents. In the case of mixed-use buildings, a
separate tenanted portion of the building which meets these criteria may also
be deemed VACANT.
      VACANT PROPERTY.
         (a)   A lot or parcel of real property with at least one building,
structure, or portion that is not currently used or occupied for a period in
excess of 30 days. A building or structure that remains furnished, has
utilities connected or in use, and on property that is maintained while the
owner is absent shall not be considered VACANT unless the building or structure
is vacant for a period greater than one year.
         (b)   A building or structure that is under active construction or
undergoing active rehabilitation, renovation, or repair, and there is a
building permit to make the building fit for occupancy that was issued,
renewed, or extended within six months of the date of vacancy shall not be
subject to the vacant property registration requirement of this section;
provided, however, that the cessation of active construction, rehabilitation,
repair, or demolition activity for more than 30 days, unless good cause is
shown for cessation, will result in the property being deemed a VACANT PROPERTY
and subject to the registration, security, and maintenance requirements of this
section.
         (c)   A building that the owner or owner’s agent is actively trying to
sell or rent (as evidenced by a sign posted on the property advertising the
property for sale or rent with contact information and current telephone
number, listing agreement with realty contact information, MRIS or MLS
electronic listing, or other advertisement of sale or rent) shall not be
considered a VACANT PROPERTY registration requirement for a building for sale
or rent may be extended for one additional period upon a showing that the
building is still actively for sale of rent; and provided, that the building is
in compliance with the VACANT PROPERTY maintenance requirements of this
section.
      VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRY. The official record of vacant distressed
property and vacant property registered with the city in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
   (D)   Inspections of distressed property.
      (1)   Prior to filing a complaint of foreclosure or notice of default or
accepting a deed in lieu of foreclosures, the responsible party, or his, her,
or their designee, shall inspect a distressed property to determine whether the
property is vacant. If the distressed property is found to be vacant or shows
evidence of vacancy, the responsible party shall, within 30 days, register the
property as a vacant distressed property with the Planning and Zoning Director
for the purpose of minimizing hazards to persons and property as a result of
the vacancy.
      (2)   (a)   If a distressed party is occupied, but remains in default, it
shall be inspected by the responsible party, or his, her, or their designee,
monthly until:
            1.   The default is remedied; or
            2.   The property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of
vacancy.
         (b)   The responsible party or his, her, or their designee shall,
within 30 days after obtaining knowledge or vacancy, register the property as a
vacant distressed property within the city for the purpose of minimizing
hazards to persons and property as a result of the vacancy.
   (E)   Registration of vacant distressed property.
      (1)   The responsible party or his, her, or their designee shall register
a vacant distressed property by completing and submitting the vacant distressed
property registration form and submitting the registration form to the Planning
and Zoning Director, along with the required fee.
      (2)   The vacant distressed property registration form shall include the
following:
         (a)   The address of the vacant distressed property;
         (b)   The name, current street/office mailing address (no post office
boxes), telephone number, and email of all owners of the vacant distressed
property;
         (c)   The names of the responsible party, the street/office mailing
address of the responsible party (no post office boxes), a responsible party
direct contact name, telephone number and email, and the name, address,
telephone number, and email of the property management company, field service
provider, property preservation or real estate owned (REO) section or
department responsible for inspecting, securing, and maintaining the property;
and
         (d)   An explanation as to the reason for the vacancy of the property.
      (3)   If a vacant distressed property is not registered, then the city
may give the responsible party or his, her, or their designee a written notice
of vacancy and the responsible party or their designee shall register the
vacant distressed property with the city within 30 days of receipt of a notice
of vacancy from the city.
      (4)   Registration of a vacant distressed property shall be valid and
effective for a period not to exceed one year, beginning July 1 and ending the
next June 30, and shall be renewed annually thereafter until the property is no
longer a vacant distressed property.
      (5)   Vacant distressed property shall remain under the registration
requirement, security, and maintenance standards of this section so long as the
property is distressed property.
      (6)   The responsible party shall inform the city of any pending action,
such as bankruptcy, probate, or other court or administrative action, that
would prohibit the responsible party from taking any of the actions required by
this section. The responsible party shall provide the city with complete
information about any pending action that it alleges prevents the responsible
party from complying with this section, including the security and maintenance
standards set forth herein.
      (7)   Failure to register a vacant distressed property is an ordinance
violation.
   (F)   Owner registration of vacant property.
      (1)   An owner of vacant property located in the city shall register the
vacant property with the Planning and Zoning Director within 30 days of the
vacancy. For good cause, the Director may grant an owner of vacant property of
the notice of vacancy from the city.
      (2)   If a vacant property is not registered, then the Planning and
Zoning Director may give the owner of record a written notice of vacancy and
the owner shall register the vacant property with the city within 30 days of
receipt of the notice of vacancy from the city.
      (3)   Owners who are required to register his, her, or their vacant
properties pursuant to this section shall do so by completing and submitting
the vacant property registration form to the Planning and Zoning Director,
along with the required fee. The vacant property registration form may be
signed by an agent for an owner provided the agent’s written authorization from
the owner is also provided. The vacant property registration form shall include
the following:
         (a)   The name, current street/office mailing address (no post office
boxes), telephone number, and email of all owners of the vacant property. If
any owner of the vacant property is not the same as the owner of record, then
an explanation of the reasons for the difference in ownership shall be
provided;
         (b)   The name of an individual or legal entity responsible for the
care and control of the vacant property. Such individual may be the owner, if
the owner is an individual, or may be someone other than the owner; provided,
that the owner has contracted with such a person or entity to act as his or her
agent for purposes of this section;
         (c)   A current street/office mailing address (no post office boxes),
telephone number and email of the owner’s agent, along with a direct contact
name, telephone number, and email for the direct contact of the owner’s agent;
         (d)   A certificate of property insurance in an amount equal to or
greater than the tax assessed value of the property; and
         (e)   An explanation as to the reason for the vacancy of the property.
      (4)   Registration of the vacant property shall be valid and effective
for a period not to exceed one year, beginning July 1 and ending the next June
30, and shall be renewed annually thereafter until the property is no longer a
vacant property.
      (5)   Vacant property shall remain under the registration requirement,
security, and maintenance standards of this section so long as the property is
vacant.
      (6)   The owner or owner’s agent shall inform the Planning and Zoning
Director of any pending action, such as bankruptcy, probate, or other court or
administrative action, that would prohibit the owner or owner’s agent from
taking any of the actions required by this section. The owner or owner’s agent
shall provide the Director with complete information about any pending action
that he or she alleges prevents the owner or owner’s agent from complying with
this section, including the security and maintenance standards set forth
herein.
      (7)   Failure to register a vacant property is an ordinance violation.
   (G)   Fire damaged property. If a building or structure is damaged in a fire
or other casualty, the owner has 90 days from the date of the fire or other
casualty to apply for a permit to start construction, rehabilitation, repair,
or demolition of the fire damaged building or structure. Failure to do or the
cessation of active construction, rehabilitation, repair, or demolition
activity for more than 30 days, unless good cause is shown, will result in the
property being deemed a vacant property and subject to the registration,
security, and maintenance requirements of this section.
   (H)   Registration fee. The annual fee for registration of a vacant
distressed property or a vacant property shall be $200, payable to the city and
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Director, along with the required
registration form and all supporting information and documentation.
Registration of a vacant distressed property or a vacant property is for the
fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending the next June 30. Unpaid registration
fees shall be charged a late fee of 2% for each month or portion of a month
that the registration fee remains unpaid. Registration fees are nonrefundable
and are not prorated in the event a registration fee is paid for a partial
year. Unpaid registration fees are a lien on the property and may be collected
in the same manner as taxes collected.
   (I)   Requirement to keep information current; removal from vacant property
registry.
      (1)   If, at any time, the information contained in the responsible
party’s vacant distressed property registration or the owner’s vacant property
registration form is no longer valid, then the responsible party or owner, as
applicable, has 15 days to file a new form containing valid, current
information. There shall be no fee to update an existing registered responsible
party’s or owner’s current information.
      (2)   Should the vacant building become occupied at any time after
registration of a vacant distressed property or a vacant property, then the
responsible party or owner, as applicable, shall file an amended registration
form within 15 days of occupancy, notifying the city of such occupancy along
with corroborating documentation and requesting that the building be removed
from the vacant property registry. The city shall remove such building from the
registry within 30 days of the filing of the amended registration form, unless
the city determines that there is evidence of vacancy and reason to believe
that the building is vacant and subject to registration.
   (J)   Vacant property maintenance and security requirements.
      (1)   The responsible party of a vacant distressed property and the owner
or owner’s agent of a vacant property shall comply with the following
maintenance requirements.
         (a)   The exterior of the property shall be kept free of weeds, dry
brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required
by federal, state, or local law, discarded personal items, including, but not
limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material,
or any other items that give the appearance that the property is vacant and
abandoned.
         (b)   The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging, or
similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that
matches the color of the exterior of the structure.
         (c)   All visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and
properly maintained during the vacancy of the property. LANDSCAPING includes,
but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges, or similar
plantings. MAINTENANCE includes, but is not limited to, cutting, pruning, and
mowing of required landscape and removal of all trimmings.
         (d)   Pools, spas, and other water features shall be kept in working
order so the water remains clear and free pollutants and debris or drained and
kept dry. Properties with pools and/or spas must comply with applicable
security fencing requirements.
         (e)   Adherence to the maintenance requirements of this section does
not relieve the responsible party, owner, or owner’s agent of any obligations
set forth in any covenants, conditions, and restrictions and/or homeowners’
association’s rules and regulations which may apply to the property.
      (2)   The responsible party of a vacant distressed property and the owner
or owner’s agent of a vacant property shall maintain the property in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. All vacant property
shall be deemed adequately protected from intrusion by trespassers and from
deterioration by the weather if:
         (a)   Doors, windows, areaways, and other openings are weathertight
and secured against entry by birds, vermin, and trespassers. Missing or broken
doors, windows, and opening coverings are covered with at least one-half inch
of CDX plywood completely painted in accordance with the predominant tone of
the building, weather protected, tightly fitted to the opening, and secured by
screws or bolts;
         (b)   The roof and flashings are sound, tight, will not admit
moisture, and drained to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or
interior;
         (c)   The building gutters and downspouts are watertight and entire
storm drainage system is adequately sized, installed in an approved manner,
functional, and discharged in an approved manner. All downspout and gutters
shall be of the type, size, and discharge locations approved by the Planning
and Zoning Director;
         (d)   The building is maintained in good repair, structurally sound,
free from debris, rubbish, and garbage, and sanitary walking surfaces and
stairs are structurally sound, so as not to pose a threat to the public health
or safety;
         (e)   The structural members are free of deterioration and capable of
safely bearing imposed dead and live loads;
         (f)   The foundation walls are plumb, free from open cracks and
brakes, and rat-proof;
         (g)   The exterior walls are free of holes, breaks, and loose or
rotting materials. Exposed metal and wood surfaces are protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment;
         (h)   All balconies, porches, canopies, marquees, signs, metal
awnings, cornices, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts, and
similar features are in good repair, anchored, sage, and sound. Exposed metal
and wood surfaces are protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment;
         (i)   Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and similar appurtenances
are structurally safe. Exposed metal and wood surfaces are protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment;
         (j)   Yard, walk, steps, and openings in sidewalks are safe for
pedestrian travel and snow and ice are removed from sidewalks adjoining the
property;
         (k)   Accessory and appurtenant structures such as garages, sheds, and
fences are free from safety and health standards; and
         (l)   The premises on which a structure is located is clean, safe, and
sanitary, maintained free of weeds, junk vehicles, and litter, and does not
pose a threat to the public health or safety.
      (3)   Vacant property and vacant distressed property required to be
registered in accordance with this section shall be inspected by the owner or
owner’s agent or by the responsible party on a monthly basis to determine if
the property is in compliance with the requirements of this section.
   (K)   Posting of notices.
      (1)   Vacant property and vacant distressed property required to be
registered in accordance with this section shall be posted with the name and a
24-hour contact telephone number of the owner/owner’s agent or responsible
party, including any local property management company.
      (2)   The posting shall contain along with the contact name and contact
telephone number, words substantially similar to “this property preserved by
______” and “to report problems or concerns call______.”
      (3)   The notice shall be place on the interior of a window facing the
street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or
secured to the exterior of the front door or the building/structure facing the
street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street. If no
such area exists, then the notice may be posted in a location that is visible
from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to
vandals.
      (4)   Notices shall not be illuminated or exceed eight and one-half by 14
inches in size. Exterior postings must be constructed of and printed with
weather resistant materials. The owner or owner’s agent or the responsible
party, property preservation company, or property management company shall
inspect the vacant or distressed property on at least a monthly basis to
determine if the property remains in compliance with the notice posting
requirements of this section.
   (L)   Additional authority.
      (1)   If the Planning and Zoning Director, or his or her designee,
determines that the vacant property or vacant distressed property is in
violation of any provision of this section, then the designee shall notify the
owner/owner’s agent or the lender/mortgagee/responsible party of the violation
by providing notice of the violation to the person identified in the
registration application, and shall require the owner/owner’s agent or the
lender/mortgagee/responsible party to correct the violation.
      (2)   A notice of violation shall include a description of the violation
and, except for severe conditions where immediate action is needed to protect
the public health and safety or failure to secure the vacant property, shall
provide a period of not less than 20 days from the mailing or delivery of the
notice for the owner/owner’s agent or the lender/mortgagee/responsible party to
remedy the violation. If the responsible party fails to remedy the violation
within the stated period, the city may issue a citation for an ordinance
violation and impose penalties against the owner/owner’s agent or the lender/
mortgagee/responsible party for the violation.
(Ord. 13 2020, passed 8-18-2020) Penalty, see §
151.999
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.070 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.
   (A)   The Administrative Officer, who shall be appointed by the Advisory
Plan Commission upon recommendation of the Mayor, shall:
      (1)   Administer the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Issue zoning-building permits; and
      (3)   Maintain a permanent file of all zoning-building permits and
applications as public records.
   (B)   The Administrative Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   The exclusive right to hear and approve or deny all specifications
for mobile homes and manufactured housing special exceptions only. A special
exception may only be approved by the Administrative Officer upon determination
in writing that the provisions of §
151.089 have been met. In addition, the Administrative Officer may impose
conditions pursuant to §
151.092;
      (2)   The exclusive right to hear and approve or deny variances from the
development standards of the zoning ordinance. A variance from the development
standards may be approved by the Administrative Officer only upon a
determination in writing that the provisions of §
151.087 have been met. In addition, the Administrative Officer may impose
conditions pursuant to §
151.092; and
      (3)   The rules and procedures adopted by the Advisory Board of Zoning
Appeals under §
151.085 shall apply to the Administrative Officer, and any appeal of the
decision made by the Administrative Officer shall be done in accordance with §
151.073.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.071 ZONING-BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   A zoning-building permit shall be obtained before any person may:
      (1)   Occupy or use any vacant land;
      (2)   Occupy or use any structure hereafter constructed, reconstructed,
moved, or enlarged;
      (3)   Change the use of a structure or land to a different use;
      (4)   Change a nonconforming use;
      (5)   Erect a fence; or
      (6)   Erect a satellite dish.
   (B)   Application for a zoning-building permit shall be accomplished by a
plot plan showing clearly and completely the location, dimensions, and nature
of any structure involved and such other information as the Administrative
Officer may require for administration of this chapter. Any zoning-building
permits shall expire six months after date of issuance.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.072 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to locate, erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge,
change, maintain, or use any structure or land in violation of any regulation
in or any provisions of this chapter or of any regulation enacted hereunder by
the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals. The Advisory Plan Commission may
institute a suit for mandatory injunction directing the removal of a structure
erected in violation of this chapter. Any structure or use that violates this
chapter shall be deemed to be a common nuisance, and the owner of the structure
shall be liable for maintaining a common nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-403) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.073 METHOD OF APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved or affected by the provisions of this chapter or by any
decision of the Administrative Officer may appeal to the Advisory Board of
Zoning Appeals within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the
Advisory Board, by filing a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
Every decision of the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals shall be subject to
review by the Circuit or Superior Court of the county.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-404) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
ADVISORY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
§ 151.085 GENERAL.
   In accordance with state law, the Mayor, the City Council, and the Advisory
Plan Commission shall appoint and organize an Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals,
which may adopt rules to govern its procedure. The Advisory Board of Zoning
Appeals shall hold meetings, keep minutes, and, pursuant to notice, conduct
hearings, compel the attendance of witnesses, take testimony, and render
decisions in writing, all as required by law. The cost of any legal
advertisement and certified letters shall be borne by the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-501) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.086 APPEALS.
   The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide
appeals from any order, requirement, decision, grant, or refusal made by the
Administrative Officer in the administration of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-502) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.087 VARIANCES FROM DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals, upon appeal, shall have the
power to authorize variances from the development standard requirements of this
chapter, and to attach such conditions to such variances as it deems necessary
to assure compliance with the purpose of this chapter.
   (B)   A variance from the development standards may be approved by the
Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals only upon a determination in writing that:
      (1)   The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the community in that the variance observes a
spirit of this chapter, produces substantial justice, and is not contrary to
the public interest;
      (2)   The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in
the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner; and
      (3)   The strict application of the terms of the zoning ordinance will
result in the unnecessary hardship in the use of the property in that the
property has a unique characteristic.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.088 USE VARIANCE.
   (A)   The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals, upon appeal, shall have the
power to authorize variances of use from the requirements of this chapter, and
to attach such conditions to the variances of use as it deems necessary to
assure compliance for the purpose of this chapter.
   (B)   A use variance may be approved by the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals
only upon the determination in writing that:
      (1)   The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the community in that the variance observes a
spirit of this chapter, produces substantial justice, and is not contrary to
the public interest;
      (2)   The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in
the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner, and shall
comply with the performance standards of §
151.090;
      (3)   The need for the variance arises from some condition peculiar to
the property involved;
      (4)   The strict application of the terms of the zoning ordinance will
result in the unnecessary hardship in the use of the property in that the
property has a unique characteristic; and
      (5)   The approval does not interfere substantially with the
Comprehensive Plan adopted pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-500 and all acts
supplemental and amendatory thereto, including I.C. 36-7-4.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.089 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to authorize
special exceptions as specified in this chapter.
   (B)   A special exception may be approved under this section only upon
determination in writing that:
      (1)   A special exception shall be listed as such in §
151.027 for the district requested;
      (2)   The special exception shall not involve any element or cause any
condition that may be dangerous, injurious, or noxious to any other property or
persons, and shall comply with the performance standards of §
151.090;
      (3)   The special exception shall be sited, oriented, and landscaped to
produce a harmonious relationship of buildings and grounds to adjacent
buildings and properties;
      (4)   The special exception shall produce a total visual impression and
environment which is consistent with the environment of the neighborhood;
      (5)   The special exception shall require organized vehicular access and
parking to minimize traffic congestion in the neighborhood;
      (6)   The special exception shall be consistent with the spirit, purpose,
and intent of this chapter, and the special exception will substantially serve
the public convenience and welfare; and
      (7)   The special exception for the sale of alcoholic beverages in an
eating and/or drinking establishment must be passed upon and approved by the
Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.090 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   General. All special exceptions and use variances shall comply with
the requirements of this section. In order to determine whether the proposed
use will conform to the requirements of this chapter, the Advisory Board of
Zoning Appeals may also obtain a qualified consultant to testify, whose costs
for services shall be borne by the applicant.
   (B)   Fire protection. Fire prevention and fighting equipment acceptable to
the City Fire Department shall be readily available when any activity involving
the handling or storage of flammable or explosive materials is carried on.
   (C)   Electrical disturbance. No activity shall cause electrical disturbance
adversely affecting radio or other equipment in the vicinity.
   (D)   Noise. Noise which is determined to be objectionable because of
volume, frequency, or beat shall be muffled or otherwise controlled, except
fire sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes shall be
exempt from this requirement.
   (E)   Vibrations. Vibrations detectable without instruments on neighboring
property in any district shall be prohibited.
   (F)   Odors. No malodorous gas or matter shall be permitted which is
discernable on any adjoining lot or property.
   (G)   Air pollution. No pollution of air, by fly ash, dust, smoke, vapors,
or any other substance shall be permitted which is harmful to health, animals,
vegetation, or property.
   (H)   Glare. Lighting devices which produce objectionable direct or
reflected glare on adjoining properties or thoroughfares shall not be
permitted.
   (I)   Erosion. No erosion by wind or water shall be permitted which carries
objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
   (J)   Water pollution. Water pollution shall be subject to the standards
established by the State Stream Pollution Control Board.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.091 NONCONFORMING USES.
   The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to authorize
changes of a lawful nonconforming use as follows.
   (A)   A nonconforming use which occupies a portion of a structure or
premises may be extended within such structure or premises as they existed when
the prohibitory provision took effect, but not in violation of the area and
yard requirements of the district in which such structures or premises are
located. No change of a nonconforming use shall entail structural alterations
or any additions other than those required by law for the purpose of safety and
health.
   (B)   The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals may impose such conditions as it
deems necessary for the protection of adjacent property and public interest.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-
15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-
7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord.
1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed
9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord.
1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.092 COMMITMENTS.
   In the case of a petition for a special exception, development variance, or
use variance from the terms of this chapter, the Advisory Board of Zoning
Appeals may permit or require the owner of a parcel of property to make a
written commitment concerning use or development of that parcel. Said
commitment shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder and take
effect upon the granting of the special exception, development variance, or use
variance. A recorded commitment shall be binding on the owner of the parcel,
each subsequent owner, and any person acquiring an interest in the parcel of
land. A commitment may be modified or terminated by the Advisory Board of
Zoning Appeals during a public hearing after notice is given as provided by its
rules.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-508) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
AMENDMENTS
§ 151.105 GENERAL.
   The City Council may introduce and consider amendments to this chapter and
to the zone map, as proposed by the Advisory Plan Commission or by petition by
the owners of 50% or more of the area involved in the petition.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-601) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.106 PETITION.
   Petitions for amendment shall be filed with the Advisory Plan Commission,
and the petitioner, upon filing, shall, whether or not the proposed amendment
is enacted, pay all costs and expenses connected with the petition including
the drafting, advertising, and recording of the chapter.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-602) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.107 REFERRAL.
   Any proposed amendment not originating from the Advisory Plan Commission
shall be referred to the Advisory Plan Commission for consideration and report
before any final action is taken by the City Council. The Advisory Plan
Commission shall hold a public hearing and report its findings and
recommendations in writing to the City Council, as prescribed by law, after the
public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-603) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
§ 151.108 ACTION.
   After receiving the Advisory Plan Commission’s report, the City Council may
proceed to take action on the proposed amendment as prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-604) (Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed
9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed 3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord.
1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord. 1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970;
Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977; Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8,
passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11, passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982;
Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985)
COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
§ 151.120 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM OR CSE SYSTEM. 
      (1)   A system that:
         (a)   Has a nameplate capacity of at least ten megawatts; and
         (b)   Captures and converts solar energy into electricity:
            1.   For the purpose of selling the electricity at wholesale; and
            2.   For use in locations other than where it is generated.
      (2)   Includes solar panels, collection and feeder lines, generation tie
lines, substations, ancillary buildings, solar monitoring stations, and
accessory equipment or structures.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that
is occupied as, or is designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one
or more families or individuals.
   NONPARTICIPATING PROPERTY. 
      (1)   A lot or parcel of real property:
         (a)   That is not owned by a project owner; and
         (b)   With respect to which:
            1.   The project owner does not seek:
               a.   To install or locate one or more CSE systems or other
facilities related to a CSE system project (including power lines, temporary or
permanent access roads, or other temporary or permanent infrastructure); or
               b.   To otherwise enter into a lease or any other agreement with
the owner of the property for use of all or part of the property in connection
with a CSE system project; or
            2.   The owner of the property does not consent:
               a.   To having one or more CSE systems or other facilities
related to a CSE system project (including power lines, temporary or permanent
access roads, or other temporary or permanent infrastructure) installed or
located; or
               b.   To otherwise enter into a lease or any other agreement with
the project owner for use of all or part of the property in connection with a
CSE system project.
      (2)   Does not include a lot or parcel of real property otherwise
described if the owner of the lot or parcel consents to participate in a CSE
system project through a neighbor agreement, a participation agreement, or
another similar arrangement or agreement with a project owner.
(Ord. 6-2025, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 151.121 SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Subject to division (E), a project owner may not install or locate a
CSE system on property unless the distance, measured as a straight line, from
the nearest outer edge of the CSE system's solar panels to:
      (1)   The nearest edge of the right-of-way for any:
         (a)   Federal interstate highway, federal highway, or state highway,
is at least 40 feet;
         (b)   Collector road is at least 30 feet; or
         (c)   Local road is at least 30 feet; or
      (2)   The property line of any nonparticipating property is at least 50
feet.
   (B)   Subject to division (E), a project owner may not install or locate a
CSE system on property unless the distance, measured as a straight line, from
the nearest outer edge of the CSE system's solar panels to the nearest point on
the outer wall of a dwelling located on a nonparticipating property is at least
300 feet.
   (C)   Subject to division (E), if a project owner installs a CSE system
within a distance of 300 feet, measured as a straight line, from the nearest
outer edge of the CSE system's solar panels to the nearest point on the outer
wall of a dwelling located on a nonparticipating property, the project owner
shall install a landscape buffer in the area between the nearest outer edge of
the CSE system's solar panels and the nonparticipating property owner's
property line that faces the CSE system's solar panels. The landscape buffer
must be:
      (1)   In a location that is not on the property of the nonparticipating
property owner; and
      (2)   Constructed from such materials as set forth in a plan submitted
during the permitting and approval process for the CSE system.
   (D)   A project owner may not install or locate a CSE system on property
unless the height of the CSE system solar panels are not more than 15 feet
above ground level when the CSE system's arrays are at full tilt.
   (E)   The distance requirements set forth in division (A)(2) and division
(B) and requirement for the installation of a landscape buffer set forth in
division (C) may be waived with respect to the siting of any one CSE system,
subject to the written consent of the owner of each affected nonparticipating
property and the city.
(Ord. 6-2025, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 151.122 GROUND COVER.
   (A)   The project owner shall plant, establish, and maintain for the life of
the CSE system perennial vegetated ground cover on the ground around and under
solar panels, and in project site buffer areas. The use of pollinator seed
mixes in the planting of ground cover required by this section is encouraged.
The project owner shall prepare a vegetation plan that:
      (1)   Is compatible with each CSE system on the project site;
      (2)   Provides for the planting of noninvasive species and the use of
native or naturalized species if the planting and use of noninvasive and native
or naturalized species are:
         (a)   Appropriate to the region; and
         (b)   Economically feasible; in order to reduce stormwater runoff and
erosion at the site and to provide habitat for wildlife and insects; and
      (3)   Provides for site preparation and maintenance practices designed to
control invasive species and noxious weeds.
(Ord. 6-2025, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 151.123 FENCING.
   The project owner shall completely enclose the CSE system with fencing that
is at least six feet high.
(Ord. 6-2025, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 151.124 UNDERGROUND CABLES.
   All cables of up to 34.5 kilovolts that are located between inverter
locations and project substations shall be located and maintained underground,
as feasible and approved by the city. Other solar infrastructure, such as
module-to-module collection cables, transmission lines, substations, junction
boxes, and other typical aboveground infrastructure may be located and
maintained above ground. Buried cables shall be at a depth of at least 36
inches below grade or, if necessitated by on-site conditions, at a greater
depth. Cables and lines located outside of the CSE system project site may:
   (A)   Be located above ground; or
   (B)   In the case of cables or lines of up to 34.5 kilovolts, be buried
underground at:
      (1)   A depth of at least 48 inches below grade, so as to not interfere
with drainage tile or ditch repairs; or
      (2)   Another depth, as necessitated by conditions, as determined in
consultation with the landowner(s) and the city.
(Ord. 6-2025, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 151.125 GLARE MINIMIZATION.
   A CSE system must be designed and constructed to:
   (A)   Minimize glare on adjacent properties and roadways; and
   (B)   Not interfere with vehicular traffic, including air traffic.
(Ord. 6-2025, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 151.126 SIGNAL INTERFERENCE.
   A CSE system installed in a unit must be installed in a manner so as to
minimize and mitigate impacts to:
   (A)   Television signals;
   (B)   Microwave signals;
   (C)   Agricultural global positioning systems;
   (D)   Military defense radar;
   (E)   Radio reception; or
   (F)   Weather and doppler radar.
(Ord. 6-2025, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 151.127 DAMAGE TO DRAINAGE INFRASTRUCTURE.
   All damages to waterways, drainage ditches, field tiles, or other drainage
related infrastructure caused by the construction, installation, or maintenance
of a CSE system must be completely repaired by the project owner or remedied
with the installation of new drainage infrastructure so as to not impede the
natural flow of water. All repairs must be completed within a reasonable period
of time and:
   (A)   To the satisfaction of the city; and
   (B)   As stated in an applicable lease or another agreement with the
landowner, subject to applicable federal, state, and local drainage laws and
regulations.
(Ord. 6-2025, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 151.128 DECOMMISSIONING PLAN.
   (A)   Subject to division (B), a project owner may not install or locate a
CSE system unless the project owner submits a decommissioning and site
restoration plan, and posts a surety bond, or an equivalent means of security
acceptable to the city, including a parent company guarantee or an irrevocable
letter of credit, but excluding cash, in an amount equal to the estimated cost
of decommissioning the CSE system, as calculated by a third party licensed or
registered engineer or by another person with suitable experience in the
decommissioning of CSE systems. The required bond or other security shall be
posted in an amount equal to 100% of the total estimated decommissioning costs
not later than the start date of the CSE system's full commercial operation.
For purposes of this section, the total estimated decommissioning costs shall
be reevaluated by a third party licensed or registered engineer (or by another
person with suitable experience in the decommissioning of CSE systems) at least
once every five-year period after the start date of the CSE system's full
commercial operation; and the total amount of the bond or security posted under
this division shall be adjusted as necessary after each reevaluation.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the estimated cost of decommissioning a
CSE system, as calculated by a licensed or registered professional engineer (or
by another person with suitable experience in the decommissioning of CSE
systems), shall not include any estimated salvage value attributable to the CSE
system at the time of decommissioning, unless the city and the project owner
agree to include any such value in the estimated cost.
   (C)   A project owner shall provide written notice of the project owner's
intent to decommission a CSE system not later than 60 days before the
discontinuation of commercial operation by the CSE system. Except as provided
in division (E), after the discontinuation of commercial operation by the CSE
system, and as part of the decommissioning process:
      (1)   All structures, foundations, roads, gravel areas, and cables
associated with the project shall be removed to a depth of at least 36 inches
below grade; and
      (2)   The ground shall be restored to a condition reasonably similar to
its condition before the start of construction activities in connection with
the CSE system project.
   (D)   Except as provided in division (E), if the project owner fails to
remove all CSE system project assets not later than one year after the proposed
date of final decommissioning, as set forth in the notice to the city under
division (C), the city may engage qualified contractors to:
      (1)   Enter the project site;
      (2)   Remove the CSE system project assets;
      (3)   Sell any assets removed; and
      (4)   Remediate the site and may initiate proceedings to recover any
costs incurred.
   (E)   Project assets may remain in place after decommissioning is complete
if:
      (1)   The location and condition of the assets conform with local
regulations at the time of decommissioning; and
      (2)   The written consent of the landowner and the city is obtained.
(Ord. 6-2025, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 151.129 PRESUMED ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   If a CSE system installed does not generate electricity for 18
consecutive months:
      (1)   The CSE system is considered abandoned as of the date that is 540
days after the date on which the CSE system last generated electricity; and
      (2)   All CSE system project assets shall be removed in accordance with §
151.128(C) not later than one year after the date of abandonment specified in
division (A)(1).
   (B)   In the case of abandonment, as described in division (A), if the
project owner fails to remove the CSE system project assets not later than one
year after the date of abandonment, as required by division (A)(2), the city
may engage qualified contractors to:
      (1)   Enter the project site;
      (2)   Remove the CSE system project assets;
      (3)   Sell any assets removed; and
      (4)   Remediate the site and may initiate proceedings to recover any
costs incurred.
(Ord. 6-2025, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 151.130 FORCE MAJEURE.
   (A)   A FORCE MAJEURE EVENT includes the following:
      (1)   Fire, flood, tornado, or other natural disasters or acts of God.
      (2)   War, civil strife, a terrorist attack, or other similar acts of
violence.
      (3)   Other unforeseen events or events over which a project owner has no
control.
   (B)   If a force majeure event results in a CSE system not generating
electricity, the project owner shall:
      (1)   As soon as practicable after the occurrence of the force majeure
event, provide notice to the city of the event and of the resulting cessation
of generating operations; and
      (2)   Demonstrate to the city that the CSE system will be substantially
operational and generating electricity not later than 12 months after the
occurrence of the force majeure event.
   (C)   If the CSE system does not become substantially operational and resume
generating electricity within the time set forth in division (B)(2):
      (1)   The CSE system is considered abandoned as of the date that is 365
days after the date on which the CSE system last generated electricity, unless
the project owner demonstrates to the city that the project owner is using all
commercially reasonable efforts to resume generation; and
      (2)   All CSE system project assets shall be removed in accordance with §
151.128(C) of this chapter not later than one year after the date of
abandonment specified in division (C)(1).
   (D)   In the case of presumed abandonment, as described in division (C), if
the project owner fails to remove the CSE system project assets not later than
one year after the date of abandonment, as required by division (C)(2), the
city may engage qualified contractors to:
      (1)   Enter the project site;
      (2)   Remove the CSE system project assets;
      (3)   Sell any assets removed; and
      (4)   Remediate the site and may initiate proceedings to recover any
costs incurred.
(Ord. 6-2025, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 151.131 ROAD USE AGREEMENT.
   The project owner shall enter into a road use agreement to the satisfaction
of the city that identifies the following: The route desired to haul equipment
and materials necessary to provide permanent access roads and complete the
construction of a CSE system.
(Ord. 6-2025, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure to maintain pool covers, fences, failure to have gates closed,
or failure to remove or retract a ladder access to the pool shall constitute a
violation of the zoning ordinance and is subject to the penalties provided
therefor.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty of not less than $100, nor more than $3,000. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-4-600-403)
(Ord. 712, passed 4-2-1957; Ord. 1964-9, passed 9-15-1964; Ord. 1965-4, passed
3-2-1965; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 1967-7, passed 6-6-1967; Ord.
1968-5, passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 8-4-1970; Ord. 1977-12, passed 11-1-1977;
Ord. 1978-18, passed 12-5-1978; Ord. 1980-8, passed 9-16-1980; Ord. 1980-11,
passed 11-4-1980; Ord. 1982-1, passed 6-1-1982; Ord. 1985–5, passed 11-19-1985;
Ord. 13 2020, passed 8-18-2020)
CHAPTER 152: BUILDINGS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   City Building Code adopted by reference
   
152.02   Building standards adopted by reference
   
152.03   Unsafe structures
   
152.04   Building permit fee schedule
   
152.05   Residential investment incentives
Preservation and Design Review Regulations
   
152.20   Design Review Board
   
152.21   Purpose
   
152.22   Definitions
   
152.23   City boundaries
   
152.24   Demolition permit required
   
152.25   Limitations on issuance of building, demolition, sign permits, and
certificates of zoning compliance
   
152.26   Issuance of certificate of appropriateness
   
152.27   Criteria for evaluating applications for certificate of
appropriateness
   
152.28   Notice of demolition required
   
152.29   Certificate of appropriateness required for new signs
   
152.30   Exclusions
   
152.31   Appeal from decision of Review Board
   
152.32   Review Board guidelines
Construction, Alteration, Equipment, Use, Occupancy,
and Location of Buildings and Structures
   
152.45   General requirements
   
152.46   Building permits
   
152.47   Investigations and inspections of construction activities
   
152.48   Enforcement and penalties
   
152.49   Minimum construction standards
   
152.50   Use of engineered roof trusses and floor joists
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 CITY BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The city hereby adopts all of I.C. 36-7-9-1 et seq., as amended, as
the City Building Code.
   (B)   The Building Inspector shall administer the provisions of this section
and shall act as the enforcement authority defined under I.C. 36-7-9-2.
   (C)   The definition of SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST set forth in I.C. 36-
7-9-2 is hereby adopted for the purposes of this section and incorporated in it
by reference.
(Prior Code, § 36-7-9-1) (Ord. passed 8-14-1923; Ord. passed 3-24-1925; Ord.
passed 4-27-1926; Ord. 1966-2, passed 3-1-1966; Ord. 7-1983, passed 10-4-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Local building standards, see I.C. 36-7-9-1
§ 152.02 BUILDING STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-1 et seq., as subsequently amended
concerning the enforcement of building standards, are hereby adopted in their
entirety and are incorporated by reference into this section.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DEPARTMENT. The City Building Department shall be the executive
department authorized by this section to administer the provisions of I.C. 36-
7-9-1 et seq.
      ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The Building Inspector.
      HEARING AUTHORITY. Those persons so designated by the Mayor under the
authority of I.C. 36-7-9-2. The HEARING AUTHORITY shall perform those functions
specified by I.C. 36-7-9-5 et seq.
      SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. The definition of SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY
INTEREST set out in I.C. 36-7-9-4 is incorporated by reference into this
section.
(Ord. 5-90, 1990, passed 7-17-1990)
§ 152.03 UNSAFE STRUCTURES.
   The provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-1 et seq., are hereby adopted in its entirety;
and, further, specifically:
   (A)   UNSAFE STRUCTURES in this section shall mean a building or structure
or any part of a building or structure that is:
      (1)   In an impaired structural condition that makes it unsafe to a
person or property;
      (2)   A fire hazard;
      (3)   A hazard to the public health;
      (4)   A public nuisance;
      (5)   Dangerous to a person or property because of a violation of a
statute or ordinance concerning building condition or maintenance; or
      (6)   Vacant or blighted and not maintained in a manner that would allow
human habitation, occupancy, or use under the requirements of a statute or an
ordinance.
   (B)   An UNSAFE PREMISES shall mean:
      (1)   An unsafe building and the tract of real property on which the
unsafe building is located; or
      (2)   A tract of real property, not including land used for production
agriculture, that does not contain a building or structure or contains a
building or structure that is not considered an unsafe building, if the tract
of real property is:
         (a)   A fire hazard;
         (b)   A hazard to public health;
         (c)   A public nuisance; or
         (d)   Dangerous to a person or property because of a violation of a
statute or an ordinance.
(Ord. 12 2022, passed 1-3-2023)
§ 152.04 BUILDING PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE.
   The following building permit fee schedules are hereby adopted:
   (A)   Commercial building permit fees (including industrial buildings,
commercial buildings, and three or more family dwellings and duplex units) are
as follows.
Permit Type Fee
Permit Type                                     Fee
Accessory structure
(Antenna, wireless tower, gas station canopies, $150
and the like)
Additions                                       $150 + $0.03 per square foot
Demolition
(Fill out notification for utilities to be      $150
disconnected)
Electric/plumbing/HVAC                          $150
House relocation                                $150
New construction - commercial and multi-family  $300 + $0.03 per square foot
New construction - industrial and institutional $300 + $0.02 per square foot
Permit renewal                                  $25
Remodel (includes roof)                         $150 + $0.03 per square foot
Signs                                           $100
Swimming pools (above ground and in-ground)     $50
 
   (B)   Residential building permit fees (including single or two-family
dwellings, modular homes, and duplex condo units) are as follows.
Permit Type Fee
Permit Type                                       Fee
Accessory additions                               $50
(patio, decks, or fences)
Accessory buildings                               $50
(detached garages, pole bars, sheds, or carports)
Additions                                         $50
(covered porches, garages, or room additions)
Demolition
(fill out notification for utilities to be        $100
disconnected)
Exterior remodel                                  $50
(roofing)
House relocation                                  $150
New construction                                  $100 + $0.05 per square foot
(square footage refers to living area only)
Permit renewal                                    $25
(time extension beyond the six-month time limit)
Swimming pool                                     $50
(above and in-ground)
 
(Ord. 12-2021, passed 9-21-2021)
§ 152.05 RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT INCENTIVES.
   (A)   Residential investment incentives, in the form of deductions, relating
to the construction of residential real property shall be granted by the
Council only when the Council finds that the facility to be constructed is
located in a economic development target area following findings by the Council
made pursuant to state statutes and the further provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before the City Council determines that a residential investment
incentive is appropriate for property within the economic development target
area, and after following procedures, the City Council shall further make all
the following findings pertaining to said property.
      (1)   The facility to be constructed consists or consisted of new
construction intended for the habitation by a single-family unit, including
rental units and/or adjoining condominiums for single families.
      (2)   Construction of the facility commenced on or after May 1, 2001.
      (3)   The totality of benefits to the community is sufficient to justify
the deduction.
   (C)   The City Plan Commission shall recommend and the City Council may
grant a deduction for three years pursuant to the schedule found in the state
statutes.
   (D)   The City Plan Commission shall be entitled to charge a fee of $50 for
each application for the residential investment incentives.
(Ord. 7, 2001, passed 9-18-2001)
PRESERVATION AND DESIGN REVIEW REGULATIONS
§ 152.20 DESIGN REVIEW BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment. In recognition of the need for the establishment of a
public body with the authority to advise upon changes to structures and objects
within the city and in order to encourage changes that are compatible with the
restoration movement now in progress, the Design Review Board is hereby
established as included in the duties of the organization known as “Project Gas
City.”
   (B)   Composition.
      (1)   The Design Review Board shall consist of three appointees by the
Mayor, upon approval by the Council.
      (2)   The members shall be one member of the Board of Works, one member
of the City Council, and the Zoning Officer of the city.
      (3)   Each member shall serve a term of three years.
      (4)   The members shall serve without compensation from the city and may
be removed for just cause by the Mayor.
      (5)   A subcommittee will be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the Council to consist of seven members. The subcommittee shall make
recommendations to the Design Review Board and shall serve in an advisory
capacity.
   (C)   Organization and rules.
      (1)   Within 30 days of adoption, the Review Board shall meet and
organize by election of a Chairman and Secretary. The Review Board shall adopt
its Rules of Procedure to accomplish the purpose of this subchapter.
      (2)   Before adoption of such Rules of Procedure by the Review Board,
such rules shall be submitted to the Mayor and the City Council for review,
recommendations, and approval. Such rules shall not be adopted without prior
approval by the Mayor and City Council.
   (D)   Duties. The Review Board shall have the following duties.
      (1)   The Review Board shall review and act upon all applications for
certificates of appropriateness as required in this subchapter.
      (2)   The Review Board shall conduct or cause to be conducted or assist
in the conduction of a continuing survey of all areas, places, buildings,
structures, homes, works of art, or other objects of environmental and
aesthetic interest in the designated area in the city.
      (3)   The Review Board shall work for the continuing education of the
residents of the city, with respect to the architectural and historic heritage
of the city, and shall make every effort to improve the overall design and the
environmental awareness of the people.
      (4)   The Review Board shall establish criteria, rules, and regulations
not otherwise included in this subchapter for evaluating applications for
certificates of appropriateness submitted to it and the manner in which they
shall be processed. These criteria shall include specific considerations to be
given to building materials, landscaping, signs, lighting, and architectural
style for properties within the designated area, as described in this
subchapter. Such criteria, rules, and regulations shall not be adopted by the
Review Board until after review, recommendations, and approval by the Mayor and
Council.
      (5)   The Review Board may recommend to Council legislation that would
best serve to beautify, preserve, restore, and develop the designated area.
Towards these ends, the Review Board shall work with the appropriate officials,
employees, and departments, and joint meetings with such officials, employees,
and departments may be held for this purpose.
      (6)   The Review Board may make recommendations to the Council for
additions or revisions to this subchapter.
      (7)   The Review Board may, within its capabilities, perform such other
design review related tasks as may be required by these preservation and design
review regulations and as may be requested or authorized by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council.
(Ord. 8, 1996, passed 12-17-1996)
§ 152.21 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Council, being mindful of the proud history of this community and
of the importance of beauty in the everyday lives of our citizens, hereby
declares as a matter of public policy that the preservation, restoration,
rehabilitation, and overall aesthetic improvement of our community are matters
of public necessity involving the health, safety, prosperity, and welfare of
the people.
   (B)   The purpose of this subchapter is to:
      (1)   Maintain and enhance the distinctive character of the designated
area of the city by safeguarding the architectural integrity of the various
period structures within it, and to discourage intrusions and alterations
within this city that would be incompatible with this established character;
and
      (2)   Provide for a means of design review for other aspects of community
development within the city that will be of any assistance in achieving a more
pleasing environment for the residents of and visitors to the city.
(Ord. 8, 1996, passed 12-17-1996)
§ 152.22 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTER or ALTERATION. Any material change in the external architectural
features of any property which lies within the city’s designated area or has
been listed under the provisions of this subchapter, as a listed property, not
including demolition, removal, or construction, but including the landscaping
of real property.
   APPLICANT. Any owner, owners, person, persons, association, partnership, or
corporation who applies for a certificate of appropriateness in order to
undertake any change on property subject to this subchapter.
   CHANGE. Any alteration or construction involving any property subject to the
provisions of this subchapter, including signs.
   MEMBER. Any member of the Review Board.
   OWNER. The owner or owners of record.
   PROPERTY. Any place, building, structure, work of art, fixture, or similar
object, but shall not include real property unless expressly provided.
   REVIEW BOARD. The Design Review Board established under the provisions of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 8, 1996, passed 12-17-1996)
§ 152.23 CITY BOUNDARIES.
   The “designated area” is shown on the exhibit attached to the ordinance from
which this subchapter is derived and made a part hereof and includes all
properties within such boundary.
(Ord. 8, 1996, passed 12-17-1996)
§ 152.24 DEMOLITION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No demolition of any property shall be undertaken prior to obtaining
approval of the Board of Works unless otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 8, 1996, passed 12-17-1996) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.25 LIMITATIONS ON ISSUANCE OF BUILDING, DEMOLITION, SIGN PERMITS, AND
CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No permits which require a certificate of appropriateness shall be
issued through otherwise established procedures within the city designated area
except in cases coming under the section of exclusion of these regulations,
unless the application for such permit is approved by the Review Board through
the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness in the manner prescribed
herein.
   (B)   No sign permit shall be issued by the Building-Zoning Inspector or
through otherwise established procedures for any sign to be erected or placed
within the designated area or for any sign to be attached to or erected upon
any existing property within the designated area unless a certificate of
appropriateness has been issued for that sign in the manner prescribed herein.
(Ord. 8, 1996, passed 12-17-1996)
§ 152.26 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (A)   When the owner of a property within the designated area of the city
desires to make any change other than ordinary maintenance when no color
changes are involved, including the construction, reconstruction, or alteration
of any property, structure, or sign, such owner or his or her agent shall first
secure a certificate of appropriateness from the Design Review Board, unless
such property is exempted in accord with the exclusions permitted. Such
exemption shall be determined by the Design Review Board or its authorized
agent.
   (B)   Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be filed with
the City Enforcement Officer who shall, prior to the issuance of any permits,
refer the application to the Review Board for approval or denial.
   (C)   If a proposed change is in accordance with the guidelines and criteria
of the Design Review Board, the Review Board shall issue a certificate of
appropriateness.
(Ord. 8, 1996, passed 12-17-1996) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.27 CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING APPLICATIONS FOR CERTIFICATE OF
APPROPRIATENESS.
   (A)   In considering the appropriateness of any changes, including signs,
the Review Board shall take into account the historical and architectural value
and significance, architectural style and general design, arrangement, texture,
material, and color of the proposed change and the relation thereof to the same
or related factors in other properties, objects, and areas in the immediate
vicinity.
   (B)   Attention shall be taken to avoid the environmentally harmful effect
often created by the clash of undisguised contemporary materials with those of
older origin, such as aluminum or other metals, plastic, fiberglass, and glass
improperly used with brick, stone, masonry, and wood.
   (C)   The Review Board shall favor the use of authentic and traditional
colors and trim colors as opposed to colors of contemporary origin.
(Ord. 8, 1996, passed 12-17-1996)
§ 152.28 NOTICE OF DEMOLITION REQUIRED.
   Where a certificate of appropriateness is required by the provisions of this
subchapter, in order to proceed with a demolition, the applicant shall provide
a written statement that the property concerned is not historically or
architecturally significant or otherwise worthy of preservation.
(Ord. 8, 1996, passed 12-17-1996) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.29 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS REQUIRED FOR NEW SIGNS.
   As has been provided under the provisions of this subchapter, a certificate
of appropriateness shall be obtained for any new sign an applicant wishes to
erect or place within the designated area.
(Ord. 8, 1996, passed 12-17-1996) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.30 EXCLUSIONS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any property, area, or object within the designated
area, provided such work involves no change in material, design, texture,
color, or outer appearance; nor shall anything in this subchapter be construed
to prevent any change, including the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
or demolition of any feature, which in the view of the Review Board, is
required for the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition.
(Ord. 8, 1996, passed 12-17-1996)
§ 152.31 APPEAL FROM DECISION OF REVIEW BOARD.
   (A)   In the case of a denied certificate of appropriateness, the Review
Board shall attempt to work out an alternative plan with the owner or his or
her agent that is acceptable to all parties.
   (B)   If the Review Board and the owner are unable to work out an
alternative plan, or if the owner does not wish to take this action, the owner
may make an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accord with the
subchapter.
(Ord. 8, 1996, passed 12-17-1996)
§ 152.32 REVIEW BOARD GUIDELINES.
   A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required of the owner of a
property, structure, or sign less than 50 years old.
(Ord. 8, 1996, passed 12-17-1996)
CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, EQUIPMENT, USE, OCCUPANCY, AND LOCATION OF
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
§ 152.45 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Title. This subchapter and all material included herein by reference
shall be known as the "Building Code of Gas City, Indiana."
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the life, public
safety, health and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and shall be
construed in such a manner as to effectuate this purpose.
   (C)   Definitions. Unless otherwise clearly indicated by its context, the
words and terms defined in this section shall have the specified meanings.
      BUILDING COMMISSIONER. As used in this subchapter, includes individuals
employed by the Building Department that are authorized to represent the
Building Commissioner.
      CLASS 1 STRUCTURE. As ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-4.
      CLASS 2 STRUCTURE. As ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-5.
      CONSTRUCTION. As ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-7.
      INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING SYSTEM. As ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-14.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. As ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-16.
      MOBILE STRUCTURE. As ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-17.
      PERSON. As ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-18.
      STRUCTURE. Both Class 1 and Class 2 structures, unless specifically
stated otherwise.
      VEHICULAR BRIDGE. As ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-26.
   (D)   Scope.
      (1)   All construction shall be accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-6, this subchapter shall not apply to
industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under I.C. 22-
15-4; however, the provisions of this subchapter and the rules promulgated by
the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission do apply to any construction
related to an industrialized building system or mobile structure not certified
under I.C. 22-15-4.
      (3)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-9, this subchapter is not applicable to
regulated amusement devices, regulated boilers, regulated pressure vessels, or
regulated lifting devices.
   (E)   Authority. The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed
to administer and enforce the following:
      (1)   All of the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   Variances granted in accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-11.
      (3)   Orders issued under I.C. 22-12-2-7.
(Ord. 4-2025, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 152.46 BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   Building permit required. Construction is prohibited unless in
conformity with a valid building permit obtained from the Building Commissioner
prior to commencement of construction.
   (B)   Application for building permit.
      (1)   Any person required to have a building permit shall submit a
complete application to the Building Commissioner.
      (2)   This application shall be submitted on a form prepared by the
Building Commissioner, and shall contain the following:
         (a)   Information that the Building Commissioner determines to be
necessary to locate and contact the applicant.
         (b)   A clear and understandable copy of detailed plans and
specifications drawn to scale which indicate in a precise manner the nature and
location of all construction to be accomplished.
         (c)   A plot plan drawn to scale; provided however, such plot plan
shall not be required in the instance where such construction is to occur
entirely within an existing structure. The plot plan shall reflect the location
of the structure in relation to existing property lines and shall show streets,
curbs and sidewalks, and proposed changes or additions to such streets, curbs
and sidewalks.
         (d)   If required by Indiana law or any rule of the Fire Prevention
and Building Safety Commission, a copy of the construction design release for
the construction to be done that has been issued by the Building Law Compliance
Officer pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3.
         (e)   Any additional information the Building Commissioner finds to be
necessary to determine that the construction will conform to all applicable
building and fire safety laws and will not violate any other applicable
ordinances or laws.
         (f)   The fee as established by Common Council.
      (3)   Application for a building permit shall be made by the person
entitled to obtain the permit or by an employee or agent of that person. The
Building Commissioner may require that such an employee or agent provide
written authority to apply for a permit.
   (C)   Issuance of a building permit. The Building Commissioner shall issue a
building permit to a person after the person has submitted a complete
application, including any applicable fee, provided that the proposed
construction will conform to all applicable building and fire safety laws and
will not violate any other applicable ordinances or laws.
   (D)   Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy for any
structure shall be issued unless such structure was constructed in compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter. It shall be unlawful to occupy any
structure unless a full, partial, or temporary certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the Building Commissioner.
(Ord. 4-2025, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 152.47 INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   General authority to make inspections and investigations.
      (1)   All construction shall be subject to periodic inspections by the
Building Commissioner irrespective of whether a building permit has been or is
required to be obtained.
      (2)   The Building Commissioner may at any reasonable time go in, upon,
around or about the premises where any structure subject to the provisions of
this subchapter or to the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission is located for the purpose of the inspection and investigation of
such structure. Such inspection and investigation may be made before and/or
after construction on the project is completed for the purpose of determining
whether the structure meets the building standards and procedures and
ascertaining whether the construction and procedures have been accomplished in
a manner consistent with this subchapter and the rules of the Fire Prevention
and Building Safety Commission.
   (B)   Inspections by the Fire Department. The Building Commissioner and the
Fire Department shall work cooperatively to conduct inspections and
investigations to promote compliance with fire safety laws (the Fire Department
has independent authority to conduct inspections and take enforcement actions
under I.C. 36-8-17).
(Ord. 4-2025, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 152.48 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Withhold issuance of permits.
      (1)   Whenever a person which is either an applicant for a building
permit or an obtainer of a permit owes fees (including checks returned for
insufficient funds, permit fees owed pursuant to §
152.46, or inspections fees owed pursuant to §
152.47) to the Building Commissioner, the Building Commissioner may withhold
the issuance of subsequently requested permits until such time that the debt is
satisfied.
      (2)   Whenever a person applies for a structure that is not being used or
constructed in conformance with applicable provisions of an applicable zoning
ordinance or other ordinance relating to land use, the Building Commissioner is
authorized to withhold the issuance of requested permit(s) until such time that
the property is brought into conformance with applicable ordinances.
   (B)   Permit revocation. The Building Commissioner may revoke a building
permit when any of the following are applicable:
      (1)   The application, plans or supporting documents contain a false
statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact.
      (2)   The application, plans or supporting documents reflect a lack of
compliance with building standards and procedures.
      (3)   There is a failure to comply with this subchapter.
      (4)   The structure for which the building permit has been issued is not
being used or constructed in conformance with an applicable zoning ordinance or
other ordinance relating to land use.
   (C)   Stop-work order.
      (1)   The Building Commissioner may issue an order requiring suspension
of the pertinent construction (stop-work order) in accordance with this
section.
      (2)   The stop-work order shall:
         (a)   Be in writing.
         (b)   State with specificity the construction to which it is
applicable and the reason for its issuance.
         (c)   Be posted on the property in a conspicuous place.
         (d)   If practicable, be given to:
            1.   The person doing the construction; and
            2.   To the owner of the property or the owner's agent.
         (e)   The stop-work order shall state the conditions under which
construction may be resumed.
      (3)   The Building Commissioner may issue a stop-work order if:
         (a)   Construction is proceeding in an unsafe manner, including, but
not limited to in violation of any standard set forth in this subchapter or any
state law pertaining to safety during construction.
         (b)   Construction is occurring in violation of this subchapter or in
such a manner that if construction is allowed to proceed, there is a reasonable
probability that it will be substantially difficult to correct the violation.
         (c)   Construction for which a building permit is required is
proceeding without a building permit being in force.
      (4)   The issuance of a stop-work order shall in no way limit the
operation of penalties provided elsewhere in this subchapter.
   (D)   Civil action. Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-4, the city may initiate a civil
action in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain any person from
violating a provision of this subchapter.
   (E)   Monetary penalty. Any person violating any provision of this
subchapter may be subject to a fine in any sum not exceeding $2,500. The
assessment of the monetary penalty shall in no way limit the operation of the
penalties provided elsewhere in this subchapter.
   (F)   Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by an order issued under this
subchapter shall have the right to petition for review of any order of the
Building Commissioner. Such a person may file a petition to:
      (1)   Appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
         (a)   A person aggrieved by an order issued under this subchapter may
appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission, in accordance
with I.C. 22-13-2-7.
         (b)   The Commission may modify or reverse any order issued by the
municipality that covers a subject governed by I.C. 22-12, I.C. 22-13, I.C. 22-
14, I.C. 22-15, a fire safety or a building rule.
         (c)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission must review
orders that concern a Class 2 structure if the person aggrieved by the order
petitions for review under I.C. 4-21.5- 3-7 within 30 days after the issuance
of the order.
         (d)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission may review
all other orders issued under this subchapter.
         (e)   The review of an order by the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission does not suspend the running of the time period under any
statute under which a person must petition a court for judicial review of the
order.
      (2)   Appeal to an established local administrative body or court.
Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-8-9, a person aggrieved by a decision of the Building
Commissioner may appeal to a court as in other civil actions. The appellant
must, by registered mail, give the mayor a 15-day written notice of his or her
intention to appeal. This notice must concisely state the appellant's
grievance.
(Ord. 4-2025, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 152.49 MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Adoption of rules by reference.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-3(b), the rules of the Indiana Fire
Prevention and Building Safety
Commission has set out the following Articles of 675 IAC, hereby incorporated
by reference, and shall include any later amendments to those rules.
         (a)   Article 13: Building Codes.
         (b)   Article 14: Indiana Residential Code.
         (c)   Article 16: Indiana Plumbing Code.
         (d)   Article 17: Indiana Electrical Code.
         (e)   Article 18: Indiana Mechanical Code.
         (f)   Article 19: Indiana Energy Conservation Code.
         (g)   Article 20: Indiana Swimming Pool Code.
         (h)   Article 22: Indiana Fire Code.
         (i)   Article 25: Indiana Fuel Gas Code.
         (j)   Article 28- NFPA Standards.
      (2)   Two copies of the above rules incorporated by reference are on file
in the office of the Clerk for the legislative body for public inspection as
required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
      (3)   The Building Commissioner and the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission may
grant a variance to the fire safety laws adopted in this subchapter. Pursuant
to I.C. 22-13-2-7(b), a variance granted by the Building Commissioner is not
effective until it has been approved by Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission.
   (B)   Lifting devices located within a private residence.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-22(b)(12), lifting devices such as
elevators and wheelchair lifts, located within a private residence are not
regulated lifting devices. Therefore, the following standards applicable to
lifting devices located within a private residence are incorporated by
reference:
         (a)   Part 5.3, Private Residence Elevators, ANSI/ASME A17.1-2000,
Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators published by the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016.
         (b)   Part 5.4, Private Residence Inclined Elevators, ANSI/ASME A1
7.1-2000, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators published by the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016.
         (c)   Section 5, Private Residence Vertical Platform Lifts, ASME
A18.1A, 2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard Platform and Stairway
Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three
Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016.
         (d)   Section 6, Private Residence Inclined Platform Lifts, ASME
A18.1A, 2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard Platform and Stairway
Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three
Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016.
         (e)   Section 7, Private Inclined Stairway Lifts, ASME A18.1A, 2001
(Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard Platform and Stairway Chair Lifts,
published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue,
New York, New York, 10016.
      (2)   Two copies of the above lifting device standards incorporated by
reference are on file in the office of the Clerk of the legislative body for
public inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
(Ord. 4-2025, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 152.50 USE OF ENGINEERED ROOF TRUSSES AND FLOOR JOISTS.
   (A)   This section applies only to new construction of a Class 1 structure
and a Class 2 structure.
   (B)   (1)   As used in the section, ENGINEERED LUMBER ROOF TRUSSES AND/OR
FLOOR JOISTS refers to a structural assembly that:
         (a)   Is fabricated from:
            1.   Wood;
            2.   Light gauge metal;
            3.   Other component materials; or
            4.   Any combination of materials described in divisions 1. through
3.;
         (b)   Has less mass cross-sectional area than sawn lumber members that
would be used in an equivalent application;
         (c)   Is assembled from combustible or non-combustible materials, or
both; and
         (d)   Is not vertical member that supports a roof or floor, or both.
      (2)   The term does not include a structural assembly that provides a
minimum of one hour fire resistance when tested in accordance with ASTM
Standard E119.
      (3)   As used in this subchapter, OWNER means the person having control
or custody of any structure to which this subchapter applies.
   (C)   (1)   A structure that contains engineered lumber roof trusses and/or
floor joists must have placard affixed to the structure that meets the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   The placard shall use RED coding and lettering that identifies both
of the following:
         (a)   The types of engineered lumber roof trusses and floor joists
used in the structure, including truss or engineered lumber.
         (b)   The location of engineered lumber roof trusses and/or floor
joists used in the structure
including floor joists or roof truss systems.
      (3)   The placard may not be:
         (a)   Smaller than three and one-half inches by four and one-half
inches;
         (b)   Larger than five inches by five and one-half inches.
   (D)   The placard must be permanently affixed:
      (1)   Below the structure's electrical meter, if the structure has
electrical service; or
      (2)   On the left side of the front entrance four to six feet above the
ground, if the structure does not provide electrical service.
   (E)   (1)   An applicant for a building permit must indicate on the
application:
         (a)   The types of engineered lumber roof trusses and/or floor joists
used in the structure;
         (b)   The location of engineered lumber roof trusses and/or floor
joists used in the structure.
      (2)   The application form for a building permit must include a place on
the form for providing
information set forth in division (E)(1).
   (F)   (1)   An applicant for a building permit shall not be issued a
building permit unless the individual
at the time of the application is issued a placard by the Building
Commissioner.
      (2)   A fee, not to exceed $5, shall be charged for each placard issued.
   (G)   The Building Commissioner shall not:
      (1)   Approve a structure on final inspection; or
      (2)   Issue a certificate of occupancy for a structure;
      (3)   Unless a placard is affixed to the structure that meets the
requirements of this section.
   (H)   (1)   Not later than ten business days after issuing a building
permit, the Building Commissioner shall send written notification by certified
mail, with return receipt, to the local Fire Department and the local 911
telephone call center, which notification shall be sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
      (2)   The notification must include the following information:
         (a)   The street address of the property.
         (b)   The name of the municipality and county in which the structure
is located.
         (c)   The types of engineered lumber roof trusses and/or floor joists
used in the structure.
         (d)   The location of the engineered lumber roof trusses and/or floor
joists by the area within
the structure.
   (I)   Upon receiving a copy of the notification under division (H), the
Chief of the Fire Department or the Chief’s designee shall:
      (1)   Post the information in a conspicuous place for all emergency
personnel;
      (2)   Provide the information to any fire department providing mutual
aid; and
      (3)   For Class 1 structures only, add the structure to the inspection
file for follow up on a timely basis for inspection.
   (J)   Upon receiving a notification under division (G), the 911 telephone
call center shall maintain the information on each property, by the address of
the property, that used engineered lumber roof trusses and/or floor joists.
When dispatching to the listed address, the dispatcher shall notify the
responding units of information regarding the types and locations of the
engineered roof trusses and/or floor joists.
   (K)   An owner of the structure shall ensure that the placard described
above remains affixed to the
structure during the life of the structure.
   (L)   (1)   If the Building Commissioner provides written notice to an owner
that the owner has failed to install or maintain a placard on the structure in
violation of this section; and
      (2)   If the owner fails to correct the violation within ten business
days after notice, the owner may be charged a fine of $100 per day after
receipt of such notice, not to exceed $3,000 per structure, per year, may be
imposed.
(Ord. 4-2025, passed 5-20-2025)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever constructs, reconstructs, alters, changes, or demolishes
any exterior feature of any property, area, object in violation of these
preservation and design review regulations or whoever maintains, changes, or
installs a sign in violation of §§
152.20 through
152.32, shall be deemed in violation of §§
152.20 through
152.32, and such violation shall be punishable under the City Zoning Code.
      (2)   In the event any change is made in any property in violation of the
provisions of these preservation or design regulations, the city may institute
appropriate proceedings to prevent such unlawful change.
(Ord. 8, 1996, passed 12-17-1996)
CHAPTER 153: PUBLIC WAYS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Street excavation and moving permits
Excavation and Restoration
   
153.15   General requirements
   
153.16   Flowable fill
   
153.17   Restoration to match existing surroundings
   
153.18   Waiver
   
153.19   Street cut application and permit form
 
   
153.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 STREET EXCAVATION AND MOVING PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall injure, disturb, excavate, or break the surface of any
street, road, alley, sidewalk, curb, or other city-owned property or the
construction materials beneath it without first obtaining authorization to do
so from the Council.
   (B)   No person shall drive, place, force, or set any post, pipe, stake, or
other material or object below the surface of any property described in
division (A) above without first obtaining authorization to do so from the
Council.
   (C)   The Council may, from time to time, designate city employees or
officials to grant permission to any person to engage in the acts described in
divisions (A) and (B) above.
   (D)   No person shall move any building, structure, vehicle, or combination
of them over any city street, alley, or public highway with a gross weight of
more than XX,000 pounds without first obtaining a permit to do so from the City
Chief of Police.
   (E)   Each applicant for a permit under division (D) above shall file a
written petition with the City Chief of Police describing the size and
character of the items to be moved, the exact route to be taken, including the
beginning and ending points, together with any other information deemed
pertinent by the Chief of Police to fully describe the proposed movement and to
identify the hazards occasioned by it.
   (F)   No permit shall be issued by the Chief of Police until the applicant
has filed with that officer a bond in the penal sum of not less than $2,000,
conditioned on the faithful and prompt performance of the work according to the
specifications set forth in the permit, and to pay all damages that may be
cause to the city, directly or indirectly, by damage to its streets, alleys, or
utilities. The bond shall also cover all damage that may be caused by the
movement to the property of any other person. The bond shall be made payable to
the city, for the benefit of the city or any other person damaged by the
movement. A reputable person or a corporation qualified to do business in this
state shall be surety on the bond and shall be a person or corporation
acceptable to the City Chief of Police.
   (G)   The issuance of a permit under division (D) above shall not relieve
the permit holder of the duty to notify the manager or agent of any utility
service if necessary to raise or remove any utility lines or property to permit
the item to be moved through or past the utility lines or property. The permit
holder shall make proper arrangements for the payment of the reasonable cost
and expenses of any such raising or removal by the utility.
   (H)   No person shall permit any item moving under a permit issued under
division (D) above to remain stationary in or upon any public way for more than
24 hours.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-2-7) (Ord. 655, passed 8-12-1952; Ord. 65-16, passed 9-21-
1965)
Statutory reference:
   Public ways; regulation of use; school corporation property, see I.C. 36-9-
2-7
EXCAVATION AND RESTORATION
§ 153.15 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall make any excavation into, under, or across any
pavements (paved or unpaved), gutters, or curbs within the public rights-of-way
under the city jurisdiction without first obtaining a street cut permit from
the City Zoning Office. Each street cut shall require a separate street cut
permit.
   (B)   The edges of all excavations into paved or finished pavements,
gutters, and curbs shall be sawed to a minimum depth of one-third the depth of
the pavement, gutter, or curb. In no case will the sawed cut be allowed to be
less than two inches.
   (C)   All excavations or cuts made into, under, across, or extending three
feet from the finished edges of pavements, gutters, or curbs shall be back
filled with flowable fill, also known as controlled density fill.
   (D)   All materials, cuts, and excavations, unless specifically stated
otherwise, shall be in accordance with the current State Department of
Transportation (INDOT) standard specifications.
(Ord. 2001-12, passed 2-5-2002) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.16 FLOWABLE FILL.
   (A)   Composition.
      (1)   The flowable fill shall have a compressive strength from 50 PSI
(pounds per square inch) to 150 PSI.
      (2)   The flowable fill shall have a flow test spread diameter greater
than eight inches.
      (3)   The test for flow shall consist of filling a three-inch diameter by
six-inch high open-ended cylinder placed on a smooth, level, nonporous surface
to the top with the flowable fill. The cylinder shall be pulled straight up
within five seconds. The spread of the fill shall be measured. The minimum
spread shall be eight inches. This test shall be performed by the Street
Commissioner of the City or his or her designated representative.
      (4)   The flowable fill mix may consist of the following materials and be
proportioned within the following limits for each material per cubic yard:
         (a)   Portland concrete: 25 to 75 pounds per cubic yard;
         (b)   Fly ash: zero to 1,500 pounds per cubic yard;
         (c)   Fine aggregate: 2,010 to 3,150 pounds per cubic yard; and
         (d)   Water: as required, approximately 500 pounds per cubic yard.
      (5)   The producer may use water reducing admixtures and also air-
entraining admixtures when used in accordance with the admixture’s
manufacturer’s recommendations. The flowable fill may have an air content
ranging from 0-25% by volume.
      (6)   The proposed mix design shall be submitted and approved by the City
Street Commissioner. A trial batch demonstration and compressive strength
report may be required.
   (B)   Placement.
      (1)   Before any flowable fill is placed, any pipes, structures, or other
objects that might be displaced by the placement of the flowable fill shall be
adequately anchored, braced, or otherwise secured.
      (2)   No flowable fill or any other fill shall be placed in the
excavation until the excavation and any required bracing has been inspected by
the Street Commissioner of the city or his or her designated representative.
      (3)   The mixture shall be delivered and discharged using ready-mix
trucks approved for use by the State Department of Transportation.
      (4)   A copy of the batch ticket for the delivered flowable fill shall be
required to be turned into the Zoning Officer of the city upon completion of
the street cut.
      (5)   Flowable fill shall not be placed on frozen ground.
      (6)   Flowable fill shall be protected from freezing until the material
has stiffened and bleeding water subsided. When the temperature at placement is
below freezing (32°F), the Street Commissioner of the city may require that
freezing protection extend for as long as 48 hours.
      (7)   When the flowable fill is being placed in industrial streets,
commercial streets, federal aid highways, or other streets used for
nonresidential uses, the flowable fill shall extend to a minimum of six inches
below the finished surface of the adjacent pavement. If the final six inches of
the pavement is being finished with concrete, the concrete may be placed as
soon as bleeding water has subsided from the flowable fill. The concrete shall
be protected from traffic for a minimum of 48 hours, unless otherwise approved
by the Street Commissioner of the city or his or her designated representative.
When hot asphalt is used for restoring the final six inches, the flowable fill
shall be allowed to cure for a minimum of 24 hours, unless otherwise approved
by the Street Commissioner of the city or his or her designated representative.
The hot asphalt shall consist of five inches of HAC #5 base and one inch of HAC
#11 surface meeting current INDOT specifications. When the existing pavement
depth is greater than six inches, the Street Commissioner of the city may
require that the final restoration match the existing pavement depth.
      (8)   When flowable fill is being placed in residential streets or
alleys, the flowable fill shall extend to a minimum of four and one-half inches
below the finished surface of the adjacent pavement. Placing of concrete is the
same as for industrial streets above but the depth may be four and one-half
inches. After the flowable fill has cured for 24 hours, unless otherwise
approved by the Street Commissioner of the city, hot asphalt may be placed and
shall consist of three and one-half inches of HAC #5 base and one inch of HAC
#11 surface meeting current INDOT specifications. When the existing pavement
depth is greater than four and one-half inches, the Street Commissioner of the
city may require that the final restoration match the existing pavement.
      (9)   When flowable fill is being placed in unpaved streets or alleys,
the flowable fill shall extend to a minimum of six inches below the adjacent
surface grade. After the flowable fill has cured for 24 hours, unless otherwise
approved by the Street Commissioner of the City, six inches of compacted
aggregate #73 limestone, meeting current INDOT specifications, shall be placed
and compacted.
(Ord. 2001-12, passed 2-5-2002) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.17 RESTORATION TO MATCH EXISTING SURROUNDINGS.
   (A)   All gutters and curbs shall be restored as near as possible to match
the existing gutter and curbs.
   (B)   Any driveways or landscape that have been disturbed shall be restored
to match the existing driveway and landscape.
(Ord. 2001-12, passed 2-5-2002) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.18 WAIVER.
   (A)   Any request for waiver of the flowable fill requirement shall be made
in writing and approved by the Street Commissioner of the city. If such waiver
is granted, granular backfill, meeting INDOT specifications for B Borrow, #53
compacted aggregate, and #73 compacted aggregate, may be used when placed in
eight-inch lifts and compacted to 95% of the maximum dry density, as determined
by accepted AASHTO (American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials) standards and procedures, and confirmed by test results from a INDOT
certified laboratory. The number of tests to be taken will be determined by the
Street Commissioner of the city and is dependent upon the depth and length of
the excavation being restored. The cost of these tests, if any, will be borne
by the permit holder. In any event, the structure(s), pipe, cable, and the like
shall be covered to a height of not less than 12 inches with flowable fill
prior to placement of the granular fill material.
   (B)   If the city, or any of its departments, determines that an emergency
situation exists, the requirements of this subchapter may be temporarily waived
in order to protect the health, welfare, and safety of the traveling public.
(Ord. 2001-12, passed 2-5-2002) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.19 STREET CUT APPLICATION AND PERMIT FORM.
   The application and permit form for street cuts will appear substantially as
follows.
STREET CUT APPLICATION & PERMIT
STREET CUT APPLICATION & PERMIT
Date: ___________                                 
Permittee: ________________________              Phone No: _________________________
Signature: ________________________              Title: _____________________________
Address: __________________________________       
__________________________________________        
Location of proposed street cut:
_________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Size of proposed street cut:
_____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Date of proposed street cut:                      
_____________________
Completion date of proposed street cut:           
___________
Permittee hereby agrees to abide by all the RESPONSIBILITIES and CONDITIONS listed in this STREET
CUT PERMIT APPLICATION and Gas City ORDINANCE # 2001-12 governing STREET CUTS.
RESPONSIBILITY: Applicant shall:
1.   Install and maintain barricades, signs, lights, etc., and all traffic controls (flag people,
etc.) in accordance with the latest edition of the Indiana Manual of Uniform Traffic Devices
(IMUTCD).
2.   Indemnify and save harmless the City of Gas City, its agents, and employees for any and all
claims for damages or actions arising out of the work performed under this permit.
3.   Keep a copy of the approved permit with each work crew while work is in progress and present
it upon request by and Gas City Official.
4.   Notify all law enforcement and emergency agencies (police, fire, ambulance, etc.) in the
event that any lane closings are required for the work that is to be performed under this permit.
5.   Remove and/or relocate any facilities when required by the City of Gas City for performance
of construction of maintenance activities on the City of Gas City right-of-way. Removal and/or
relocation of facilities in the City of Gas City right-of-way shall be at the sole expense of the
permittee except as provided for by applicable statutes.
6.   Attach to this application a map showing all drainage structures and title ditches adjacent
to the right-of- way where work is to be performed under this permit.
7.   Attach to this application proof of notification of all adjacent property owners by either
registered or certified mail.
8.   Attach to this application drawings or sketches showing the work to be done under this
permit and its application.
9.   Contact the Zoning Officer of the City of Gas City upon completion of the project.
10.   ________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
CONDITIONS: The following conditions apply to granting this permit:
1.   This permit is valid for 90 days from the date of approval. If the work covered by this
permit is not completed within this time, a new permit will be required.
2.   This permit is valid only for work on the right-of-way for the City of Gas City. Permittee
shall obtain approval from appropriate agencies for work done outside the incorporated area of
the City of Gas City and secure consent by easement or other legal document from abutting
property owners for work performed outside the City of Gas City rights-of-way.
3.   This permit in no way relieves the permittee from meeting all applicable federal, state, and
local laws.
4.   Attach to this application a non-refundable fee of $10.
5.   ________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
APPROVAL: This permit application is approved subject to the requirements set out in this permit
application and Gas City Ordinance #2001-12.
_____________________________________________    _____________________________________________
ZONING OFFICER               DATE STREET COMMISSIONER            DATE
 
(Ord. 2001-12, passed 2-5-2002)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §
153.01 shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and, upon
conviction, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $300, not including
court costs.
(Prior Code, § 36-9-2-7(i))
   (C)   The following penalties are in addition to and supplemental to any fee
assessments, restoration costs, or any other remedies the Street Department or
the city may have:
      (1)   Penalty: $5,000 fine (maximum) per street cut; and
      (2)   Violation: not complying with §§
153.15 to
153.18.
(Ord. 655, passed 8-12-1952; Ord. 65-16, passed 9-21-1965; Ord. 2001-12, passed
2-5-2002)
CHAPTER 154: FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Statutory authorization
   
154.02   Findings of fact
   
154.03   Statement of purpose
   
154.04   Objectives
   
154.05   Definitions
   
154.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
154.07   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data
   
154.08   Establishment for floodplain development permit
   
154.09   Compliance
   
154.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
154.11   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground elevations
   
154.12   Interpretation
   
154.13   Warning and disclaimer or liability
Administration
   
154.25   Designation of Administrator
   
154.26   Permit procedures
   
154.27   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
154.40   General standards
   
154.41   Specific standards
   
154.42   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
154.43   Critical facility
   
154.44   Standards for identified floodways
   
154.45   Standards for identified fringe
   
154.46   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood elevation and/or
floodways/fringes
   
154.47   Standards for flood prone areas
Variance Procedures
   
154.60   Variance and Appeals Board
   
154.61   Variance procedures
   
154.62   Conditions for variances
   
154.63   Variance notification
   
154.64   Historic structure
   
154.65   Special conditions
 
   
154.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The state legislature has, in I.C. 36-7-4, granted the power to local
government units to control land use within their jurisdictions. Therefore, the
City Council does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to
other lands which are inadequately elevated, inadequately floodproofed, or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provision designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage;
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands; and
   (F)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for structures and
their contents in the city by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are:
   (A)   To protect human life and health;
   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in floodplains; and
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight
areas.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Unless specifically
defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as
to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its
most reasonable application.
   A ZONE. Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding is
runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A ZONES, flood
waters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant
threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE, Zones A1-A30,
Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR, and Zone A99 on a FIRM. The definitions are
presented below.
      (1)   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no base
flood elevation or depths are shown.
      (2)   ZONE AE AND A1-A30. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood elevations are
shown within these zones. (ZONE AE is on new and revised maps in place of ZONES
A1-A30.)
      (3)   ZONE AO. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.
      (4)   ZONE AH. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between one and
three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are
shown within this zone.
      (5)   ZONE AR. Areas that result from the decertification of a previously
accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of
being restored to provide base flood protection.
      (6)   ZONE A99. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of an under-
construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of special flood
hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction of a protection
system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to consider it complete for insurance
rating purposes. ZONE A99 may only be used when the flood protection system has
reached specified statutory progress toward completion. No base flood
elevations or depths are shown.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure with a floor area
400 square feet or less that is located on the same parcel of property as the
principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should constitute a minimal initial
investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have
minimal flood damage potential. Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are detached
garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed ADDITION, which is
connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls, is new construction.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the community’s
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the 1% annual chance flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BOUNDARY RIVER. The part of the Ohio River that forms the boundary between
Kentucky and Indiana.
   BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of a boundary river.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the regular
program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to
develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding
might be too great. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited to,
schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use, or store hazardous materials
or hazardous waste.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a structure or any
addition to a structure;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more than
180 days;
         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences, construction
of roads, or similar projects;
         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes,
dams, channel improvements, and the like;
         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling
operations;
         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
         (g)   Storage of materials; or
         (h)   Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing, resurfacing
roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent
structures.
   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter
walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls), pilings, or
columns (posts and piers).
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A certified statement that verifies a structure’s
elevation information.
   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The first phase under which a community participates in
the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA)
has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic report
provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FBFM
(where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area acknowledged by a community as being
susceptible to inundation by water from any source. See FLOOD.
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory flood plus two
feet at any given location in the SFHA. See FREEBOARD.
   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake, or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory
flood. The FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the fringe districts.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in
flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in
any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS are also referred to
as floodplain regulations, floodplain ordinance, flood damage prevention
ordinance, and floodplain management requirements.
   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING). A method of protecting a structure that
ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with walls that
are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated debris impact
forces.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for
nonresidential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or above
the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional engineer or
architect.
   FLOODWAY. The channel or a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently
carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood.
   FRINGE. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.
   HARDSHIP (AS RELATED TO VARIANCES OF THIS CHAPTER). The exceptional hardship
that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Board of
Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar
to the property involved. Mere economic or financial HARDSHIP alone is not
exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps,
personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as
a rule, qualify as an EXCEPTIONAL HARDSHIP. All of these problems can be
resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURES. Any structures individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Register of Historic Sites and
Structures.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially
damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to
bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local flood
damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation,
relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All renewal and new
business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after June 1,
1997, will include ICC coverage.
   LETTER OF FINAL DETERMINATION (LFD). A letter issued by FEMA during the
mapping update process which establishes final elevations and provides the new
flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD initiates the six-month
adoption period. The community must adopt or amend its floodplain management
regulations during this six-month period unless the community has previously
incorporated an automatic adoption clause.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A general term used to refer to the several
types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by
letter. They include letter of map amendment (LOMA), letter of map revision
(LOMR), and letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F). The definitions are
presented below.
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment by letter to the
currently effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in
a SFHA through the submittal of property specific elevation data. A LOMA is
only issued by FEMA.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the
currently effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations, and elevations.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An official revision
by letter to an effective NFIP map. a LOMR-F provides FEMA’s determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the
BFE and excluded from the SFHA.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest elevation described among the following:
      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure;
      (2)   The top of the basement floor;
      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of
the structure;
      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or
pillars; and/or
      (5)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement,
below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure provide any
resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:
         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic
flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters by
providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows) in a
minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has more than one enclosed area,
each shall have openings on exterior walls;
         (b)   The total net area of all openings shall be at least one square
inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; the bottom of all such
openings shall be no higher than one foot above the exterior grade or the
interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher; and
         (c)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parking of
vehicles and building access.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a
willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market
will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent certified appraisal,
replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value), or
adjusted assessed values.
   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to
people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of MITIGATION
is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the cost of
disaster response and recovery.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF 1929. As corrected in 1929, a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within
the floodplain.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced after the effective date of the community’s first floodplain
ordinance.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
   NON-BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of any river or stream other than
a boundary river.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88). As adopted in 1993, a
vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, canalization,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across, or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard, or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its propensity to snare
or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being
carried downstream.
   ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the
letter A is subject to the 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. See REGULATORY FLOOD.
   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a community’s FEMA
map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood elevations, floodplain
boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and planimetric features. These
changes typically occur as a result of structural works or improvements,
annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas, or correction to base
flood elevations or SFHAs.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community, neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community’s participation in the NFIP
where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and
higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations
determined in a FIS.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is acceptable
to and approved by the State Department of Natural Resources and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at any location is
as defined in §
154.07. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also know by the term BASE FLOOD, 1% ANNUAL
CHANCE FLOOD, and 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SECTION 1316. That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968,
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq., as amended, which states that no new flood
insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the Administrator
finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority
or other authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws,
regulations, or ordinances that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict
land development or occupancy in flood prone areas.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdiction of
the city subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the city
are generally identified as such on the Grant County, Indiana and Incorporated
Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated December 9, 2014 as well as any future
updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency with the most recent date. (These areas are shown on a FIRM as Zone A,
AE, A1- A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO.)
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred repetitive loss
or substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not include improvements of structures to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code requirements or any alteration
of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structures continued designation as a historic structure.
   SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP because
the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain management
regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
SHADED X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood). UNSHADED X ZONES (C zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.
   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FIRM that reflects the severity or type
of flooding in the area.
   ZONE A. See A ZONE.
   ZONE B, C, AND X. Areas identified in the community as areas of moderate or
minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area. However,
buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated rainfall
coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is available in
participating communities but is not required by regulation in these zones.
(ZONE X is used on new and revised maps in place of ZONES B AND C.)
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and known flood prone areas within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.
   This chapter’s protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best
available regulatory flood data is listed below.
   (A)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for the
studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the city shall be as delineated on the
1% annual chance flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Grant County,
Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated December 9, 2014
and the corresponding flood insurance rate map dated December 9, 2014 as well
as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date.
   (B)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for each
of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the city, delineated as an “A Zone” on
the Grant County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated
December 9, 2014 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions,
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date,
shall be according to the best data available as provided by the State
Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the
subject site is greater than one square mile. Whenever a party disagrees with
the best available data, the party needs to replace existing data with better
data that meets current engineering standards. To be considered, this data must
be submitted to the State Department of Natural Resources for review and
subsequently approved.
   (C)   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of identification
on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits of
any watercourse in the community’s known flood prone areas shall be according
to the best data available as provided by the State Department of Natural
Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater
than one square mile.
   (D)   Upon issuance of a letter of final determination (LFD), any more
restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall be utilized
for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing all
previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or
structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within the
SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.11 DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND ELEVATIONS.
   (A)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped floodplain
(SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation provided on
the profiles shall govern.
   (B)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood
elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated accordingly.
   (C)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is above the
base flood elevation and not located within the floodway, that site shall be
considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied.
The property owner shall be advised to apply for a LOMA.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.12 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.13 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.
   (B)   Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this
chapter does not create any liability on the part of the city, the State
Department of Natural Resources, or the state, for any flood damage that
results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.25 DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Council hereby appoints the Zoning Administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this chapter and is herein referred to as the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.26 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following:
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen
fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location
of the forgoing.
   (B)   Specifically the following information is required:
      (1)   Application stage.
         (a)   A description of the proposed development;
         (b)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately
locate property and structure(s) in relation to existing roads and streams;
         (c)   A legal description of the property site;
         (d)   A site development plan showing existing and proposed
development locations and existing and proposed land grades;
         (e)   Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD 88 or NGVD;
         (f)   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any nonresidential
structure will be floodproofed; and
         (g)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. A hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering study is required and any watercourse changes submitted
to DNR for approval and then to FEMA as a letter of map revision. (See § 154.27
for additional information.)
      (2)   Construction stage. Upon establishment of the lowest floor of an
elevated structure or structure constructed on fill, it shall be the duty of
the applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor, as built. Said certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land
surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the lowest floor elevation survey data submitted.
The applicant shall correct deficiencies detected by such review before any
further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to
make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order
for the project. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the elevation
certification shall be at the applicant’s risk. Upon establishment of the
floodproofed elevation of a floodproofed structure, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a floodproofing
certificate. Certification shall be prepared by or under the direction
supervision of a registered professional engineer and certified by the same.
(The Floodplain Administrator shall review the floodproofing certification
submitted.) The applicant shall correct any deficiencies detected by such
review before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the
floodproofing certification or failure to make correction required shall be
cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
      (3)   Finished construction. Upon completion of construction, a FEMA
elevation certificate, Form 81-31, which depicts all finished construction, is
required to be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project
includes a floodproofing measure, a FEMA floodproofing certificate, Form 81-65,
is required to be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.27 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter
which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      (2)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and complete
substantial damage determinations;
      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the
State Department of Natural Resources for all development projects subject to
§§
154.44 and
154.46(A), and maintain a record of such authorization (either copy of actual
permit/authorization or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment);
      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have been
received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit. Copies
of such permits/authorizations are to be maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit;
      (5)   Maintain and track permit records involving additions and
improvements to residences located in the floodway;
      (6)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain Coordinator
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of
such notifications to FEMA;
      (7)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local
permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, letters of map change (LOMC),
copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization, and floodplain analysis and
regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal permit documents,
and “as-built” elevation and floodproofing data for all buildings constructed
subject to this chapter;
      (8)   Utilize and enforce all letters of map change (LOMC) or physical
map revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA maps of the
community;
      (9)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished;
      (10)   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance;
      (11)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in
accordance with §
154.07;
      (12)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new or
substantially improved structures have been floodproofed in accordance with §
154.07;
      (13)   Perform a minimum of three inspections to ensure that all
applicable ordinance and floodplain development requirements have been
satisfied. The first upon the establishment of the flood protection grade
reference mark at the development site; the second upon the establishment of
the structure’s footprint/establishment of the lowest floor; and the final
inspection upon completion and submission of the required finished construction
elevation certificate. Authorized city officials shall have the right to enter
and inspect properties located in the SFHA;
      (14)   Stop-work orders:
         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator, work on any
building, structure, or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall immediately cease; and
         (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner
of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work, and
shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
      (15)   Revocation of permits:
         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit or approval,
issued under the provisions of the chapter, in cases where there has been any
false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application
or plans on which the permit or approval was based; and
         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit upon
determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the
structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in
conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 154.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all SFHAs and known flood prone areas, the following provisions are
required.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces.
   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage below the FPG.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, utility meters, and other service facilities shall be located at/
above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and
telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities
may be located below the FPG.
   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (G)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (H)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure
that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the
requirements of new construction as contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Building protection. In addition to the requirements of §
154.40, all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood
damage below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the
following situation:
      (1)   Construction or placement of any structure having a floor area
greater than 400 square feet;
      (2)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure where the
cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the
existing structure (excluding the value of the land);
      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure where the
costs of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the value of the
land) before damage occurred;
      (4)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days; and
      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to returning the existing
manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed
to avoid flood damage.
   (B)   Residential structures. New construction or substantial improvement of
any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor;
including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood
elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood
waters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of division (D)
below.
   (C)   Nonresidential structures. New construction or substantial improvement
of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential structure (or manufactured
home) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or
above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation) or be floodproofed to
or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood
waters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of division (D)
below. Structures located in all A zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being
elevated if done in accordance with the following.
      (1)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the structure has been designed so that, below the FPG, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account
flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures, and impacts
from debris or ice. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in §
154.27(B)(12).
      (2)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention
and without an outside source of electricity.
   (D)   Elevated structures.
      (1)   New construction or substantial improvements of elevated structures
shall have the lowest floor at or above the FPG.
      (2)   Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by foundation
and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed to
preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of
flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls. Designs must meet the following minimum criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings located in a minimum of two
exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area);
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one foot above
the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening,
whichever is higher;
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of flood waters
in both directions;
         (d)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator);
         (e)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms; and
         (f)   The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be at an
elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.
   (E)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or nonresidential
structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in accordance with the
following.
      (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep
before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with either the
standard or modified proctor test method. The results of the test showing
compliance shall be retained in the permit file.
      (2)   The fill shall extend ten feet beyond the foundation of the
structure before sloping below the BFE.
      (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is
used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
      (5)   The top of the lowest floor, including basements, shall be at or
above the FPG.
   (F)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following
requirements.
      (1)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on
a site outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a
flood.
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in division (D) above.
      (2)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on
a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been
substantially damaged by a flood.
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the lowest floor
of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in division (D) above.
      (3)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:
         (a)   Be on-site for less than 180 days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for HIGHWAY USE (defined as being on
its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions); or
         (c)   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes, as stated earlier
in this section.
   (G)   Accessory structures. Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such structures must meet
the following standards:
      (1)   Shall not be used for human habitation;
      (2)   Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      (3)   Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of flood waters;
      (4)   Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to or above the FPG; and
      (6)   Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as
required for elevated structures in division (D) above.
   (H)   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. All above ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral
movement.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.42 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the SFHA and/
or limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.
   (F)   All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of SFHA
for pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency responders).
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.43 CRITICAL FACILITY.
   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible,
located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new critical facilities
shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site. Floodproofing and
sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be
displaced by or released into flood waters. Access routes elevated to or above
the FPG shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.44 STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   Located within SFHAs, established in §
154.07, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters, which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and has erosion potential. If the site is in an
identified floodway, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant
to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications,
to the State Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1, a permit for
construction in a floodway from the State Department of Natural Resources is
required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any excavation,
deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the floodway. This
includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading, clearing and
paving, and the like, undertaken before the actual start of construction of the
structure.
      (2)   However, it does exclude non-substantial additions/improvements to
existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26
allows construction of a non-substantial addition/improvement to a residence in
a non-boundary river floodway without obtaining a permit for construction in
the floodway from the State Department of Natural Resources. Please note that
if fill is needed to elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior
approval for the fill is required from the State Department of Natural
Resources.)
   (B)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until a
permit or letter of authorization (when applicable) has been issued by the
State Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in the
floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway or letter of
authorization has been issued by the State Department of Natural Resources, the
Floodplain Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit,
provided the provisions contained in §§
154.40 through
154.47 have been met. The floodplain development permit cannot be less
restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the State
Department of Natural Resources. However, a community’s more restrictive
regulations (if any) shall take precedence.
   (C)   No development shall be allowed, which acting alone or in combination
with existing or future development, that will adversely affect the efficiency
of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway. This adverse affect is
defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory flood of at least 15
hundredths of a foot as determined by comparing the regulatory flood elevation
under the project condition to that under the natural or pre-floodway condition
as proven with hydraulic analyses.
   (D)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including
levees) the city shall submit the data and request that the Federal Emergency
Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per mapping standard
regulations found at 44 C.F.R. § 65.12.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.45 STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FRINGE.
   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit provided the
provisions contained in §§
154.40 through
154.47 have been met. The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of
any new or substantially improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.46 STANDARDS FOR SFHAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND/OR
FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.
   (A)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile.
      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the drainage area
upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along
with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the State Department of Natural
Resources for review and comment.
      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
either a permit for construction in a floodway (including letters of
authorization) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 1%
annual chance flood elevation and the recommended flood protection grade has
been received from the State Department of Natural Resources. Once the
Floodplain Administrator has received the proper permit for construction in a
floodway (including letters of authorization) or floodplain analysis/regulatory
assessment approving the proposed development, a floodplain development permit
may be issued, provided the conditions of the floodplain development permit are
not less restrictive than the conditions received from the State Department of
Natural Resources and the provisions contained in §§
154.40 through
154.47 have been met.
   (B)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile.
      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the drainage area upstream
of the site is less than one square mile, the Floodplain Administrator shall
require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the limits of
the floodplain and 1% annual chance flood elevation for the site.
      (2)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in §§
154.40 through
154.47 have been met.
   (C)   Cumulative effect. The total cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
shall not increase the regulatory flood more than 14 hundredths of one foot and
shall not increase flood damages or potential flood damages.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.47 STANDARDS FOR FLOOD PRONE AREAS.
   All development in known flood prone areas not identified on FEMA maps, or
where no FEMA published map is available, shall meet applicable standards as
required per §§
154.40 through
154.47.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
VARIANCE PROCEDURES
§ 154.60 VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests
for variances from requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any person
aggrieved by the decision of the Board may appeal such decision to the County
Circuit Court.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.61 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   In passing upon such applications, the Board shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of
this chapter, and:
   (A)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   (B)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
   (C)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
   (D)   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where
applicable;
   (E)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
   (F)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
   (G)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
   (H)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
   (I)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment of
transport of the flood waters at the site; and
   (J)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.62 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship; and
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
   (B)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to §§
154.44 or
154.46(A) may be granted.
   (C)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §§
154.44 or
154.46(A) will require a permit from the State Department of Natural Resources.
   (D)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of §
154.41 may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot of
one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.
   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (F)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration of any
structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the flood protection grade and the
elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of
the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation (See §
154.63).
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or
the State Department of Natural Resources upon request (See §
154.63).
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.63 VARIANCE NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows the lowest
floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade shall be
given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the flood
protection grade will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
      (2)   Such construction below the flood protection grade increases risks
to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain
Administrator in the office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a
manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.64 HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and
the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of
the structure.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.65 SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
   Upon the consideration of the factors listed in §§
154.60 through
154.65, and the purposes of this chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or
failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit or
conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. All
violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such in
accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code for the city. All violations
shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the violation
continues to exist.
   (C)   The City Council shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be superseded.
   (D)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 12-2014, passed 12-8-2014)
CHAPTER 155: STORM-WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
General Information
   
155.001   Authority and title
   
155.002   Applicability and exemptions
   
155.003   Findings
   
155.004   Purpose
   
155.005   Abbreviations and definitions
   
155.006   Responsibility for administration
   
155.007   Interpretation
   
155.008   Disclaimer of liability
Prohibited Discharges and Connections
   
155.020   Applicability and exemptions
   
155.021   Prohibited discharges and connections
   
155.022   Exempted discharges and connections
   
155.023   Storage of hazardous or toxic material
   
155.024   Private property maintenance duties
   
155.025   Spill reporting
   
155.026   Inspections and monitoring
Stormwater Quantity Management
   
155.040   Applicability and exemptions
   
155.041   Policy on stormwater quantity management
   
155.042   Calculations and design standards and specifications
   
155.043   Drainage easement requirements
   
155.044   Placement of utilities
   
155.045   Structures near county regulated drains
   
155.046   Inspection, maintenance, record keeping, and reporting
Stormwater Pollution Prevention for Construction Sites
   
155.060   Applicability and exemptions
   
155.061   Policy on stormwater pollution prevention
   
155.062   Calculations and design standards and specifications
   
155.063   Inspection, maintenance, record keeping, and reporting
Stormwater Quality Management for Post-Construction
   
155.080   Applicability and exemptions
   
155.081   Policy on stormwater quality management
   
155.082   Calculations and design standards and specifications
   
155.083   Easement requirements
   
155.084   Inspection, maintenance, record keeping, and reporting
Permit Requirements and Procedures
   
155.100   Conceptual drainage plan review
   
155.101   Permit procedures
   
155.102   Information requirements
   
155.103   Review of individual lots
   
155.104   Changes to plans
   
155.105   Fee structure
   
155.106   Required assurances
   
155.107   Terms and conditions of permits
   
155.108   Certification of as-built plans
   
155.109   Post-project maintenance bond and verifications
Compliance and Enforcement
   
155.120   Compliance with this chapter
   
155.121   Enforcement of this chapter
   
155.122   Cost of abatement of the violation
   
155.123   Appeals
Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination
   
155.140   Purpose/intent
   
155.141   Definitions
   
155.142   Applicability
   
155.143   Responsibility for administration
   
155.144   Ultimate responsibility
   
155.145   Discharge prohibitions
   
155.146   Suspension of MS4 access
   
155.147   Industrial or construction activity discharges
   
155.148   Monitoring of discharges
   
155.149   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by
the use of best management practices
   
155.150   Watercourse protection
   
155.151   Notification of spills
   
155.152   Enforcement
   
155.153   Appeal of notice of violation
   
155.154   Enforcement measures after appeal
   
155.155   Cost of abatement of the violation
   
155.156   Injunctive relief
   
155.157   Compensatory action
   
155.158   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
155.159   Civil penalty
GENERAL INFORMATION
§ 155.001 AUTHORITY AND TITLE.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted in accordance with statutory authority granted
to the city, under "Home Rule" and further is required by Phase 11 of the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Stormwater program (40 CFR
Parts 9, 122, 123, and 124; December 8, 1999) authorized by the 1987 amendments
to the Clean Water Act, the Indiana Department of Environmental Management's
(IDEM) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) General Permit (MS4 GP), and
the Indiana Department of Environmental Management's Construction Stormwater
General Permit (CSGP). Based on this authority and these requirements, this
chapter regulates:
      (1)   Discharges of prohibited non-stormwater flows into the storm drain
system.
      (2)   Stormwater drainage improvements related to development of lands
located within the corporate boundaries of the city.
      (3)   Drainage control systems installed during new construction and
grading of lots and other parcels of land.
      (4)   Stormwater, including stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and
surface runoff and drainage, associated with construction activity.
      (5)   Stormwater discharges from construction support activities directly
related to construction sites subject to this chapter.
      (6)   Erosion and sediment control systems installed during new
construction and grading of lots and other parcels of land.
      (7)   The design, construction, and maintenance of stormwater drainage
facilities and systems.
      (8)   The design, construction, and maintenance of stormwater quality
facilities and systems.
      (9)   The design, construction, and maintenance of new dams.
      (10)   The development downstream of existing dams.
      (11)   Development within floodplains, floodways, fluvial erosion hazard
corridors, and bluff zones.
   (B)   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Stormwater
Management Ordinance. Once adopted, this chapter will supersede any conflicting
ordinances previously adopted by the city.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.002 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall regulate all development and redevelopment
occurring within the city. No building permit shall be issued and no land
disturbance started for any construction in a development, as defined in §
155.005, until the plans required by this chapter for such construction have
been accepted in writing by the city. With the exception of the requirements of
§§
155.020 through
155.026 and
155.103, single-family dwelling houses and duplexes in accepted subdivisions,
and land-disturbing activities affecting less than one-acre of area shall be
exempt from the stormwater management requirements of this chapter. Also exempt
from this chapter shall be agricultural land-disturbing activities, provided no
new drainage conveyances are established for a receiving system.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements of this chapter and its companion
Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, compliance with all applicable
ordinances of the city as well as with applicable federal, State of Indiana,
and other local statues and regulations shall also be required. Unless
otherwise stated, all other specifications referred to in this chapter shall be
the most recent edition available. The city capital improvement projects shall
be exempt from obtaining a permit, but are expected to meet all applicable
technical requirements of this chapter and the city Stormwater Technical
Standards Manual. If the project site is located within a Grant County
Regulated Drain Watershed, the applicant will need to check with the Grant
County Surveyor's Office to learn if additional Surveyor's Office requirements
specific to that regulated drain would apply to the site. In case there are
conflicts between the requirements contained in this chapter and applicable
requirements contained in other regulatory documents referenced above, the most
restrictive shall prevail.
   (C)   Any construction project which has had its final drainage plan
accepted by the city and has started construction within a 180-day period prior
to the effective date of this chapter shall be exempt from all requirements of
this chapter that are in excess of the requirements of ordinances in effect at
the time of acceptance. Such an exemption is not applicable to the requirements
detailed in §§
155.020 through
155.026.
   (D)   The City Engineer has the authority to modify, grant exemptions, and/
or waive any and all the requirements of this chapter and its associated
technical standards document. A presubmittal meeting with the City Engineer may
be requested by the applicant to discuss the applicability of various
provisions of this chapter and its associated technical standards document with
regards to unique or unusual circumstances relating to a project. However, any
initial determination of such applicability shall not be binding on future
determinations of the city that may be based on the review of more detailed
information and plans.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.003 FINDINGS.
   The city finds that:
   (A)   Water bodies, roadways, structures, and other property within the city
or its planning jurisdiction boundary are at times subjected to flooding;
   (B)   Flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public and is
also a danger to the natural resources of the region;
   (C)   Land development alters the hydrologic response of watersheds,
resulting in increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, increased flooding,
increased stream channel erosion, and increased sediment transport and
deposition;
   (D)   Soil erosion resulting from land-disturbing activities causes a
significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to be transported off-site
and deposited in ditches, streams, wetlands, lakes, and reservoirs;
   (E)   Increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, and the sediments and
pollutants associated with stormwater runoff from future development projects
within the city will, absent reasonable regulation and control, adversely
affect the city's water bodies and water resources;
   (F)   Pollutant contributions from illicit discharges within the city will,
absent reasonable regulation, monitoring, and enforcement, adversely affect the
city's water bodies and water resources;
   (G)   Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, non-point source pollution, and
illicit sources of pollution can be controlled and minimized by the regulation
of stormwater management;
   (H)   Adopting the standards, criteria, and procedures contained and
referenced in this chapter and implementing the same will address many of the
deleterious effects of stormwater runoff and illicit discharges;
   (I)   Adopting this chapter is necessary for the preservation of the public
health, safety, and welfare, for the conservation of natural resources, and for
compliance with state and federal regulations.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.004 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of
stormwater and non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system and to
protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water
resources within the city. This chapter establishes methods for managing the
quantity and quality of stormwater entering into the storm drain system. The
objectives of this chapter are:
   (A)   To reduce the hazard to public health and safety caused by excessive
stormwater runoff.
   (B)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm drain system
from construction site runoff.
   (C)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm drain system
from runoff from new development and re-development.
   (D)   To prohibit illicit discharges into the storm drain system.
   (E)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, monitoring,
and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.005 ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following abbreviations and definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (A)   Abbreviations.
      BMP. Best management practice.
      COE. United States Army Corps of Engineers.
      CWA. Clean Water Act.
      EPA. Environmental Protection Agency.
      GIS. Geographical information system.
      IDEM. Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
      MS4. Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System.
      NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
      NRCS. USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service.
      POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.
      SWCD. Soil and Water Conservation District.
      SWPPP. Stormwater pollution prevention plan.
      USDA. United States Department of Agriculture.
      USFWS. United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
   (B)   Definitions.
      AGRICULTURAL LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Tillage, planting, cultivation, or
harvesting operations for the production of agricultural or nursery vegetative
crops. Also includes pasture renovation and establishment, the construction of
agricultural conservation practices, and the installation and maintenance of
agricultural drainage tile.
      BASE FLOW. Stream discharge derived from groundwater sources as
differentiated from surface runoff. Sometimes considered to include flows from
regulated lakes or reservoirs.
      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Design, construction, and maintenance
practices and criteria for stormwater facilities that minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, prevent erosion, and capture pollutants.
      BUFFER STRIP. An existing, variable width strip of vegetated land
intended to protect water quality and habitat.
      CAPACITY (OF A STORM DRAINAGE FACILITY). The maximum flow that can be
conveyed or stored by a storm drainage facility without causing damage to
public or private property.
      CATCH BASIN. A chamber usually built at the curb line of a street for the
admission of surface water to a storm drain or subdrain, having at its base a
sediment sump designed to retain grit and detritus below the point of overflow.
      CHANNEL. A portion of a natural or artificial watercourse which
periodically or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting
link between two bodies of water. It has a defined bed and banks which serve to
confine the water.
      COMPLIANCE. The act of correcting a violation or violations within the
time frame specified by the city.
      COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. A comprehensive stormwater program
for effective management of stormwater quantity and quality throughout the
community.
      CONSTRUCTED WETLAND. A man-made shallow pool that creates growing
conditions suitable for wetland vegetation and is designed to maximize
pollutant removal.
      CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Land-disturbing activities, and land-disturbing
activities associated with the construction of infrastructure and structures.
Does not include routine ditch or road maintenance or minor landscaping
projects.
      CONSTRUCTION SITE ACCESS. A stabilized stone surface at all points of
ingress or egress to a project site, for the purpose of capturing and detaining
sediment carried by tires of vehicles or other equipment entering or exiting
the project site.
      CONSTRUCTION SUPPORT ACTIVITIES. Include but are not limited to the
following: concrete or asphalt batch plants, equipment staging yards, material
storage areas, excavated material disposal areas, borrow areas. Such activities
must not support multiple, unrelated projects, be a commercial/industrial
operation, or continue to operate beyond the completion of the construction
activity for the project it supports.
      CONTIGUOUS. Adjoining or in actual contact with.
      CONTOUR. An imaginary line on the surface of the earth connecting points
of the same elevation.
      CONTOUR LINE. Line on a map which represents a contour or points of equal
elevation.
      CONTRACTOR OR SUBCONTRACTOR. An individual or company hired by the
project site or individual lot owner, their agent, or the individual lot
operator to perform services on the project site.
      CONVEYANCE. Any structural method for transferring stormwater between at
least two points. Includes piping, ditches, swales, curbs, gutters, catch
basins, channels, storm drains, and roadways.
      CROSS SECTION. A graph or plot of ground elevation across a stream valley
or a portion of it, usually along a line perpendicular to the stream or
direction of flow.
      CULVERT. A closed conduit used for the conveyance of surface drainage
water under a roadway, railroad, canal or other impediment.
      DECHLORINATED SWIMMING POOL DISCHARGE. Chlorinated water that has either
sat idle for seven days following chlorination prior to discharge to the MS4
conveyance, or, by analysis, does not contain detectable concentrations (less
than 0.05 milligram per liter) of chlorinated residual.
      DESIGN STORM. A selected storm event, described in terms of the
probability of occurring once within a given number of years, for which
drainage or flood control improvements are designed and built.
      DETENTION. Managing stormwater runoff by temporary holding and controlled
release.
      DETENTION BASIN. A facility constructed or modified to restrict the flow
of stormwater to a prescribed maximum rate, and to detain concurrently the
excess waters that accumulate behind the outlet.
      DETENTION STORAGE. The temporary detaining of storage of stormwater in
storage facilities, on rooftops, in streets, parking lots, school yards, parks,
open spaces or other areas under predetermined and controlled conditions, with
the rate of release regulated by appropriately installed devices.
      DETENTION TIME. The theoretical time required to displace the contents of
a tank or unit at a given rate of discharge (volume divided by rate of
discharge).
      DETRITUS. Dead or decaying organic matter; generally contributed to
stormwater as fallen leaves and sticks or as dead aquatic organisms.
      DEVELOPER. Any person financially responsible for construction activity,
or an owner of property who sells or leases, or offers for sale or lease, any
lots in a subdivision.
      DEVELOPMENT.
         (a)   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
including but not limited to:
            1.   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a building or
any addition to a building;
            2.   Construction of flood control structures such as levees,
dikes, dams or channel improvements;
            3.   Construction or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
            4.   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more
than 180 days;
            5.   Installing utilities, erection of walls, construction of
roads, or similar projects;
            6.   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling
operations;
            7.   Storage of materials; or
            8.   Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
         (b)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the maintenance
of existing buildings and facilities such as painting, re-roofing, resurfacing
roads, or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent
buildings.
      DISCHARGE. In the context of water quantity provisions, usually the rate
of water flow. A volume of fluid passing a point per unit time commonly
expressed as cubic feet per second, cubic meters per second, gallons per
minute, or millions of gallons per day. In the context of water quality
provisions, any addition of liquids or solids to a water body or a flow
conveyance facility.
      DISPOSAL. The discharge, deposit, injection, spilling, leaking, or
placing of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or on any land or water so
that the solid waste or hazardous waste, or any constituent of the waste, may
enter the environment, be emitted into the air, or be discharged into any
waters, including groundwaters.
      DITCH. A man-made, open watercourse in or into which excess surface water
or groundwater drained from land, stormwater runoff, or floodwaters flow either
continuously or intermittently.
      DRAIN. A buried slotted or perforated pipe or other conduit (subsurface
drain) or a ditch (open drain) for carrying off surplus groundwater or surface
water.
      DRAINAGE. The removal of excess surface water or groundwater from land by
means of ditches or subsurface drains. Also see NATURAL DRAINAGE.
      DRAINAGE AREA. The area draining into a stream at a given point. It may
be of different sizes for surface runoff, subsurface flow and base flow, but
generally the surface runoff area is considered as the drainage area.
      DRY WELL. A type of infiltration practice that allows stormwater runoff
to flow directly into the ground via a bored or otherwise excavated opening in
the ground surface.
      DURATION. The time period of a rainfall event.
      ENVIRONMENT. The sum total of all the external conditions that may act
upon a living organism or community to influence its development or existence.
      ERODIBILITY INDEX (EI). The soil erodibility index (EI) provides a
numerical expression of the potential for a soil to erode considering the
physical and chemical properties of the soil and the climatic conditions where
it is located. The higher the index, the greater the investment needed to
maintain the sustainability of the soil resource base if intensively cropped.
It is defined to be the maximum of (RxKxLS)/T (from the Universal Soil Loss
Equation) and (CxI)/T (from the Wind Erosion Equation), where R is a measure of
rainfall and runoff, K is a factor of the susceptibility of the soil to water
erosion, LS is a measure of the combined effects of slope length and steepness,
C is a climatic characterization of windspeed and surface soil moisture and I
is a measure of the susceptibility of the soil to wind erosion. Erodibility
index scores equal to or greater than eight are considered highly erodible
land.
      EROSION. The wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice,
gravity, or other geological agents. The following terms are used to describe
different types of water erosion:
         (a)   ACCELERATED EROSION. Erosion much more rapid than normal or
geologic erosion, primarily as a result of the activities of man.
         (b)   CHANNEL EROSION. An erosion process whereby the volume and
velocity of flow wears away the bed and/or banks of a well-defined channel.
         (c)   GULLY EROSION. An erosion process whereby runoff water
accumulates in narrow channels and, over relatively short periods, removes the
soil to considerable depths, ranging from one to two feet to as much as 75 to
100 feet.
         (d)   RILL EROSION. An erosion process in which numerous small
channels only several inches deep are formed; occurs mainly on recently
disturbed and exposed soils (see RILL).
         (e)   SHEET EROSION. The gradual removal of a fairly uniform layer of
soil from the land surface by runoff water.
         (f)   SPLASH EROSION. The spattering of small soil particles caused by
the impact of raindrops on wet soils; the loosened and spattered particles may
or may not be subsequently removed by surface runoff.
      EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL. A practice, or a combination of practices,
to minimize sedimentation by first reducing or eliminating erosion at the
source and then as necessary, trapping sediment to prevent it from being
discharged from or within a project site.
      FILTER STRIP. Usually a long, relatively narrow area (usually, 20 to 75
feet wide) of undisturbed or planted vegetation used near disturbed or
impervious surfaces to filter stormwater pollutants for the protection of
watercourses, reservoirs, or adjacent properties.
      FLOATABLE. Any solid waste that will float on the surface of the water.
      FLOOD (OR FLOODWATERS). A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual
and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
      FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining the channel which
have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory or 100-year flood. Any
normally dry land area that is susceptible to being inundated by water from any
natural source. Includes both the floodway and the floodway fringe districts.
      FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently
carry and discharge the peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream.
      FLOODWAY FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain lying outside the
floodway, which is inundated by the regulatory flood.
      FLUVIAL EROSION HAZARD (FEH) CORRIDOR. Fluvial erosion hazard corridors
represent the areas along the streams (including the channel and immediate
overbanks areas) that are believed to be subject to stream movement or
streambank erosion. These corridors have been delineated for most actively
migrating and relatively stationary streams in Indiana through an Indiana
Silver Jackets initiative.
      FOOTING DRAIN. A drain pipe installed around the exterior of a basement
wall foundation to relieve water pressure caused by high groundwater elevation.
      GARBAGE. All putrescible animal solid, vegetable solid, and semisolid
wastes resulting from the processing, handling, preparation, cooking, serving,
or consumption of food or food materials.
      GASOLINE OUTLET. An operating gasoline or diesel fueling facility whose
primary function is the resale of fuels. Applies to facilities that create
5,000 or more square feet of impervious surface, or generate an average daily
traffic count of 100 vehicles per 1,000 square feet of land area.
      GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM. A computer system capable of assembling,
storing, manipulating, and displaying geographically referenced information.
This technology can be used for resource management and development planning.
      GRADE. 
         (a)   The inclination or slope of a channel, canal, conduit, etc., or
natural ground surface usually expressed in terms of the percentage the
vertical rise (or fall) bears to the corresponding horizontal distance.
         (b)   The finished surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of embankment,
or bottom of excavation; any surface prepared to a design elevation for the
support of construction, such as paving or the laying of a conduit.
         (c)   To finish the surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of
embankment, or bottom of excavation, or other land area to a smooth, even
condition.
      GRADING. The cutting and filling of the land surface to a desired slope
or elevation.
      GRASS. A member of the botanical family Graminae, characterized by blade-
like leaves that originate as a sheath wrapped around the stem.
      GROUNDWATER. Accumulation of under ground water, natural or artificial.
Does not include man-made underground storage or conveyance structures.
      HABITAT. The environment in which the life needs of a plant or animal are
supplied.
      HIGHLY ERODIBLE LAND (HEL). Land that has an erodibility index of eight
or more.
      HOT SPOT DEVELOPMENT. Projects involving land uses considered to be high
pollutant producers such as vehicle service and maintenance facilities, vehicle
salvage yards and recycling facilities, vehicle and equipment cleaning
facilities, fleet storage areas for buses, trucks, etc., industrial/commercial
or any hazardous waste storage areas or areas that generate such wastes,
industrial sites, restaurants and convenience stores, any activity involving
chemical mixing or loading/unloading, outdoor liquid container storage, public
works storage areas, commercial container nurseries, and some high traffic
retail uses characterized by frequent vehicle turnover.
      HYDROLOGIC UNIT CODE. A numeric United States Geologic Survey code that
corresponds to a watershed area. Each area also has a text description
associated with the numeric code.
      HYDROLOGY. The science of the behavior of water in the atmosphere, on the
surface of the earth, and underground. A typical hydrologic study is undertaken
to compute flow rates associated with specified flood events.
      ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to a conveyance that is not composed
entirely of stormwater except naturally occurring floatables, such as leaves or
tree limbs. Illicit discharges include polluted flows from direct and indirect
connections to the MS4 conveyance, illegal dumping, and contaminated runoff.
      IMPAIRED WATERS. Waters that do not or are not expected to meet
applicable water quality standards, as included on IDEM's CWA Section 303(d)
List of Impaired Waters.
      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Surfaces, such as pavement and rooftops, which
prevent the infiltration of stormwater into the soil.
      INDIVIDUAL BUILDING LOT. A single parcel of land within a multi-parcel
development.
      INDIVIDUAL LOT OPERATOR. A contractor or subcontractor working on an
individual lot.
      INDIVIDUAL LOT OWNER. A person who has financial control of construction
activities for an individual lot.
      INFILTRATION. Passage or movement of water into the soil. Infiltration
practices include any structural BMP designed to facilitate the percolation of
runoff through the soil to groundwater. Examples include infiltration basins or
trenches, dry wells, and porous pavement.
      INLET. An opening into a storm drain system for the entrance of surface
stormwater runoff, more completely described as a storm drain inlet.
      LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any man-made change of the land surface,
including removing vegetative cover that exposes the underlying soil,
excavating, filling, transporting and grading.
      LAND SURVEYOR. A person licensed under the laws of the State of Indiana
to practice land surveying.
      LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. A plan, undertaken by a single
project site owner or a group of project site owners acting in concert, to
offer lots for sale or lease; where such land is contiguous, or is known,
designated, purchased or advertised as a common unit or by a common name, such
land shall be presumed as being offered for sale or lease as part of a larger
common plan. Also includes phased or other construction activity by a single
entity for its own use.
      LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The elevation of the lowest grade adjacent to a
structure, where the soil meets the foundation around the outside of the
structure (including structural members such as basement walkout, patios,
decks, porches, support posts or piers, and rim of the window well.
      LOWEST FLOOR. Refers to the lowest of the following:
         (a)   The top of the basement floor;
         (b)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level
of the building;
         (c)   The top of the first floor of buildings constructed on a slab or
of buildings elevated on pilings or constructed on a crawl space with permanent
openings; or
         (d)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure below an elevated
building where the walls of the enclosure provide any resistance to the flow of
floodwaters unless:
            1.   The walls are designed to automatically equalize the
hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters, by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways
and windows) having a total area of one square foot for every two square feet
of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all such openings shall be
no higher than one foot above grade.
            2.   Such enclosed space shall be usable only for the parking of
vehicles or building access.
      MANHOLE. Storm drain structure through which a person may enter to gain
access to an underground storm drain or enclosed structure.
      MEASURABLE STORM EVENT. A precipitation event that results in a total
measured precipitation accumulation equal to, or greater than, one-half inch of
rainfall.
      MULCH. A natural or artificial layer of plant residue or other materials
covering the land surface which conserves moisture, holds soil in place, aids
in establishing plant cover, and minimizes temperature fluctuations.
      MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWERS. Meets all the following criteria:
         (a)   Is a conveyance or system of conveyances owned by the state,
county, city, town, or other public entity;
         (b)   Discharges to waters of the United States;
         (c)   Is designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
         (d)   Is not a combined sewer; and
         (e)   Is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM. A permit developed by
the United States EPA through the Clean Water Act. In Indiana, the permitting
process has been delegated to IDEM. This permit covers aspects of municipal
stormwater quality.
      NATURAL DRAINAGE. The flow patterns of stormwater runoff over the land in
its pre-development state.
      NUTRIENT(S). 
         (a)   A substance necessary for the growth and reproduction of
organisms.
         (b)   In water, those substances (chiefly nitrates and phosphates)
that promote growth of algae and bacteria.
      OFFENSE. Both a violation and a failure of compliance on a particular
project. If there are multiple violations or multiple failures of compliance on
the same project, each shall be considered a separate offense.
      OPEN DRAIN. A natural watercourse or constructed open channel that
conveys drainage water.
      OPEN SPACE. Any land area devoid of any disturbed or impervious surfaces
created by industrial, commercial, residential, agricultural, or other man-made
activities.
      OUTFALL. The point, location, or structure where a pipe or open drain
discharges to a receiving body of water.
      OUTLET. The point of water disposal from a stream, river, lake,
tidewater, or artificial drain.
      PEAK DISCHARGE (OR PEAK FLOW). The maximum instantaneous flow from a
given storm condition at a specific location.
      PERCOLATION. The movement of water through soil.
      PERMANENT STABILIZATION. The establishment, at a uniform density of 70%
across the disturbed area, of vegetative cover or permanent non-erosive
material that will ensure the resistance of the soil to erosion, sliding, or
other movement.
      PERVIOUS. Allowing movement of water.
      POINT SOURCE. Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance
including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well,
discrete fissure, or container from which pollutants are or maybe discharged
(P.L. 92-500, Section 502(14)).
      POROUS PAVEMENT. A type of infiltration practice to improve the quality
and reduce the quantity of stormwater runoff via the use of man-made, pervious
pavement which allows runoff to percolate through the pavement and into
underlying soils.
      PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person licensed under the laws of the State of
Indiana to practice professional engineering.
      PROJECT SITE. The entire area on which construction activity is to be
performed.
      PROJECT SITE OWNER. The person required to submit a stormwater permit
application and required to comply with the terms of this chapter, including a
developer or a person who has financial and operational control of construction
activities, and project plans and specifications, including the ability to make
modifications to those plans and specifications.
      RAIN GARDEN. A vegetative practice used to alter impervious surfaces,
such as roofs, into pervious surfaces for absorption and treatment of rainfall.
      RECEIVING STREAM, RECEIVING CHANNEL, OR RECEIVING WATER. The body of
water into which runoff or effluent is discharged. Does not include private
drains, unnamed conveyances, retention and detention basins, or constructed
wetlands used as treatment.
      RECHARGE. Replenishment of groundwater reservoirs by infiltration and
transmission from the outcrop of an aquifer or from permeable soils.
      REDEVELOPMENT. Development occurring on a previously developed site.
      REFUELING AREA. An operating gasoline or diesel fueling area whose
primary function is to provide fuel to equipment or vehicles.
      REGIONAL POND. A detention/retention basin sized to detain/retain the
runoff from the entire watershed, on-site and off-site, tributary to the pond's
outlet.
      REGULATORY FLOOD. The discharge or elevation associated with the 100-year
flood as calculated by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and
approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known as the BASE
FLOOD.
      REGULATORY FLOODWAY. See FLOODWAY.
      RELEASE RATE. The amount of stormwater release from a stormwater control
facility per unit of time.
      RESERVOIR. A natural or artificially created pond, lake or other space
used for storage, regulation or control of water. May be either permanent or
temporary. Also used in the hydrologic modeling of storage facilities.
      RETENTION. The storage of stormwater to prevent it from leaving the
development site. May be temporary or permanent.
      RETENTION BASIN. A type of storage practice that has no positive outlet,
used to retain stormwater runoff for an indefinite amount of time. Runoff from
this type of basin is removed only by infiltration through a porous bottom or
by evaporation.
      RETURN PERIOD. The average interval of time within which a given rainfall
event will be equaled or exceeded once. A flood having a return period of 100
years has a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded in any one year.
      RIPARIAN HABITAT. A land area adjacent to a waterbody that supports
animal and plant life associated with that waterbody.
      RIPARIAN ZONE. Of, on, or pertaining to the banks of a stream, river, or
pond.
      RUNOFF. That portion of precipitation that flows from a drainage area on
the land surface, in open channels, or in stormwater conveyance systems.
      RUNOFF COEFFICIENT. A decimal fraction relating the amount of rain which
appears as runoff and reaches the storm drain system to the total amount of
rain falling. A coefficient of 0.5 implies that 50% of the rain falling on a
given surface appears as stormwater runoff.
      SEDIMENT. Solid material (both mineral and organic) that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by
air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface.
      SEDIMENTATION. The process that deposits soils, debris and other
unconsolidated materials either on the ground surfaces or in bodies of water or
watercourses.
      SENSITIVE WATER. A waterbody is in need of priority protection or
remediation based on its:
         (a)   Providing habitat for threatened or endangered species;
         (b)   Usage as a public water supply intake;
         (c)   Relevant community value;
         (d)   Usage for full body contact recreation;
         (e)   Exceptional use classification as found in 327 IAC 2-1-11(b);
         (f)   Outstanding state resource water classification as found in 327
IAC 2-1-2(3) and 327 IAC 2-1.5-19(b).
      SILVICULTURAL. The practice of controlling the establishment, growth,
composition, health, and quality of forests to meet diverse needs and values.
         (a)   Nonpoint activities include source silvicultural activities such
as nursery operations, site preparation, reforestation and subsequent cultural
treatment, thinning, prescribed burning, pest and fire control, harvesting
operations, surface drainage, or road construction and maintenance from which
there is natural runoff. Some of these activities (such as stream crossing for
roads) may involve the placement of dredged or fill material which may require
a CWA Section 404 permit and a 401 Water Quality Certification.
         (b)   Point source activities include any discernible, confined and
discrete conveyance related to rock crushing, gravel washing, log sorting, or
log storage facilities which are operated in connection with silvicultural
activities and from which pollutants are discharged into waters of the United
States or the state.
      SITE. The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which land-disturbing activity is to be performed.
      SLOPE. Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, measured as
a numerical ratio or percent. Expressed as a ratio, the first number is
commonly the horizontal distance (run) and the second is the vertical distance
(rise); e.g., 2:1. However, the preferred method for designation of slopes is
to clearly identify the horizontal (H) and vertical (V) components (length (L)
and width (W) components for horizontal angles). Also note that according to
international standards (metric), the slopes are presented as the vertical or
width component shown on the numerator; e.g., 1V:2H. Slope expressions in this
chapter follow the common presentation of slopes; e.g., 2:1 with the metric
presentation shown in parentheses; e.g., (1V:2H). Slopes can also be expressed
in percent. Slopes given in percent are always expressed as (100*V/H); e.g., a
2:1 (1V:2H) slope is a 50% slope.
      SOIL. The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate
surface of the earth that serves as a natural medium for the growth of land
plants.
      SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT. A public organization created under
state law as a special purpose district to develop and carry out a program of
soil, water, and related resource conservation, use, and development within its
boundaries. A subdivision of state government with a local governing body,
established under I.C. 14-32.
      SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, debris, or other discarded material.
      SPILL. The unexpected, unintended, abnormal, or unapproved dumping,
leakage, drainage, seepage, discharge, or other loss of petroleum, hazardous
substances, extremely hazardous substances, or objectionable substances. Does
not include releases to impervious surfaces when the substance does not migrate
off the surface or penetrate the surface and enter the soil.
      STORM DURATION. The length of time that water may be stored in any
stormwater control facility, computed from the time water first begins to be
stored.
      STORM EVENT. An estimate of the expected amount of precipitation within a
given period of time. For example, a ten-year frequency, 24-hour duration storm
event is a storm that has a 10% probability of occurring in any one year.
Precipitation is measured over a 24-hour period.
      STORM SEWER. A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater, while
excluding sewage and industrial wastes. Also called a STORM DRAIN.
      STORMWATER. Water resulting from rain, melting or melted snow, hail, or
sleet.
      STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All means, natural or man-made, used for
conducting stormwater to, through or from a drainage area to any of the
following: conduits and appurtenant features, canals, channels, ditches,
storage facilities, swales, streams, culverts, streets and pumping stations.
      STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. A collection of structural and non-
structural practices and infrastructure designed to manage stormwater on a
site. This system may include but is not limited to erosion control measures,
storm drainage infrastructure, detention/retention facilities, and stormwater
quality BMPs.
      STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A plan developed to minimize the
impact of stormwater pollutants resulting from construction activities.
      STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN. A comprehensive written document that
addresses stormwater runoff quality.
      STORMWATER QUALITY MEASURE. A practice, or a combination of practices, to
control or minimize pollutants associated with stormwater runoff.
      STORMWATER RUNOFF. The water derived from rains falling within a
tributary basin, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in
channels or conduits.
      STRIP DEVELOPMENT. A multi-lot project where building lots front on an
existing road.
      SUBDIVISION, MAJOR. Any land that is divided or proposed to be divided
into four or more lots, whether contiguous or subject to zoning requirements,
for the purpose of sale or lease as part of a larger common plan of development
or sale.
      SUBDIVISION, MINOR. Any land that is divided or proposed to be divided
into less than four lots, whether contiguous or subject to zoning requirements,
for the purpose of sale or lease as part of a larger common plan of development
or sale.
      SUBSURFACE DRAIN. A pervious backfield trench, usually containing stone
and perforated pipe, for intercepting groundwater or seepage.
      SURFACE RUNOFF. Precipitation that flows onto the surfaces of roofs,
streets, the ground, etc., and is not absorbed or retained by that surface but
collects and runs off.
      SWALE. An elongated depression in the land surface that is at least
seasonally wet, is usually heavily vegetated, and is normally without flowing
water. Swales conduct stormwater into primary drainage channels and may provide
some groundwater recharge.
      TEMPORARY STABILIZATION. The covering of soil to ensure its resistance to
erosion, sliding, or other movement. Includes vegetative cover, anchored mulch,
or other non-erosive material applied at a uniform density of 70% across the
disturbed area.
      TILE DRAIN. Pipe made of perforated plastic, burned clay, concrete, or
similar material, laid to a designed grade and depth, to collect and carry
excess water from the soil.
      TOPOGRAPHIC MAP. Graphical portrayal of the topographic features of a
land area, showing both the horizontal distances between the features and their
elevations above a given datum.
      TOPOGRAPHY. The representation of a portion of the earth's surface
showing natural and man-made features of a given locality such as rivers,
streams, ditches, lakes, roads, buildings and most importantly, variations in
ground elevations for the terrain of the area.
      TRAINED INDIVIDUAL. An individual who is trained and experienced in the
principles of stormwater quality, including erosion and sediment control as may
be demonstrated by state registration, professional certification (such as
CESSWI and/or CPESC certification), or other documented and applicable
experience or coursework as deemed sufficient by the city that enable the
individual to make judgments regarding stormwater control or treatment and
monitoring.
      URBAN DRAIN. As defined in Indiana Drainage Code.
      URBANIZATION. The development, change or improvement of any parcel of
land consisting of one or more lots for residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional, recreational or public utility purposes.
      VEGETATED SWALE. A type of vegetative practice used to filter stormwater
runoff via a vegetated, shallow-channel conveyance.
      VIOLATION. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this
chapter or the Technical Standards, the requirements of an approved stormwater
management design plan or permit, and/or the requirements of a recorded
stormwater maintenance agreement may be subject to the enforcement actions
outlined in §§
155.120 through
155.123. Any such action or inaction is deemed to be a public nuisance and may
be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief in addition to, and separate
from, the imposition of any of the enforcement actions described in §§
155.120 through
155.123.
      WATER QUALITY. The chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of
water, usually in respect to its suitability for a particular purpose.
      WATER RESOURCES. The supply of groundwater and surface water in a given
area.
      WATERBODY. Any accumulation of water, surface or underground, natural or
artificial, excluding water features designed and designated as water pollution
control facilities.
      WATERCOURSE. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or man-made
drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff or floodwaters flow either
continuously or intermittently.
      WATERSHED. The region drained by or contributing water to a specific
point that could be along a stream, lake or other stormwater facility.
Watersheds are often broken down into subareas for the purpose of hydrologic
modeling.
      WATERSHED AREA. All land and water within the confines of a drainage
divide. See also WATERSHED.
      WETLANDS. Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.006 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement
agency may be delegated in writing by the city to qualified persons or entities
acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.007 INTERPRETATION.
   Words and phrases in this chapter shall be construed according to their
common and accepted meanings, except that words and phrases defined in §
155.005 shall be construed according to the respective definitions given in
that section. Technical words and technical phrases that are not defined in
this chapter, but which have acquired particular meanings in law or in
technical usage shall be construed according to such meanings.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.008 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on historical records,
engineering, and scientific methods of study. Larger storms may occur or
stormwater runoff amounts may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that land uses permitted will be free from stormwater
damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer, representative, or employee thereof, for any damage that may result
from reliance on this chapter or on any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
   (B)   The words APPROVE and ACCEPT, and their common derivations as used in
this chapter in relation to plans, reports, calculations, and permits shall
mean that the city has reviewed the material produced and submitted by the
applicant or his/her agents for general compliance with this chapter and the
city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, and that such compliance would
qualify the applicant to receive a stormwater management approval or permit.
Such an APPROVAL or ACCEPTANCE is based on the assumption that the project
engineer has followed all appropriate engineering methods in the design. Any
stormwater quantity (drainage) or water quality problems associated with the
project caused by poor construction by the contractor and/or poor engineering
design or judgment, either on-site or off-site, are the responsibility of the
developer and the project engineer and shall in no way be the responsibility of
the city or its officials and representatives.
   (C)   Consideration, design, construction, and maintenance of safety
measures for proposed or existing stormwater facilities shall be the
responsibility of the developer, applicant, and/or the property owner. The city
and its officials and representatives shall not be responsible for maintenance
nor liability for any accidents.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
PROHIBITED DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS
§ 155.020 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This section shall apply to all discharges, including illegal dumping,
entering the storm drain system under the control of the city, regardless of
whether the discharge originates from developed or undeveloped lands, and
regardless of whether the discharge is generated from an active construction
site or a stabilized site. These discharges include flows from direct
connections to the storm drain system, illegal dumping, and contaminated
runoff.
   (B)   Stormwater runoff from agricultural, timber harvesting, and mining
activities is exempted from the requirements of this section unless determined
to contain pollutants not associated with such activities or in excess of
standard practices. Farm residences are not included in this exemption.
   (C)   Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver
(unless the waiver is solely based on point source considerations, still
allowing non-point source discharge of a pollutant), or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for the subject discharge to the storm drain system, is also exempted
from this section.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.021 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge to a MS4 conveyance, watercourse, or
waterbody, directly or indirectly, any substance other than stormwater or an
exempted discharge. Any person discharging stormwater shall effectively
minimize pollutants from also being discharged with the stormwater, through the
use of best management practices (BMPs).
   (B)   Concrete washout material must be properly contained within an
appropriate practice and any waste material properly disposed of.
   (C)   The city is authorized to require dischargers to implement pollution
prevention measures, utilizing BMPs necessary to prevent or reduce the
discharge of pollutants into the city's stormwater drainage system.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.022 EXEMPTED DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements in this chapter, the following categories
of non-stormwater discharges or flows are exempted from the requirements of
this section:
   (A)   Water line flushing;
   (B)   Landscape irrigation;
   (C)   Diverted streamflows;
   (D)   Rising groundwaters;
   (E)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration;
   (F)   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
   (G)   Discharges from potable water sources;
   (H)   Foundation drains;
   (I)   Air conditioning condensation;
   (J)   Irrigation water;
   (K)   Springs;
   (L)   Water from crawl space pumps;
   (M)   Footing drains;
   (N)   Lawn watering;
   (O)   Water used to wash vehicles and equipment, provided that there is no
discharge of soaps, solvents, or detergents used for such purposes;
   (P)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
   (Q)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges not including discharges from
saltwater swimming pools;
   (R)   Street wash water;
   (S)   Discharges from emergency firefighting activities;
   (T)   Naturally introduced detritus (e.g., leaves and twigs);
   (U)   Routine external building washdown water that does not use detergents.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.023 STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC MATERIAL.
   Storage or stockpiling of hazardous or toxic material within any
watercourse, or in its associated floodway or floodplain, is strictly
prohibited. Storage or stockpiling of hazardous or toxic material, including
sewage treatment plant stockpiles, on active construction sites must include
adequate protection and/or containment so as to prevent any such materials from
entering any temporary or permanent stormwater conveyance or watercourse.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.024 PRIVATE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE DUTIES.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse located
within their property boundaries, free of trash, debris, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.025 SPILL REPORTING.
   (A)   Any discharger who accidentally discharges into a waterbody any
substance other than stormwater or an exempted discharge shall immediately
inform the city concerning the discharge. A written report concerning the
discharge shall be filed with the city and IDEM, by the dischargers, within
five days. The written report shall specify:
      (1)   The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof;
      (2)   The date, time, and estimated volume of the discharge;
      (3)   All measures taken to clean up the accidental discharge, and all
measures proposed to be taken to prevent any recurrence;
      (4)   The name and telephone number of the person making the report, and
the name and telephone number of a person who may be contacted for additional
information on the matter.
   (B)   A properly reported accidental discharge shall be an affirmative
defense to a civil infraction proceeding brought under this chapter against a
discharger for such discharge. It shall not, however, be a defense to a legal
action brought to obtain an injunction, to obtain recovery of costs or to
obtain other relief because of or arising out of the discharge. A discharge
shall be considered properly reported only if the discharger complies with all
the requirements of this section. This requirement does not relieve discharger
from notifying other entities as required by state or federal regulations.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.026 INSPECTIONS AND MONITORING.
   (A)   Storm drainage system. The city has the authority to periodically
inspect the portion of the storm drainage system under the city's control, in
an effort to detect and eliminate illicit connections and discharges into the
system. This inspection will include a screening of discharges from outfalls
connected to the system in order to determine if prohibited flows are being
conveyed into the storm drainage system. It could also include spot testing of
waters contained in the storm drainage system itself to detect the introduction
of pollutants into the system by means other than a defined outfall, such as
dumping or contaminated sheet runoff.
   (B)   Potential polluters. If, as a result of the storm drainage system
inspection, a discharger is suspected of an illicit discharge, the city may
inspect and/or obtain stormwater samples from stormwater runoff facilities of
the subject discharger, to determine compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. Upon request, the discharger shall allow the city's properly
identified representative to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all
hours necessary for the purposes of such inspection or sampling. The city or
its properly identified representative may place on the discharger's property
the equipment or devices used for such sampling or inspection. Identified
illicit connections or discharges shall be subject to enforcement action as
described in §§
155.120 through
155.123.
   (C)   New development and re-development. Following the final completion of
construction and the receipt of as-built drawings by the city, the city has the
authority to inspect new development and re-development sites to verify that
all on-site stormwater conveyances and connections to the storm drainage system
are in compliance with this section.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
STORMWATER QUANTITY MANAGEMENT
§ 155.040 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.
   The storage and controlled release of excess stormwater runoff shall be
required for all new business, institutional developments, commercial and
industrial developments, residential subdivisions, planned development, rural
estate subdivisions, and any redevelopment or other new construction located
within the city. The city, after thorough investigation and evaluation, may
waive the requirement of controlled runoff for minor subdivisions and
parcelization. Additional potential exemptions regarding the detention
requirements are provided under §
155.041.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.041 POLICY ON STORMWATER QUANTITY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   It is recognized that most streams and drainage channels serving the
city do not have sufficient capacity to receive and convey stormwater runoff
resulting from continued urbanization. Accordingly, the storage and controlled
release of excess stormwater runoff as well as compensation for loss of
floodplain storage shall be required for all developments and redevelopments
(as defined in § 155.005) located within the city. Release rate requirements,
downstream restriction considerations, acceptable outlet, adjoining property
impact considerations, policy on dams and levees, policy on fluvial erosion
hazard corridors, and compensatory floodplain storage rates are detailed in the
city Stormwater Technical Standards.
   (B)   Due to unknowns regarding the future development patterns and the
associated proposed stormwater quantity management systems within a watershed,
it is the policy of the city to discourage direct release of runoff from a new
development or redevelopment without providing detention. However, in rare
circumstances, where a comprehensive watershed-wide hydrologic study or
watershed plan of a major stream (not a "beat the peak" analysis) adopted by
the city substantiates the benefits of (or allows for) direct release for a
proposed development located adjacent to a major stream, the detention
requirements set in this chapter may be waived. Other special circumstances
when such a waiver may be considered by the city include situations where the
design of a regional pond has already taken into account the provision of
direct release in certain areas in the watershed.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.042 CALCULATIONS AND DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   The calculation methods as well as the type, sizing, and placement of all
stormwater facilities shall meet the design criteria, standards, and
specifications outlined in the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual. The
methods and procedures in the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual are
consistent with the policy stated above.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.043 DRAINAGE EASEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All stormwater systems, including detention or retention basins,
conveyance systems, structures and appurtenances, located outside of the right-
of-way shall be placed within a drainage easement. There shall be no trees or
shrubs planted, nor any structures or fences erected in any drainage easement,
unless otherwise accepted by the city. Additional easement requirements along
stormwater conveyance systems are contained in the city Stormwater Technical
Standards Manual. All drainage improvements performed relative to the
conveyance of stormwater runoff and the perpetual maintenance thereof, within
the latter easements, shall be the responsibility of the owner or homeowner
association.
   (B)   Any outlet to, crossing, and/or encroachment of a county regulated
drainage easement requires application and acceptance from the County Drainage
Board in accordance with the Indiana Drainage Code.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.044 PLACEMENT OF UTILITIES.
   No utility company may disturb existing storm drainage facilities without
the consent of the city staff, whose decision may be appealed to the regulatory
body with authority to grant appeals of the city. All existing drainage
facilities shall have senior rights and damage to said facilities shall result
in penalties as prescribed in §§
155.120 through
155.123.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.045 STRUCTURES NEAR COUNTY REGULATED DRAINS.
   For regulated drains not located in platted subdivisions, unless otherwise
accepted by the Grant County Drainage Board, no permanent structure (including
fences) shall be erected within 75 feet measured at right angles from the
existing top edge of each bank of a regulated open drain, as determined by the
Grant County Drainage Board, or the center line of a piped regulated drain,
unless otherwise modified as approved by the Grant County Drainage Board. The
Indiana Drainage Code may be consulted for further details.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.046 INSPECTION, MAINTENANCE, RECORD KEEPING, AND REPORTING.
   (A)   After the approval of the stormwater management permit by the city and
the commencement of construction activities, the city has the authority to
conduct inspections of the work being done to insure full compliance with the
provisions of this section, the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, Design
and Construction Standards, and the terms and conditions of the approved
permit.
   (B)   The city also has the authority to perform long-term, post-
construction inspection of all public or privately owned stormwater quantity
facilities. The inspection will cover physical conditions, available storage
capacity, and the operational condition of key facility elements. Stormwater
quantity facilities shall be maintained in good condition, in accordance with
the designed and approved performance specifications for the facilities, in
addition to any prescribed operation and maintenance procedures, and shall not
be subsequently altered, revised or replaced except as approved by the city. If
deficiencies are found during the inspection, the owner of the facility will be
notified by the city and will be required to take all necessary measures to
correct such deficiencies. If the owner fails to correct the deficiencies
within the allowed time period, as specified in the notification letter, the
city will undertake the work and collect from the owner using lien or any and
all rights as necessary.
   (C)   Assignment of responsibility for maintaining facilities serving more
than one lot or holding shall be documented by appropriate covenants to
property deeds, unless responsibility is formally accepted by a public body,
and determined before the final stormwater permit is approved.
   (D)   Stormwater conveyance facilities may be donated to the city or other
unit of government designated by the city, for ownership and permanent
maintenance providing the city Board of Public Works and Safety formally
accepts responsibility of the facilities.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION FOR CONSTRUCTION SITES
§ 155.060 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The city will require a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP),
which includes erosion and sediment control measures and materials handling
procedures, to be submitted as part of a project's construction plans and
specifications. Any project located within the corporate boundaries of the city
that includes clearing, grading, excavation or other land-disturbing activities
resulting in the disturbance of one acre or more of total land area is subject
to the requirements of this section. This includes both new development and re-
development. This section also applies to disturbances of land that are part of
a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will
ultimately disturb one acre or more of total land area. Section 155.062
provides guidelines for calculating land disturbance. Projects meeting the
coverage requirements of IDEM's CSGP shall also be in compliance with the
requirements contained in that permit.
   (B)   The requirements under this section do not apply to the following
activities, provided other applicable state permits contain provisions
requiring immediate implementation of soil erosion and sediment control
measures:
      (1)   Landfills that have been issued a certification of closure under
329 IAC 10.
      (2)   Coal mining activities permitted under I.C. 14-34.
      (3)   Municipal solid waste landfills that are accepting waste pursuant
to a permit issued by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management under
329 IAC 10 that contains equivalent stormwater requirements, including the
expansion of landfill boundaries and construction of new cells either within or
outside the original solid waste permit boundary.
   (C)   For an individual lot where land disturbance is expected to be one
acre or more, the individual lot owner must complete their own notice of intent
letter, apply for a stormwater permit from the city, and ensure that a
sufficient construction and stormwater pollution prevention plan is completed
and submitted in accordance with §§
155.100 through
155.109, regardless of whether the individual lot is part of a larger permitted
project site. For an individual lot where land disturbance is one acre or more
but less than one acre, an individual lot plot plan permit application is
required prior to receiving a building permit. Details of the permitting
process are contained in §§
155.100 through
155.109.
   (D)   An individual lot located within a larger permitted project site, is
considered part of the larger permitted project site, and the individual lot
operator must comply with the terms and conditions of the stormwater permit
approved for the larger project site. The stormwater permit application for the
larger project site must include detailed erosion and sediment control measures
for individual lots. In addition, the builders of these individual lots are
required to submit individual lot plot plan permit application along with a
SWPPP for that individual lot prior to receiving a building permit. Details of
the permitting process for individual lots and parcels are contained in §§
155.100 through
155.109 and additional requirements for individual lots may be found in the
city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
   (E)   It will be the responsibility of the project site owner to complete a
stormwater permit application and ensure that a sufficient construction plan is
completed and submitted to the city in accordance with §§
155.100 through
155.109. It will be the responsibility of the project site owner to ensure
compliance with this chapter during the construction activity and
implementation of the construction plan, and to notify the city upon completion
of the project and stabilization of the site, requesting a termination
inspection to be performed by the city. However, all persons engaging in
construction and land-disturbing activities on a permitted project site meeting
the applicability requirements must comply with the requirements of this
section and this chapter.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.061 POLICY ON STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION.
   (A)   Effective stormwater pollution prevention on construction sites is
dependent on a combination of preventing movement of soil from its original
position (erosion control), intercepting displaced soil prior to entering a
waterbody (sediment control), and proper on-site materials handling.
   (B)   For land disturbance of one acre or more, the developer must submit to
the city, a SWPPP with detailed erosion and sediment control plans as well as a
narrative describing materials handling and storage, and construction
sequencing. The SWPPP and the project management log must be retained for at
least three years from the date the project permit is terminated.
   (C)   The required IDEM general and implementation requirements that apply
to all land- disturbing activities are contained in the city Stormwater
Technical Standards Manual.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.062 CALCULATIONS AND DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   In calculating the total area of land disturbance, for the purposes of
determining applicability of this section to a project, the following
guidelines should be used:
      (1)   Off-site construction activities that provide services (for
example, road extensions, sewer, water, off-site stockpiles, and other
utilities) to a land-disturbing project site, must be considered as a part of
the total land disturbance calculation for the project site, when the activity
is under the control of the project site owner.
      (2)   To determine if multi-lot project sites are regulated by this
section, the area of land disturbance shall be calculated by adding the total
area of land disturbance for improvements, such as, roads, utilities, or common
areas, and the expected total disturbance on each individual lot, as determined
by the following:
         (a)   For a single-family residential project site where the lots are
one-half acre or more, one-half acre of land disturbance must be used as the
expected lot disturbance.
         (b)   For a single-family residential project site where the lots are
less than one half acre in size, the total lot must be calculated as being
disturbed.
         (c)   To calculate lot disturbance on all other types of project
sites, such as industrial and commercial projects project sites, a minimum of
one acre of land disturbance must be used as the expected lot disturbance,
unless the lots are less than one acre in size, in which case the total lot
must be calculated as being disturbed.
   (B)   The calculation methods as well as the type, sizing, and placement of
all stormwater pollution prevention measures for construction sites shall meet
the design criteria, standards, and specifications outlined in the Indiana
Stormwater Quality Manual, the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, and
the product guidance/specifications of the manufacturer. The methods and
procedures included in these two references are in keeping with the above
stated policy and meet the requirements of the IDEM's CSGP. A copy of the
Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual may be obtained online through IDEM.
   (C)   The design requirements that would apply to all land-disturbing
activities and shall be considered in the selection, design, and implementation
of all stormwater quality and management measures contained in the SWPPP are
contained in the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.063 INSPECTION, MAINTENANCE, RECORD KEEPING, AND REPORTING.
   (A)   Following approval of the stormwater management permit or individual
lot plot plan permit by the city and commencement of construction activities,
the city has the authority to conduct inspections of the site to ensure full
compliance with the provisions of this section, the approved stormwater
pollution prevention plan, the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual, and the terms
and conditions of the approved permit.
   (B)   A self-monitoring program (SMP) must be implemented by the project
site owner to ensure the stormwater pollution prevention plan is working
effectively. A trained individual, acceptable to the city, shall monitor and
manage project construction and stormwater activities. Details regarding the
required monitoring activities are contained in the city Stormwater Technical
Standards Manual.
   (C)   The stormwater pollution prevention plan shall serve as a guideline
for stormwater quality but should not be interpreted to be the only basis for
implementation of stormwater quality measures for a project site. The project
site owner is responsible for implementing, in accordance with this section,
all measures necessary to adequately prevent polluted stormwater runoff.
Recommendations by the trained individual for modified stormwater quality
measures should be implemented.
   (D)   A project management log must be maintained at the project site or in
the possession of on- site individuals associated with the management and
operations of the construction activities. Details regarding requirements
related to the project management log are contained in the city Stormwater
Technical Standards Manual.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT FOR POST-CONSTRUCTION
§ 155.080 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   In addition to the requirements of §§
155.060 through
155.063, the stormwater pollution prevention plan, which is to be submitted to
the city as part of the stormwater management permit application, must also
include post-construction stormwater quality measures. These measures are
incorporated as a permanent feature into the site plan and are left in place
following completion of construction activities to continuously treat
stormwater runoff from the stabilized site. Any project located within the
corporate boundaries of the city that includes clearing, grading, excavation,
and other land-disturbing activities, resulting in the disturbance of one acre
or more of total land area is subject to the requirements of this section. This
includes both new development and re-development, and disturbances of land less
than one acre of total land area that are part of a larger common plan of
development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb one acre
or more of total land area. In addition, regardless of the amount of
disturbance, the city reserves the right to require pre-treatment BMPs for
proposed hot spot developments in accordance with provisions contained in the
city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
   (B)   The requirements under this section do not apply to the following
activities: Construction activities associated with a single-family residential
dwelling disturbing less than one acre, when the dwelling is not part of a
larger common plan of development, or sale; or individual building lots within
a larger permitted project.
   (C)   The requirements under this section do not apply to the following
activities, provided other applicable state permits contain provisions
requiring immediate implementation of soil erosion control measures:
      (1)   Landfills that have been issued a certification of closure under
329 IAC 10.
      (2)   Coal mining activities permitted under I.C. 14-34.
      (3)   Municipal solid waste landfills that are accepting waste pursuant
to a permit issued by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management under
329 IAC 10 that contains equivalent stormwater requirements, including the
expansion of landfill boundaries and construction of new cells either within or
outside the original solid waste permit boundary.
   (D)   It will be the responsibility of the project site owner to complete a
stormwater permit application and ensure that a sufficient construction plan is
completed and submitted to the city in accordance with §§
155.100 through
155.109. It will be the responsibility of the project site owner to ensure
proper construction and installation of all stormwater BMPs (especially, the
protection of post-stormwater BMPs during construction phase) in compliance
with this chapter and with the approved stormwater management permit, and to
notify the city upon completion of the project and stabilization of the site,
requesting a termination inspection to be performed by the city. However, all
eventual property owners of stormwater quality facilities meeting the
applicability requirements must comply with the requirements of this section
and this chapter.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.081 POLICY ON STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   It is recognized that developed areas, as compared to undeveloped
areas, generally have increased imperviousness, decreased infiltration rates,
increased runoff rates, and increased concentrations of pollutants such as
fertilizers, herbicides, greases, oil, salts and other pollutants. As new
development and re-development continues within the corporate boundaries of the
city, measures must be taken to intercept and filter pollutants from stormwater
runoff prior to reaching regional creeks, streams, and rivers. Through the use
of appropriate Best Management Practices (BMPs), to treat the Water Quality
Volume (WQv) or the Water Quality Flow (Qwq) stormwater runoff will be filtered
and harmful amounts of sediment, nutrients, and contaminants will be removed.
   (B)   It is also recognized that another major source of pollution in many
Indiana streams, including those within the corporate boundaries of the city,
is the streambank erosion associated with urbanizing watersheds. Stream
channels develop their shape in response to the volume and rate of runoff that
they receive from their contributing watersheds. Research has shown that in
hydrologically stable watersheds, the stream flow responsible for most of the
shaping of the channel (called the bankfull flow) occurs between every one to
two years. When land is developed, the volume and rate of runoff from that land
increases for these comparatively small flooding events that are not normally
addressed by the detention practices and the stream channel will adapt by
changing its shape. As the stream channel works to reach a new stable shape,
excess erosion occurs. As new development and re-development continues within
the corporate boundaries of the city, measures must be taken to minimize the
impact of such development or re-development on streambank erosion. Through the
use of appropriate best management practices (BMPs) to retain and/or detain and
slowly release the channel protection volume (CPv), the volume and rate of
runoff for channel forming flows will be reduced in an attempt to minimize
increased streambank erosion in the receiving streams and channels.
   (C)   The project site owner must submit to the city a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) that shows placement of appropriate BMP(s) from a pre-
approved list of BMPs specified in the city Stormwater Technical Standards
Manual. The SWPPP submittal shall include an Operation and Maintenance Manual
for all post-construction BMP(s) included in the project and a notarized
Maintenance Agreement, consistent with the sample agreement provided in the
city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, providing for the long-term
maintenance of those BMPs, both of which shall be recorded with the deed for
the property on which the project is located. The noted BMP(s) must be
designed, constructed, and maintained according to guidelines provided or
referenced in the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual. Practices other
than those specified in the pre-approved list may be utilized. However, the
burden of proof, as to whether the performance and ease of maintenance of such
practices will be according to guidelines provided in the city Stormwater
Technical Standards Manual, would be placed with the applicant. Details
regarding the procedures and criteria for consideration of acceptance of such
BMPs are provided in the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
   (D)   Gasoline outlets and refueling areas must install appropriate
practices (as noted under "Hot Spots" provision in the Technical Standards) to
reduce lead, copper, zinc, and polyaromatic hydrocarbons in stormwater runoff.
These requirements will apply to all new facilities and existing facilities
that replace their tanks, regardless of the size of the facility.
   (E)   Discharges from new development and redevelopment sites will not be
allowed directly into karst features without pre-treatment.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.082 CALCULATIONS AND DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Calculation of land disturbance should follow the guidelines discussed
in §
155.042.
   (B)   The calculation methods as well as the type, sizing, and placement of
all stormwater quality management measures, or BMPs shall meet the design
criteria, standards, and specifications outlined in the city Stormwater
Technical Standards Manual. The methods and procedures included in the
referenced standards is in keeping with the above stated policy and meet or
exceed the requirements of IDEM's MS4 GP.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.083 EASEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   All stormwater quality management systems, including detention or retention
basins, filter strips, pocket wetlands, in-line filters, infiltration systems,
conveyance systems, structures and appurtenances located outside of the right-
of-way shall be incorporated into permanent easements. For the purposes of
monitoring, inspection, and general maintenance activities, adequate easement
width, as detailed in the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, beyond
the actual footprint of the stormwater quality management facility as well as a
20-foot wide access easement from a public right-of-way to each BMP shall be
provided.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.084 INSPECTION, MAINTENANCE, RECORD KEEPING, AND REPORTING.
   (A)   After the approval of the stormwater management permit by the city and
the commencement of construction activities, the city has the authority to
conduct inspections of the work being done to ensure full compliance with the
provisions of this section, the approved stormwater pollution prevention plan,
the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, and the terms and conditions of
the approved permit.
   (B)   Stormwater quality facilities shall be maintained in good condition,
in accordance with the operation and maintenance procedures and schedules
listed in the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, in addition to the
designed and approved performance specifications for the facilities and shall
not be subsequently altered, revised, or replaced except as approved by the
city.
   (C)   Details regarding the requirement of Stormwater BMP Maintenance
Agreement, O and M Maintenance Manual, and a maintenance escrow account and
their transfer to other parties or subsequent owners prior to release of the
maintenance bond discussed in §§
155.100 through
155.109 is provided in the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
   (D)   The city also has the authority to perform long-term, post-
construction inspection of all public or privately owned stormwater quality
facilities. The inspection will cover physical conditions, available water
quality storage capacity and the operational condition of key facility
elements. Noted deficiencies and recommended corrective action will be included
in an inspection report.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
§ 155.100 CONCEPTUAL DRAINAGE PLAN REVIEW.
   In order to gain an understanding of the drainage requirements for a
specific project, a developer may submit conceptual drainage plans and
calculations for review by the city. The direction provided by the city during
such a review is based on preliminary data and shall not be construed as an
acceptance or binding on either party. The following is a general listing of
minimum data requirements for the review of conceptual drainage plans:
   (A)   Two complete sets of conceptual plans showing general project layout,
including existing and proposed drainage systems (plan sheets must be larger
than 11 inches by 17 inches, but not to exceed 30 inches by 42 inches).
   (B)   General description of the existing and proposed drainage systems in
narrative form.
   (C)   Map showing on-site 100-year floodplain and floodway (please note if
none exists).
   (D)   Map showing all wetlands, lakes, and ponds on or adjacent to the site.
   (E)   Watershed boundaries with USGS Contours or best information possible.
   (F)   Two copies of drainage calculations detailing existing and proposed
discharges from the site.
   (G)   Existing watercourse or regulated drains.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.101 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   This section applies to all development, or re-development of land, that
results in land disturbance of one acre or more. Individual lots with land
disturbance less than one acre shall refer to §§
155.060 through
155.063,
155.080 through
155.084, and
155.103 for plan review requirements and procedures. Figure 1 is a flowchart
summarizing the plan review/permit approval/project termination compliance
process for land disturbance of one acre or more and can be found at the end of
this section.
   (A)   General procedures.
      (1)   The project site owner shall submit an application for a stormwater
management permit to the city. The application will include a completed
application checklist, construction plan sheets, a stormwater drainage
technical report, a stormwater pollution prevention plan, and any other
necessary support information. Specific information to be included in the
application can be found in §
155.102  below. Two copies of each application must be submitted to the city.
The city may, at its discretion, require one or more copies be submitted to
other entities deemed appropriate by the city. Additionally, a digital copy of
all documents are required in a format accepted by the city.
      (2)   After the city's receipt of the application, the applicant will be
notified as to whether their application was complete or insufficient. The
applicant will be asked for additional information if the application is
insufficient. If the application is complete, it will be reviewed in detail by
the city and/or its plan review consultant(s). Once all comments have been
received and review completed, the city will either approve the project,
request modifications or deny the project. If the applicant does not agree with
or accept the review findings and wishes to seek an appeal, the city will place
the project on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city
Board of Public Works and Safety, provided the agenda for the meeting has not
yet been advertised or published. If time for notification does not allow, the
project shall be placed on the following regularly scheduled meeting of the
city Board of Public Works and Safety. If the project must go through a
scheduled meeting, the city will furnish the applicant a complete list of
comments and objections to the plans and accompanying data prior to the
scheduled meeting. After the scheduled meeting, the city will either issue a
permit, request modifications to the construction plans, or deny the project.
      (3)   The project site owner must notify the city and IDEM before
beginning construction. Notification to the city shall be in the form of an
email while the notification to IDEM shall be in the form of an online IDEM NOI
submittal. Once a permit has been issued and the pending construction
notifications submitted to the city and IDEM before the beginning of
construction, construction may commence. Once construction starts, the project
owner shall monitor construction activities and inspect all stormwater
pollution prevention measures in compliance with this chapter and the terms and
conditions of the approved permit. Upon completion of construction activities,
a certification of completion and compliance and as-built plans must be
submitted to the city. Once the construction site has been stabilized and all
temporary erosion and sediment control measures have been removed, a
notification shall be sent to the city, requesting a termination inspection.
The city, or its representative, shall inspect the construction site to verify
that the completed project is fully stabilized and meets the requirements of
this chapter and its technical standards and the terms and conditions of the
permit. Once the applicant receives a signed copy of the Termination Inspection
Checklist confirming compliance, they must forward a copy to IDEM along with
the required IDEM NOT form. Permits issued by the city under this scenario will
expire five years from the date of issuance. If construction is not completed
within five years, an updated permit application must be submitted to the city
and an updated NOI must be resubmitted to IDEM at least 90 days prior to
expiration.
   (B)   SWPPP review time limits.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 13-18-27, an MS4-designated entity or other review
authority such as SWCD must make a preliminary determination as to whether the
construction plan associated with SWPPP is substantially complete before the
end of the tenth working day (for sites with less than five acres of land
disturbance) after the day on which the SWPPP is submitted to the review
authority or the fourteenth working day (for sites with five acres or larger of
land disturbance) after the day on which the SWPPP is submitted to the review
authority. Depending on the outcome of the SWPPP review, the following
scenarios may play out:
         (a)   No SWPPP review notification received. If the review authority
does not notify the applicant of its preliminary determination as to whether
the construction plan is substantially complete within either ten or 14 days as
noted above, the project site owner may submit a notice of intent letter to
IDEM including the information required by IDEM, or this chapter and the city
Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, and 48 hours after the NOI is submitted
to IDEM, may begin the construction project, including the land-disturbing
activities of the construction project.
         (b)   SWPPP not substantially complete. If the review authority
notifies the applicant that the construction plan is not substantially
complete, the project site owner may not submit a notice of intent letter to
IDEM until the review authority makes a conclusive favorable determination
concerning the construction plan under the IDEM rule/permit, or this chapter
and the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
         (c)   Unfavorable SWPPP. If the review authority notifies the
applicant that the construction plan is substantially complete, and makes a
conclusive unfavorable determination concerning the construction plan under
IDEM rule/permit, or this chapter and the city Stormwater Technical Standards
Manual, the project site owner may not submit a notice of intent letter to
IDEM.
         (d)   Preliminary SWPPP review. If the review authority notifies the
applicant that the construction plan is substantially complete and a
preliminary review has been completed, the project site owner may submit a
notice of intent letter to IDEM including the information required by IDEM, or
this chapter and the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, and 48 hours
after the NOI is submitted to IDEM, may begin the construction project,
including the land-disturbing activities of the construction project. The plan
review authority reserves the right to perform a comprehensive review at a
later date, and revisions may be required at that time.
         (e)   Conditional SWPPP review. If the review authority notifies the
applicant that the construction plan is substantially complete and a
conditional review has been completed, the project site owner may submit a
notice of intent letter to IDEM including the information required by IDEM, or
this chapter and the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, and 48 hours
after the NOI is submitted to IDEM, may begin the construction project,
including the land-disturbing activities of the construction project provided
that the requirements included in the conditional review are fulfilled.
         (f)   Favorable SWPPP review. If the review authority notifies the
applicant that the construction plan is substantially complete and a
preliminary review has been completed, the project site owner may submit a
notice of intent letter to IDEM including the information required by IDEM, or
this chapter and the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, and 48 hours
after the NOI is submitted to IDEM, may begin the construction project,
including the land-disturbing activities of the construction project.
      (2)   Note that the above time limits only apply to the SWPPP portion of
the overall stormwater permit submittal and does not affect any official or
non-official permit review timelines set by the entity for other aspects of the
stormwater permit application.
Figure 1: Permit Approval and Project Termination Sign-Off Process.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5845d03809c2b13194ec9ac2486edd9aec822e0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1471.png]
 
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.102 INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Specific projects or activities may be exempt from all or part of the
informational requirements listed below. Exemptions are detailed in §§
155.020,
155.040,
155.060, and
155.080. If a project or activity is exempt from any or all requirements of
this chapter, an application should be filed listing the exemption criteria
met, in lieu of the information requirements listed below. This level of
detailed information is not required from individual lots, disturbing less than
one acre of land, developed within a larger permitted project site. Review and
acceptance of such lots is covered under §
155.103.
   (B)   The different elements of a permit submittal include an application
checklist, construction plans, a stormwater drainage technical report, a
stormwater pollution prevention plan for active construction sites, a post-
construction stormwater pollution prevention plan, and any other necessary
supporting information. All plans, reports, calculations, and narratives shall
be signed and sealed by a professional engineer or a licensed surveyor,
registered in the State of Indiana who also meets the definition of a trained
individual found in §
155.005.
      (1)   Application checklist. As part of the city stormwater management
permit application package, the application checklist provided in the city
Stormwater Technical Standards Manual must be completed by the applicant and
provided along with other required supporting material.
      (2)   Construction plans. Construction plan sheets (larger than 11 inches
by 17 inches, but not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches in size) and an
accompanying narrative report shall describe and depict the existing and
proposed conditions. Note that in order to gain an understanding of and to
evaluate the relationship between the proposed improvements for a specific
project section/phase and the proposed improvements for an overall multi-
section (phased) project, the detailed information requested herein for the
first section/phase being permitted must be accompanied by an overall project
plan that includes the location, dimensions, and supporting analyses of all
detention/retention facilities, primary conveyance facilities, and outlet
conditions. Construction plans must include items listed in the application
checklist provided in the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
      (3)   Stormwater drainage technical report. A written stormwater drainage
technical report must contain a discussion of the steps taken in the design of
the stormwater drainage system. Note that in order to gain an understanding of
and to evaluate the relationship between the proposed improvements for a
specific project section/phase and the proposed improvements for an overall
multi- section (phased) project, the detailed information requested herein for
the first section/phase being permitted must be accompanied by an overall
project plan that includes the location, dimensions, and supporting analyses of
all detention/retention facilities, primary conveyance facilities, and outlet
conditions. The technical report needs to include items listed in the
application checklist provided in the city Stormwater Technical Standards
Manual.
      (4)   Stormwater pollution prevention plan for construction sites. For
sites with total disturbance of one acre or more, a stormwater pollution
prevention plan associated with construction activities must be designed to, at
least, meet the requirements of this chapter. The SWPPP and construction plans
must include the items listed in the application checklist provided in the city
Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
      (5)   Post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan. For sites
with total land disturbance of one-acre or more of total land area, a post-
construction stormwater pollution prevention plan must be designed to, at
least, meet the requirements of this chapter and must include the information
provided in the city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual. The post-
construction stormwater pollution prevention plan must include items listed in
the application checklist provided in the city Stormwater Technical Standards
Manual.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.103 REVIEW OF INDIVIDUAL LOTS.
   (A)   For all individual lots disturbing 10,000 square feet or more but less
than one acre, a formal review and issuance of an individual lot plot plan
permit will be required before a building permit can be issued. Similarly, for
individual lots disturbing less than 10,000 square feet of total land area,
developed within a larger permitted project, a formal review and issuance of an
individual lot plot plan permit will be required before a building permit can
be issued. All stormwater management measures necessary to comply with this
chapter must be implemented in accordance with permitted plan for the larger
project.
   (B)   The following information must be submitted to the city, for review
and acceptance, by the individual lot operator, whether owning the property or
acting as the agent of the property owner, as part of a request for review and
issuance of an individual lot plot plan permit that must be obtained prior to
the issuance of a building permit.
      (1)   A site layout for the subject lot and all adjacent lots showing
building pad location, dimensions, and elevations, and the drainage patterns
and swales.
      (2)   Erosion and sediment control plan that, at a minimum, includes the
following measures:
         (a)   Installation and maintenance of a stable construction site
access.
         (b)   Installation and maintenance of appropriate perimeter erosion
and sediment control measures prior to land disturbance.
         (c)   Minimization of sediment discharge and tracking from the lot.
         (d)   Clean-up of sediment that is either tracked or washed onto
roads. Bulk clearing of sediment shall not include flushing the area with
water. Cleared sediment must be redistributed or disposed of in a manner that
is in compliance with all applicable statutes and rules.
         (e)   Implementation of concrete or cementitious wash water practices
that securely contain and allow for the proper disposal of concrete or
cementitious wash water.
         (f)   Adjacent lots disturbed by an individual lot operator must be
repaired and stabilized with temporary or permanent surface stabilization.
         (g)   Self-monitoring program including plan and procedures.
         (h)   Certification of compliance stating that the individual lot plan
is consistent with the stormwater management permit, as approved by the city,
for the larger project (if the individual lot is part of a larger permitted
project).
         (i)   Name, address, telephone number, and list of qualifications of
the trained individual in charge of the mandatory stormwater pollution
prevention self-monitoring program for the project site.
   (C)   The individual lot operator is responsible for installation and
maintenance of all erosion and sediment control measures until the site is
stabilized.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.104 CHANGES TO PLANS.
   Any changes or deviations in the detailed plans and specifications after
approval of the applicable stormwater management permit shall be filed with,
and accepted by, the city prior to the land development involving the change.
Copies of the changes, if accepted, shall be attached to the original plans and
specifications.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.105 FEE STRUCTURE.
   (A)   Fee amount. As a condition of the submittal and the review of
development plans by the city, the applicant shall agree to pay the city the
applicable fee, as set by the city with respect to the review of all drainage
submittals, preliminary plans, final plans, construction plans and accompanying
information and data, as well as prepaid inspection fees.
   (B)   Time of payment.
      (1)   After the meeting at which the city is scheduled to consider
acceptance of the applicant's final stormwater management plan, the city will
furnish a written statement to the applicant specifying the total amount due to
the city in connection with the review of the applicant's submittals, plans and
accompanying information and data, including the amount required to be paid by
applicant for review and pre-paid inspection fees.
      (2)   As a condition of acceptance of final drainage plans by the city,
applicant shall pay to the city the sum set forth in said statement. The city
may issue such a billing statement before the project advances to the final
acceptance stage, and such payment is due by applicant upon receipt of said
billing statement regardless of whether the project is advanced to the final
acceptance stage.
      (3)   The city shall have the right to not accept the drainage
improvements or to not approve the advancement of any project for which the
applicable fees have not been paid.
   (C)   Method of payment.
      (1)   Fees shall be paid by one of the following methods:
         (a)   Check.
         (b)   Certified check.
         (c)   Cashier's check.
         (d)   Money order.
      (2)   All checks shall be made payable to the: City of Gas City, 211 East
Main Street, Gas City, IN 46933.
   (D)   Refund of payment. Fees are refundable only if the city determines
that compliance by the development or project to this chapter is not necessary.
   (E)   Fee schedule. Stormwater permit application and inspection fees will
be in accordance with the fee schedule set by the city as a separate
resolution.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.106 REQUIRED ASSURANCES.
   This section shall apply to all projects whether the stormwater management
system or portions thereof will be dedicated to the city or retained privately.
As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the city shall require
the applicant to provide assurance in the form of an irrevocable letter of
credit or a bond when the stormwater management plan has been accepted and
before construction begins. Said assurance will guarantee a good faith
execution of the stormwater drainage plan, the stormwater pollution prevention
plan, the stormwater quality management plan, and any permit conditions. The
assurance shall be for an amount equal to 125% of the total costs of all
stormwater management measures for the entire project. The above-mentioned
costs shall be based on an estimate as prepared by a registered engineer or
land surveyor. Said costs shall be for the installation and ongoing monitoring
and maintenance of erosion control measures and the construction and ongoing
monitoring and maintenance of storm drainage infrastructure, detention/
retention facilities, and stormwater quality BMPs, as regulated under this
chapter, until the construction is completed, the site is stabilized, and as-
built plans are accepted by the city. Assurances shall be for a minimum of
$5,000. All other performance bonds, maintenance bonds or other assurances
required by the city in accordance with any and all other ordinances shall also
apply and so be required. Local governmental jurisdictions may require
additional performance and/or maintenance assurances. The intent of this
assurance is not only to complete the installation of storm drain
infrastructure for the project, but also to assure that adequate stormwater
pollution prevention measures are properly installed and maintained. If
adequate assurances are set aside by the project site owner for the overall
project, proof of total assurance can be submitted in place of an individual
stormwater assurance.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.107 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF PERMITS.
   (A)   In granting a stormwater management permit, the city may impose such
terms and conditions as are reasonably necessary to meet the purposes of this
chapter. The project site owner shall insure compliance with such terms and
conditions. Non-compliance with the terms and conditions of permits will be
subject to enforcement as described in §§
155.120 through
155.123.
   (B)   The project site owner shall inform all general contractor,
construction management firms, grading or excavating contractors, utility
contractors, and the contractors that have primary oversight on individual
building lots of the terms and conditions of the stormwater management permit
and the schedule for proposed implementation.
   (C)   In the event that a project site is determined to impact or discharge
to a sensitive area or is located in an impact drainage area, the city may
require more stringent stormwater quantity and quality measures than detailed
in this chapter or in the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual.
      (1)   Determination of sensitive areas. Sensitive areas include highly
erodible soils, wetlands, karst areas, threatened or endangered species
habitat, outstanding waters, impaired waters, recreational waters, and surface
drinking water sources. Any discharge from a stormwater practice that is a
Class V injection well shall meet the Indiana groundwater quality standards and
registered with U.S. EPA as required by the IDEM. If wetlands are suspected on
a site, a wetland delineation should be completed in accordance with the
methodology established by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (COE). The need for
the applicant to check for the presence of threatened or endangered species
habitat will be determined on a case-by-case basis. Special terms and
conditions for development determined to impact or discharge to any sensitive
area shall be included in the stormwater management permit.
      (2)   Determination of impact drainage areas.
         (a)   The following areas shall be designated as impact drainage
areas, unless good reason for not including them is presented to the city.
            1.   A floodway or floodplain as designated by the most updated
FEMA Code dealing with floodplain regulation and/or by the best available data
through IDNR.
            2.   Land within 25 feet of each bank of any ditch within the
city's system.
            3.   Land within 15 feet of the centerline of any stormwater
infrastructure or enclosed conduit within the city's system.
            4.   Land within 75 feet of each bank of a county open regulated
drain.
            5.   Land within 50 feet of a natural drainageway.
            6.   Land within 75 feet of the centerline of any tiled regulated
drain.
            7.   Land within the fluvial erosion hazard (FEH) corridor.
            8.   Land within the expected breach inundation zone of an existing
or proposed new dam, and areas protected from flooding by a levee.
         (b)   The City Engineer is authorized, but is not required, to
classify certain geographical areas as impact drainage areas. In determining
impact drainage areas, the City Engineer may consider such factors as
topography, soil type, capacity of existing drains, and distance from adequate
drainage facility.
         (c)   Land that does not have an adequate outlet, taking into
consideration the capacity and depth of the outlet, may be designated as an
impact drainage area by the city. Special terms and conditions for development
within any impact drainage area shall be included in the stormwater management
permit.
      (3)   Determination of designated drainage areas served by regional
facilities. The City Engineer is authorized, but is not required, to classify
certain geographical areas as designated drainage areas that are or will be
served by regional facilities, such as a regional pond. In such cases, an
infrastructure development fee (IDF) rate may be established for the designated
drainage area. The basis for determining such a fee for a proposed development
or re-development within a designated drainage area will be as detailed in the
city Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.108 CERTIFICATION OF AS-BUILT PLANS.
   This section shall apply to all projects whether the stormwater management
system or portions thereof will be dedicated to the city or retained privately.
After completion of construction of the project and before the release of
required performance assurances referenced in §
155.106, a professionally prepared and certified “as-built” set of plans
(record drawings) shall be submitted to the city for review. These as-built
plans/record drawings must be prepared and certified by the engineer of record,
i.e., the company/engineer who originally prepared the construction plans.
Additionally, a digital copy of the “as-built” plans (record drawings) as well
as finalized digital versions of all analyses, models, manuals, and reports
that are consistent with the as-built conditions is required in a format
acceptable to the city. These plans shall include all pertinent data relevant
to the completed storm drainage system and stormwater management facilities,
and shall include:
   (A)   Pipe size and pipe material.
   (B)   Invert elevations.
   (C)   Top rim elevations.
   (D)   Elevation of the emergency overflow (spillway) for ponds.
   (E)   Grades along the emergency flood routing path(s).
   (F)   Pipe structure lengths.
   (G)   BMP types, dimensions, and boundaries/easements.
   (H)   "As-planted" plans for,BMPs as applicable.
   (I)   Data and calculations showing detention basin storage volume.
   (J)   Data and calculations showing BMP treatment capacity.
   (K)   Certified statement on plans stating the completed storm drainage
system and stormwater management facilities substantially comply with
construction plans and the stormwater management permit as approved by the city
(see certificate in the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual).
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.109 POST-PROJECT MAINTENANCE BOND AND VERIFICATIONS.
   (A)   In addition to as-built plans and the certification of completion and
compliance, following the release of performance assurances, the property
owner, developer, or contractor shall be required to file a two-year
maintenance bond or other acceptable guarantee with the city in an amount not
to exceed 25% of the cost of the stormwater management system located outside
the public road rights-of-way, and in a form satisfactory to the city in order
to assure that such stormwater system installation was done according to
standards of good workmanship, that the materials used in the construction and
installation were of good quality and construction, and that such project was
done in accordance with the accepted plans and this chapter and that any off-
site drainage problems that may arise, whether upstream or downstream of such
project, will be corrected if such drainage problems are determined by the city
to have been caused by the development of such project. The bond or other
acceptable guarantee shall be in effect for a period of two years after the
date of the release of required performance assurances referenced in §
155.106. The beneficiary of all maintenance bonds shall be the Board of Public
Works and Safety.
   (B)   To verify that all stormwater infrastructure is functioning properly,
visual recordings (via closed circuit television) of such infrastructure,
including all subsurface drains, shall be required twice, once following the
completion of installation of the stormwater management system and submittal of
as-builts, and the second time before release of maintenance bonds. These
visual recordings will be scheduled by the city and paid for by the developer.
Notices shall be provided to the city within 72 hours following the completion
of installation and again at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the
maintenance bond so that the noted recordings may be scheduled. Reports
summarizing the results of the noted visual recordings shall be reviewed and
accepted by the city before the plat is recommended for recording and again
before the maintenance bond shall be recommended to be released.
   (C)   Additional requirements for transfer of any applicable stormwater BMP
Maintenance Agreement, O and M Maintenance Manual, and maintenance escrow
accounts to subsequent owners prior to release of the maintenance bond is
discussed in §§
155.080 through
155.084.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.120 COMPLIANCE WITH THIS CHAPTER.
   To secure compliance with the requirements of this chapter, violations
thereof shall be subject to the enforcement provisions set forth under §
155.121. Additionally, compliance with the requirements set forth in the local
zoning ordinances is also necessary. Compliance with all applicable ordinances
of the city as well as with applicable State of Indiana statues and regulations
shall also be required. Unless otherwise stated, all other specifications
referred to in this chapter shall be the most recent edition available.
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   VIOLATION. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of
this chapter, the requirements of an approved stormwater management design plan
or permit, and/or the requirements of a recorded stormwater maintenance
agreement may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section.
Any such action or inaction is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated
by injunctive or other equitable relief, in addition to and separate from the
imposition of any of the enforcement actions described below.
      (2)   COMPLIANCE. The act of correcting a violation or violations within
the time frame specified by the city.
      (3)   OFFENSE. Both a violation and a failure of compliance on a
particular project constitute an OFFENSE. If there are multiple violations or
multiple failures of compliance on the same project, each shall be considered a
separate offense as further stated in §
155.121(C).
   (B)   Warning notice. When the city finds that any person has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued
hereunder, the city may serve upon that person a written warning notice,
specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting
the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution
whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of
the matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieves the alleged
violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of
the warning notice. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
city to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a warning notice.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.121 ENFORCEMENT OF THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   Notice of violation/citation.
      (1)   If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible
person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an
approved stormwater management design plan, a recorded stormwater management
maintenance agreement, or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a
written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person and
the owner of the property. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by
this chapter without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of
violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of
the activity being conducted on the site.
      (2)   The notice of violation can be in the form of a citation ticket
and/or a written letter that would contain detailed inspection findings,
conclusions of law, disposition of warning or fines assessed, stipulated
remedial actions as discussed with the responsible party representative,
reasonable deadlines for those remedial actions, and the date of re-inspection.
   (B)   Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties,
and remedies authorized by this chapter, the city may impose upon a violator,
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, public education, etc.
   (C)   Civil penalties for violations. 
      (1)   Any person who commits an offense under this chapter commits a
civil infraction subject to a fine not to exceed $2,500 for each offense, plus
costs, damages, and expenses. Each day such violation occurs or continues
without a compliance action that is satisfactory to the city may be deemed a
separate offense and shall make the violator liable for the imposition of a
fine for each day. The rights and remedies provided for in this section are
cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. An admission
or determination of responsibility shall not exempt the offender from
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Any person who aids or abets a person in a violation of this
chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in this section.
      (3)   The city has established an enforcement response schedule as noted
in the table below that standardizes the approach that the city may, in its
discretion, employ in dealing with stormwater regulations offenses subject to
this chapter and the associated Technical Standards document. When so employed,
this schedule shall apply separately to each offense in the following manner:
The first offense is the underlying violation itself, while the subsequent
offenses two through eight (as necessary) are failures of compliance.
Offense # Type of Response Anticipated
Offense #       Type of Response Anticipated
First offense   Verbal telephone notice, letter of violation or written warning
                and administrative penalty
Second offense  Letter of violation, administrative penalty and/or site visit
Third offense   Letter of violation, administrative penalty and/or site visit
Fourth offense  Letter of violation, administrative penalty and/or site visit
Fifth offense   Agreed order, administrative penalty and/or site visit
Sixth offense   Administrative order, administrative penalty and/or site visit
Seventh offense Compliance schedule, administrative penalty and/or site visit
Eighth offense  Litigation and administrative penalty
 
      (4)   Likewise, in order to standardize the approach that the city may,
in its discretion, employ in the imposition of administrative penalties, the
city has established the following schedule of administrative penalties. Again,
the penalty for the first offense would apply to the violation itself, while
the subsequent penalties two through four (as necessary) would apply to
failures of compliance. In its discretion, the city may impose penalties up to
the amount specified in this schedule.
 
Offense #      Penalty
First offense  $250
Second offense $500
Third offense  $1,000
Fourth offense $2,500
 
   (D)   Stop-work order.
      (1)   In addition to the penalties listed above, if land disturbance
activities are conducted contrary to the provisions of this chapter or accepted
final stormwater management plans, or if the action causes or is likely to
cause imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or
welfare of persons or property, or to the stormwater drainage system or waters
of the state, the city may order the work stopped by notice in writing served
on any person engaged in the doing or causing of such work to be done, and any
such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the city to
proceed with the work. A stop-work order will be posted on the site by the city
and it is unlawful for any person to remove the notice or continue any work on
the site without permission from the city. The city may also undertake or cause
to be undertaken, any necessary or advisable protective measures to prevent
violations of this chapter or to avoid or reduce the effects of noncompliance
herewith. The cost of any such protective measures shall be the responsibility
of the owner of the property upon which the work is being done and the
responsibility of any person carrying out or participating in the work.
      (2)   The city may bring an action under I.C. 34-28-5-1(b), to enforce a
stop-work order against any person who neglects or fails to comply with a stop-
work order.
      (3)   For construction projects that are operating under a SWPPP approved
by the city, if a stop-work order is issued on the grounds that the erosion and
sediment control measures included in the construction plan are not adequate,
the project site owner must be notified in writing of the inadequacies in the
erosion and sediment control measures and the project site owner has 72 hours
after receiving written notice to resolve the identified inadequacies before
the stop-work order can take effect.
      (4)   The 72-hour period to resolve identified inadequacies on a
construction project does not apply if the stop-work order is issued to a
construction project where the project site owner is creating a public health
hazard or safety hazard.
   (E)   Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a
certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or
being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person
has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has
otherwise satisfied the requirements of this chapter as determined by the city.
   (F)   Suspension, revocation, or modification of permits. The city may
suspend, revoke, or modify any existing permit that the violator may also have
been previously granted. A suspended, revoked, or modified permit may be
reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the
remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured
the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon
such conditions as the city may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other
responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such
violations.
   (G)   Suspension of access to the stormwater drainage system.
      (1)   Emergency cease and desist orders.
         (a)   When the city finds that any person has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or
that the person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the person's
violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an actual or threatened
discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or to the environment, the city may issue an order to the violator
directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing
the violator to immediately comply with all ordinance requirements and take
such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations
and/or terminating the discharge.
         (b)   Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under
this section shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering
discharge. In the event of a dischargers failure to immediately comply
voluntarily with the emergency order, the city may commence court action
against such person under I.C. 34-28-5-1(b), to enforce a stop-work order.
         (c)   The city may allow the person to recommence its discharge when
it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated
against the discharger under this chapter. A person that is responsible, in
whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall
submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful
discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the city
within five days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency
cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the violator.
      (2)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
city may, without prior notice, suspend stormwater drainage system discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons or property,
or to the stormwater drainage system or waters of the state if the violator
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the city may
take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
stormwater drainage system or waters of the state, or to minimize danger to
persons.
      (3)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the stormwater drainage system in violation of this chapter may
have their stormwater drainage system access terminated if such termination
would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city will notify a violator of
the proposed termination of its stormwater drainage system access. The violator
may petition the city for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an
offense if the person reinstates stormwater drainage system access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.122 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
   (A)   In addition to any other remedies, should any owner fail to comply
with the provisions of this chapter, the city may, after giving notice and
opportunity for compliance, have the necessary work done, and the owner shall
be required to promptly reimburse the city for all costs of such work.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action as may be necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. Costs
include, but are not limited to, repairs to the stormwater drainage system made
necessary by the violation, as well as those penalties levied by the EPA or
IDEM for violation of the city's NPDES permit, administrative costs, attorney
fees, court costs, and other costs and expenses associated with the enforcement
of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
   (C)   If the amount due for abatement of the violation is not paid within a
timely manner as determined by the decision of the city or by the expiration of
the time in which to file an appeal, the city may commence a court action to
recover the costs assessed under I.C. 34-28-5-1(b).
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
§ 155.123 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeal of notice of violation. Any person to whom any provision of
this chapter has been applied may appeal in writing, not later than 30 days
after the action or decision being appealed from, to the Board of Public Works
and Safety of the city the action or decision whereby any such provision was so
applied. Such appeal shall identify the matter being appealed, and the basis
for the appeal. The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city shall consider
the appeal and make a decision whereby it affirms, rejects or modifies the
action being appealed. In considering any such appeal, the Board of Public
Works and Safety of the city may consider the recommendations of the city staff
and the comments of other persons having knowledge of the matter. In
considering any such appeal, the Board of Public Works and Safety may grant a
variance from the terms of this chapter to provide relief, in whole or in part,
from the action being appealed, but only upon finding that the following
requirements are satisfied:
      (1)   The application of the chapter provisions being appealed will
present or cause practical difficulties for a development or development site;
provided, however, that practical difficulties shall not include the need for
the developer to incur additional reasonable expenses in order to comply with
the chapter; and
      (2)   The granting of the relief requested will not substantially prevent
the goals and purposes of this chapter, nor result in less effective management
of stormwater runoff.
      (3)   Any person who has appealed a violation to the Board of Public
Works and Safety may appeal an adverse decision of the Board to the city court
within 60 days of the Board’s order, all pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-9(e) and (f).
   (B)   Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been
corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation,
or, in the event of an appeal, within five days of the decision of the Board of
Public Works and Safety upholding the decision of the city, then
representatives of the city shall enter upon the subject private property and
are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property, including the commencing of a court action under
I.C. 34-28-5-1(b), to enforce the order of the Board of Public Works and
Safety.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 3-19-2024)
ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
§ 155.140 PURPOSE/INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-
stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This subchapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The
objectives of this subchapter are:
   (A)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
   (B)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
   (C)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this subchapter.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.141 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Employees or designees of the Mayor of the
city.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre
or more, as defined in the construction stormwater general permit. Such
activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading,
excavating, and demolition.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the
storm drain system, except as exempted in §
155.146.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Either of the following:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but
not limited to any conveyances which allow any non stormwater discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain
system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously
allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 327 IAC 15-6.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to
waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group, or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of stormwater.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is
collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
   STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A document which describes the best
management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance
systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.142 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
an authorized enforcement agency.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.143 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement
agency may be delegated in writing by the Director of the authorized
enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of
or in the employ of the agency.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.144 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this subchapter
are minimum standards; therefore, this subchapter does not intend nor imply
that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.145 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.
      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not
limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
stormwater.
      (2)   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge
to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
         (a)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this subchapter: water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs,
non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
swimming pools (if dechlorinated, typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire
fighting activities, irrigation water, street wash water, and any other water
source not containing pollutants.
         (b)   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
         (c)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge but requires, at a
minimum, a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to
the time of the test.
         (d)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.
      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this subchapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.146 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city
may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or
to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United
States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United
States, or to minimize danger to persons.
   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
      (1)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this subchapter
may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce
an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator
of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the
authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the
authorized enforcement agency.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.147 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm
water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof
of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city
prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.148 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have storm
water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
   (B)   Access to facilities.
      (1)   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this subchapter as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this subchapter. If a discharger has security measures in force
which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to
discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law.
      (3)   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement
agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water
discharge.
      (4)   The city has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this
subchapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to
discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if
the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the
permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this subchapter.
      (7)   If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this subchapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this subchapter or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.149 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   The city will establish requirements identifying best management practices
for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of
the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm
drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-
structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise,
which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to
implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural
BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES
permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the
provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the
NPDES permit.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.150 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.151 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S. said
person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and
cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials
said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the
occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-
hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency
in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall
also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to
prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three
years.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.152 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this subchapter, the
authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without
limitation:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      (3)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (B)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation
or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should
the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.153 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within
30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before
the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 30 days
from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal
authority or their designee shall be final.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.154 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 90 days
of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the
authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or
restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or
person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency
or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth
above.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.155 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
   Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If
the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision
of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an
appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and
shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.156 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this subchapter. If a person has
violated or continues to violate the provisions of this subchapter, the
authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.157 COMPENSATORY ACTION.
   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by
this subchapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.158 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this subchapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
§ 155.159 CIVIL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person that has violated or continues to violate this subchapter
shall be liable to civil penalties to the fullest extent of the law, and shall
be subject to a fine of $1,000 dollars per violation per day.
   (B)   The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney's fees,
court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this subchapter,
including sampling and monitoring expenses.
(Ord. 7-2024, passed 6-4-2024)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   REZONING
      
III.   VACATIONS
      
IV.   STREET ADOPTIONS AND CLOSINGS
      
V.   SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVALS
      
VI.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TARGET AREAS
      
VII.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
      
VIII.   CREATION OF FUNDS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1987-3   8-4-1987    Annexing 0.84 acres in Section 27, Township 24 North,
                     Range 8 East.
1988-9   11-1-1988   Annexing 5.33 acres in Section 26, Township 24 North,
                     Range 8 East.
3, 1989  8-1-1989    Annexing 92.6 acres in Section 31, Township 34 North,
                     Range 9 East.
2, 1990  3-6-1990    Annexing approximately seven acres in the Northwest
                     quarter of Section 6, Township 23 North, Range 9 East.
1992-1   5-5-1992    Annexing 3.05 acres along CR 400 East.
                     Annexing 164.67 acres in Section 21, Township 24 North,
3-1992   5-19-1992   Range 8 East, 158.273 acres in Section 27, Township 24
                     North, Range 8 East, and approximately 124 acres in
                     Section 27, Township 24 North, Range 8 East.
1, 1993  3-16-1993   Annexing approximately four acres in Section 31, Township
                     24 North, Range 9 East.
2, 1993  3-16-1993   Annexing 4.37 acres in Section 31, Township 24 North,
                     Range 9 East.
                     Annexing 5.625 acres in the Southwest corner of the
13, 1994 12-6-1994   Southeast quarter of Section 36, Township 24 North, Range
                     8 East.
14, 1994 12-6-1994   Annexing 14.4 acres in the Northwest corner of Section 35,
                     Township 24 North, Range 8 East.
16, 1994 12-6-1994   Annexing 24,000 square feet in Section 36, Township 24
                     North, Range 8 East.
1, 1995  4-4-1995    Annexing 2.89 acres in Section 6, Township 23 North, Range
                     9 East.
2, 1995  4-4-1995    Annexing 3.21 acres in Section 6, Township 23 North, Range
                     9 East.
3, 1995  4-4-1995    Annexing 1.407 acres in the Southwest quarter of Section
                     31, Township 24 North, Range 9 East.
11, 1995 9-19-1995   Annexing three tracts of land, one being six acres, one
                     being 8.88 acres, and one being six acres.
12, 1995 9-19-1995   Annexing the Interstate #69 limited access right-of-way.
15, 1995 11-21-1995  Annexing 12.17 acres in Section 35, Township 24 North,
                     Range 8 East.
7, 1996  11-5-1996   Annexing a tract of land in Section 31, Township 24 North,
                     Range 9 East.
1, 1997  6-3-1997    Annexing 78.42 acres in Section 1, Township 23 North,
                     Range 8 East.
2, 1997  6-3-1997    Annexing 29.180 acres in Section 31, Township 24 North,
                     Range 9 East.
3, 1997  6-3-1997    Annexing 43.8 acres in Section 6, Township 23 North, Range
                     9 East.
1, 2002  3-5-2002    Annexing 6.42 acres in the Northwest quarter of Section 2,
                     Township 23 North, Range 8 East.
2, 2002  4-2-2002    Annexing 20.7 acres in the Northeast quarter of Section 6,
                     Township 23 North, Range 9 East.
7, 2002  9-17-2002   Annexing 29.55 acres in the Southwest quarter of Section
                     36, Township 24 North, Range 8.
                     Annexing approximately 40 acres in the Southeast quarter
9-2006   2-6-2007    of Section 31, Township 24 North, Range 9 East and 7.152
                     acres in the Southeast quarter of Section 31, Township 24
                     North, Range 9 East.
4-2007   9-18-2007   Annexing 5.16 acres in Section 6, Township 23 North, Range
                     9 East.
2-2008   8-5-2008    Annexing 16.5 acres in Section 36, Township 24 North,
                     Range 8 East.
2-2011   6-21-2011   Annexing multiple tracts of land in Section 6, Township 23
                     North, Range 9 East.
3-2011   6-21-2011   Annexing multiple tracts of land in Section 6, Township 23
                     North, Range 9 East.
7-2014   10-21-2014  Annexing 35.84 acres in Section 1 Township 23 North, Range
                     8 East and a 1.19 acre right-of-way.
4-2019   6-18-2019   Annexing 17.88 acres in Section 36, Township 24 North,
                     Range 8 East.
5-2019   8-6-2019    Annexing multiple tracts of land in Section 35, Township
                     24 North, Range 8 East.
6-2020   7-21-2020   Annexing approximately 38 acres in Section 31, Township 24
                     North, Range 9 East.
7-2020   7-21-2020   Annexing approximately 82 acres in Section 31, Township 24
                     North, Range 9 East.
12-2022  1-23-2023   Annexing approximately 40 acres in Section 6, Township 23
                     North, Range 9 East.
13-2022  2-7-2023    Annexing 47.55 acres in Section 6, Township 23 North,
                     Range 9 East.
07-2023  6-6-2023    Annexing 4.18 acres in Section 3, Township 23 North, Range
                     8 East.
15-2023  12-19-2023  Annexing parcel #27-10-01-300- 009.001-016 and #27-10-01-
                     300- 010.002-016 and being named I-1 Industrial.
6-2024   7-2-2024    Annexing approximately 80 acres in Section 32, Township 24
                     North, Range 9 East.
12-2024  7-2-2024    Annexing approximately 14.593 acres located at 3296 S. 400
                     E.
                     Annexing approximately 478.08 acres in Section 1, Township
27-2024  4-1-2025    23 North, Range 8 East, and in Sections 6 and 7, Township
                     23 North, Range 9 East.
02-2025  4-1-2025    Annexing approximately 177.7 acres in Section 36, Township
                     24 North, Range 8 East.
                    
 
TABLE II: REZONING
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
2-1969     3-4-1969    Rezoning 5.9 acres to B-2.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
1970-4     8-4-1970    Rezoning 3.01 acres to R-1.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
1971-8     9-7-1971    Rezoning three acres to B-1.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
2-1973     4-17-1973   Rezoning 6.28 acres to B-1.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
5-1973     6-19-1973   Rezoning 40 acres to B-2.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
1975-3     9-2-1975    Rezoning 21.5 acres to R-1.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
1977-1     4-5-1977    Rezoning two acres to R-1.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
1977-2     5-3-1977    Rezoning four lots from R-1 to B-1.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
1977-5     7-19-1977   Rezoning multiple lots to B-1.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
1978-7     7-18-1978   Rezoning 10.13 acres from R-1 to I-1.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
1978-9     7-18-1978   Rezoning 30.024 acres to R-1.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
1978-16    12-5-1978   Rezoning 203 South Broadway Street from I-1 to B-1.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
1979-7     10-16-1979  Rezoning 40 acres from R-1 to B-1.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
1980-3     5-20-1980   Rezoning two lots from B-2 to I-2.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
1980-9     10-7-1980   Rezoning 1.25 acres.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
1980-10    11-4-1980   Rezoning one acre from R-1 to R-3.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
                       Rezoning property north of the nursing home from R-3 to
1981-7     9-1-1981    R-1.
                       (Prior Code, Rezonings)
4, 1987    10-6-1987   Rezoning 1.25 acres from R-1 to B-1 and one acre from R-
                       3 to B-1.
88-2, 1988 8-2-1988    Rezoning six acres from I-1 to R-3.
5, 1989    7-5-1989    Rezoning 164 feet off Lot 23, Harris First Addition from
                       R-2 to B-2.
9-2009     12-1-2009   Rezoning 2.02 acres from B-2 to R-1.
4-2023     3-7-2023    Rezoning 4.39 acres from I-1 to R-3.
2024-25    10-15-2024  Rezoning 401 S. First Street from R-3 to B-2.
                      
 
TABLE III: VACATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.    Date     Description
No.     Passed
-       9-21-    Vacating Lots 32, 33, and 34 in the Seventh Addition.
        1965     (Prior Code, Vacations)
        10-18-   Vacating an alley running from Fourth Street to Fifth Street
1983-8  1983     and parallel to and in between SR 22 and South “A” Street.
                 (Prior Code, Vacations)
1984-1  4-3-1984 Vacating North Grant Street from the alley to the fence.
                 (Prior Code, Vacations)
7-1988  9-20-    Vacating a portion of the First Addition.
        1988
8, 1989 1-16-    Vacating South “A” Street between Fourth and Fifth Street.
        1990
10A-    5-4-1993 Vacating a portion of Lots 92 and 93.
1993
3-2004  3-16-    Vacating a portion of Section 34, Township 24 North, Range 8
        2004     East.
4-2004  3-16-    Vacating an alley North of 301 East Main Street, which runs
        2004     East and West between Main Street and North “A” Street.
6-2017  10-17-   Vacating a portion of Lots 66 and 67 in the Original Plat.
        2017
14-2020 9-15-    Vacating a portion of an alley in the Harris First Addition.
        2020
05-2022 8-2-2022 Vacating a ten-foot utility easement between Lots 37 and 38 in
                 Meadows at Walnut Creek.
 
TABLE IV: STREET ADOPTIONS AND CLOSINGS
 
 
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
-    10-2-  Accepting the subdivision streets of the South East Plains Addition.
     1984   (Prior Code, Street Acceptances)
1,   1-20-  Accepting subdivision streets in South East Plains, Rock Addition, Colony Woods,
1998 1998   Industrial Park, Meadows at Walnut Creek, and elsewhere.
1-   4-7-   Closing a portion of Second Street North of Main Street to a point on the south
2009 2009   line of the East/West alley between Main Street and North “A” Street to traffic.
           
 
TABLE V: SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVALS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        4-9-1957    Approving South East Plains Addition.
                     (Prior Code, Plats)
-        7-8-1958    Approving Mississinewa Second Addition, Sections 1 and 2.
                     (Prior Code, Plats)
-        8-11-1959   Approving East Mount Subdivision, Section 1.
                     (Prior Code, Plats)
-        6-21-1960   Approving Mississinewa Addition, Section 3.
                     (Prior Code, Plats)
-        9-6-1960    Approving Green Manor, Section 1.
                     (Prior Code, Plats)
-        4-3-1962    Approving Green Manor, Section 1.
                     (Prior Code, Plats)
-        5-8-1968    Approving Northview Addition.
                     (Prior Code, Plats)
-        8-1-1972    Approving Warren Addition.
                     (Prior Code, Plats)
-        5-15-1973   Approving Warren Addition, Section 2.
                     (Prior Code, Plats)
-        5-23-1977   Approving Gorham Addition, Section 1.
                     (Prior Code, Plats)
                    
 
TABLE VI: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TARGET AREAS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
7-1997   9-16-1997   Designating as an Economic Development Target Area 4936
                     South Kay-Bee Drive.
4-1998   - -1998     Designating as an Economic Development Target Area Lots
                     455 through 462 in the First Addition.
6-2001   8-21-2001   Designating as an Economic Development Target Area the
                     Southwest corner of I-69 and SR 22.
8-2001   10-16-2001  Designating as an Economic Development Target Area a part
                     of Section 31, Township 24 North, Range 9 East.
5-2024   3-19-2024   Designating as an Economic Development Target Area 800 E.
                     Main Street.
24-2024  9-17-2024   Designating 2024 Residential Housing Economic Development
                     Target Area.
                    
 
TABLE VII: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2-2006   5-16-2006   Approving a contract and supplemental contract with the
                     Indiana Municipal Power Agency.
3-2007   7-17-2007   Approving a contract and supplemental contract with the
                     Indiana Municipal Power Agency.
11-2019  11-19-2019  Approving amendment to the contract with the Indiana
                     Municipal Power Agency.
 
TABLE VIII: CREATION OF FUNDS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1965-13  8-17-1965   Creating a Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund.
                     (Prior Code, § 36-9-16-3)
4-1988   7-5-1988    Establishing a Special Vehicle Inspection Fund.
6-1989   8-15-1989   Establishing a Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund.
8-1990   12-18-1990  Creating a Promotion of Business Account within the
                     General Fund.
7-1991   9-3-1991    Establishing a Restricted Donation Fund.
11-1995  7-18-1995   Re-establishing the Cumulative Capital Development Fund.
1-2004   1-20-2004   Creating a non-reverting capital fund for the City Park
                     Department.
1-2006   3-7-2006    Establishing a Cumulative Capital Development Fund.
8-2006   11-21-2006  Creating a Rainy Day Fund for the city.
1-2008   2-19-2008   Re-establishing the Cumulative Capital Development Fund.
3-2016   4-27-2016   Establishing an account for LOIT 2016 Special Distribution
                     #257.
8-2018   11-6-2018   Establishing the Christmas Light Fund #404.
9-2018   12-18-2018  Establishing the 2010 Economic Development Revenue Bond
                     Fund #596.
19-2020  12-15-2020  Establishing a City Promotion Fund.
02-2021  4-6-2021    Establishing a Fund for American Rescue Plan Act of 2021
                     (ARP).
04-2021  4-20-2021   Re-establishing the Cumulative Capital Development Fund.
08-2021  5-18-2021   Amending Ord. 02-2021, establishing a Fund for American
                     Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (ARP).
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Section Code Section
I.C. Section        Code Section
1-1-1-5             10.04
1-1-1-7             10.12
1-1-1-8             10.06
1-1-4-5             10.05
1-1-5-1             10.11
1-1-6-1             10.08
1-1-9-1             30.04
1-1-10-1            11.02
4-13-18-5           50.15
4-13-18-6           50.15
4-21.5-3-7          152.48
5-3-1               150.027;
                    150.028
5-10.1-2            32.02
5-10.1-2-1          32.02
5-11-l-27(e)        34.16
5-11-1-27(g)        34.25
5-11-1-27(l)        34.23
5-11-1-27(j)        34.23
5-14-3              50.21
7.1-3-4             111.17
7.1-3-9             111.17
7.1-3-9-4           111.01
7.1-3-14            111.17
7.1-3-31            111.30;
                    111.31
7.1-3-31 et seq.    111.30;
                    111.31
7.1-3-31-14         111.30;
                    111.31
7.1-3-31-15         111.30;
                    111.31
7.1-3-31-16         111.30;
                    111.31
7.1-5-12-3          111.15;
                    111.16
9-4-1-34            Ch. 73 Sched. II
9-13                Ch. 70
9-13-2              70.01;
                    Ch. 73 Sched. II
9-20                Ch. 73 Sched. V
9-21-4-14           Ch. 73 Sched. III
9-21-5-3            Ch. 73 Sched. I
13-18-27            155.101
14-28-1             154.44
14-28-1-26          154.44
14-32               155.005
14-34               155.060;
                    155.080,
22-9-1-4 et seq.    94.02
22-9-1-12.1         32.03
22-9.5-1 et seq.    94.01
22-9.5-2-2          94.02
22-9.5-2-3          94.02
22-9.5-2-4          94.02
22-9.5-2-8          94.02
22-9.5-2-9          94.02
22-9.5-2-11         94.02
22-9.5-2-13         94.02
22-9.5-3            94.03
22-9.5-3 et seq.    94.10
22-9.5-4-8          94.11
22-9.5-5            94.02
22-9.5-5-1          94.03
22-9.5-6            94.02;
                    94.11
22-11-14            93.40
22-12               152.48
22-12-1-4           152.45
22-12-1-5           152.45
22-12-1-7           152.45
22-12-1-14          152.45
22-12-1-16          152.45
22-12-1-17          152.45
22-12-1-18          152.45
22-12-1-22(b)(12)   152.49
22-12-1-26          152.45
22-12-2-7           152.45
22-13               152.48
22-13-2-3(b)        152.49
22-13-2-6           152.45
22-13-2-7           152.48
22-13-2-7(b)        152.49
22-13-2-9           152.45
22-13-2-11          152.45
22-14               152.48
22-15               152.48
22-15-3             152.46
22-15-4             152.45
25-37-1-2 et seq.   110.01
31-6-4-15.7         130.03
31-36-19-27         130.03
32-25               150.014
32-30-6-61          91.01
33-35-1-1           31.07
34-28-5             130.04
                    155.121;
34-28-5-1(b)        155.122;
                    155.123
34-28-5-4           150.999
34-28-5-4(c)        72.99
35-46-3-0.5(6)      92.02
35-46-3-12          92.99
35-48-2             32.35
36-1-3 et seq.      91.01
36-1-3-1            30.01
36-1-3-1 et seq.    30.01
36-1-3-4            150.004
36-1-3-8(a)(10)     10.99
36-1-5-1            10.14
36-1-5-4            152.49
36-1-6              130.04
36-1-6-4            152.48
36-1-6-9(e) and (f) 155.123
36-4-6-3            30.02
36-4-6-6            30.03
36-5-2-2            10.15
36-7-1-2            150.014
36-7-3              150.011
                    151.003;
36-7-4              151.088;
                    154.01
36-7-4-200          31.01
36-7-4-200 et seq.  31.01
36-7-4-500          151.001;
                    151.088
36-7-4-600          Ch. 151
36-7-4-602          151.007;
                    151.030
36-7-4-700 series   150.014
36-7-8-9            152.48
36-7-9-1            152.01
36-7-9-1 et seq.    152.01-
                    152.03
36-7-9-2            152.01;
                    152.02
36-7-9-4            152.02
36-7-9-5 et seq.    152.02
36-7-10.1           91.02;
                    91.99
36-7-14-1           31.02
36-7-14-6.1         31.02
36-7-47-700         150.004
36-8-3-7            31.06
36-8-3-20           31.06
36-8-17             152.47
36-9-2-7            153.01
36-9-2-15           Ch. 53
36-9-23-1           Ch. 54
36-9-30-12          Ch. 52
36-10-3             31.04
36-10-3-1           31.04
                    
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2024 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2024 Code Section
1-1-9-1            30.04
1-1-10-1           11.02
5-10.1-2-1         32.02
7.1-3-9-4          111.01
9-4-1-28(a)        70.01
9-4-1-28(b)        70.02
9-4-1-28(c)        70.03
9-4-1-28(d)        70.04
9-4-1-34           Ch. 73, Sched. II
9-4-1-58           Ch. 73, Sched. I
9-4-1-71           Ch. 73, Sched. III
9-4-1-75           Ch. 73, Sched. IV
9-4-1-125          Ch. 73, Sched. V
22-9-1-12.1        32.03
33-10.1-1-3        31.07
36-1-3-1           30.01
36-1-3-1(a)        31.05
36-4-6-3           30.02
36-4-6-6(a)        30.03
36-4-6-6(b)        11.01
36-7-4-200         31.01
36-7-4-500         151.001
                   151.028—
                   151.030;
                   151.045;
                   151.047—
                   151.049;
36-7-4-600         151.051;
                   151.052;
                   151.070;
                   151.071;
                   151.087—
                   151.091
36-7-4-600-101     151.002
36-7-4-600-103     151.003
36-7-4-600-104     151.004
36-7-4-600-106     151.005
36-7-4-600-107     151.006
36-7-4-600-701     151.007
36-7-4-600-801     151.008;
                   151.020
36-7-4-600-202     151.021
36-7-4-600-203     151.022
36-7-4-600-204     151.023
36-7-4-600-205     151.024
36-7-4-600-206     151.025
36-7-4-600-207     151.026
36-7-4-600-208     151.027
36-7-4-600-306     151.050
36-7-4-600-403     151.072;
                   151.999
36-7-4-600-404     151.073
36-7-4-600-501     151.085
36-7-4-600-502     151.086
36-7-4-600-508     151.092
36-7-4-600-601     151.105
36-7-4-600-602     151.106
36-7-4-600-603     151.107
36-7-4-600-604     151.108
36-7-9-1           152.01
36-7-10-3          91.02;
                   91.99
36-7-14-1          31.02
36-8-3-7           31.06
36-8-3-20          31.06
36-9-2-7           153.01
36-9-2-7(i)        153.99
36-9-2-15(b)(1)    53.36
36-9-2-15(b)(2)    53.37
36-9-2-15(b)(3)    53.38
36-9-2-15(b)(4)    53.39
36-9-2-15(b)(5)    53.35
36-9-2-15(b)(6)    53.40
36-9-2-15(b)(7)    53.41
36-9-2-15(b)(8)    53.42
36-9-2-15(b)(9)    53.43
36-9-2-15(b)(10)   53.44
36-9-2-15(b)(11)   53.99
36-9-2-15(b)(12)   53.45
36-9-16-3          TSO Table VIII
36-9-23-1-1.1      54.001
36-9-23-1-1.2      54.002
36-9-23-1-1.3      54.003
36-9-23-1-1.4      54.004
36-9-23-1-1.5      54.005
36-9-23-1-1.6      54.006
36-9-23-1-2.1      54.020
36-9-23-1-2.2      54.021
36-9-23-1-2.3      54.022
36-9-23-1-2.4      54.023
36-9-23-1-2.5      54.024
36-9-23-1-2.6      54.025
36-9-23-1-3        54.026
36-9-23-1-4.1      54.040
36-9-23-1-4.2      54.040
36-9-23-1-4.3      54.041
36-9-23-1-4.4      54.041
36-9-23-1-4.5      54.042
36-9-23-1-4.6      54.043
36-9-23-1-4.7      54.044
36-9-23-1-4.8      54.045
36-9-23-1-4.9      54.045
36-9-23-1-4.10     54.045
36-9-23-1-4.11     54.045
36-9-23-1-4.12     54.045
36-9-23-1-4.13     54.046
36-9-23-1-4.14     54.047
36-9-23-1-4.15     54.048
36-9-23-1-5.1      54.060
36-9-23-1-5.2      54.060
36-9-23-1-5.3      54.060;
                   54.999
36-9-23-1-5.4      54.060
36-9-23-1-5.5      54.061
36-9-23-1-5.6      54.062
36-9-23-1-5.7      54.063
36-9-23-1-5.8      54.064
36-9-23-1-5.9      54.065
36-9-23-1-5.10     54.066
36-9-23-1-5.11     54.067
36-9-23-1-5.14     54.070
36-9-23-1-6.1      54.071
36-9-30-12(a)      52.01
36-9-30-12(b)      52.02
36-9-30-12(c)      52.03
36-9-30-12(d)      52.04
36-9-30-12(e)      52.05
36-9-30-12(f)      52.06
36-9-30-12(g)      52.07
36-9-30-12(h)      52.08
36-9-30-12(i)      52.09
36-9-30-12(j)(2)   52.11
36-9-30-12(j)(3)   52.12
36-9-30-12(k)      52.99
36-10-3-1(b)       90.01
36-10-3-1(b)(1)    90.02
36-10-3-1(b)(2)    90.03
36-10-3-1(b)(3)    90.04
36-10-3-1(b)(4)    90.05
36-10-3-1(b)(5)    90.06
36-10-3-1(b)(6)    90.07
36-10-3-1(b)(7)    90.08
36-10-3-1(b)(8)    90.09
36-10-3-1(b)(9)    90.99
Appendix V         10.14
Plats              TSO Table V
Rezonings          TSO Table II
Street Acceptances TSO Table IV
Vacations          TSO Table III
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
2        2-1-1952    32.02
1967-2   2-2-1967    151.001
1980-3   9-6-1980    31.06
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
6, 1909    - -         111.01
30         11-30-1892  111.01
32         1-13-1893   111.01
—        5-10-1904   Ch. 73 Sched. III
291        10-25-1907  91.02;
                       91.99
1911-4     3-28-1911   111.01
—        8-10-1915   Ch. 73 Sched. I;
                       Ch. 73 Sched. III
—        6-26-1923   53.35—
                       53.45
—        8-14-1923   152.01
—        3-24-1925   152.01
—        4-27-1926   152.01
—        12-26-1933  53.35—
                       53.45
—        9-25-1934   53.35—
                       53.45
—        4-27-1943   Ch. 73 Sched. III
—        9-11-1945   53.35—
                       53.45
628        9-27-1949   91.02;
                       91.99
654        7-22-1952   52.08
655        8-12-1952   153.01;
                       153.99
678        11-24-1953  53.35—
                       53.45
689        9-14-1954   53.35—
                       53.45
                       151.002—
                       151.008;
                       151.020—
                       151.030;
                       151.045—
                       151.056;
712        4-2-1957    151.070—
                       151.073;
                       151.085—
                       151.092;
                       151.105—
                       151.108;
                       151.999
—        4-9-1957    TSO Table V
722        3-25-1958   Ch. 73 Sched. V
—        7-8-1958    TSO Table V
—        7-14-1959   Ch. 73 Sched. III
—        8-11-1959   TSO Table V
10         5-13-1960   10.15
—        6-21-1960   TSO Table V
746        8-2-1960    Ch. 73 Sched. III
—        9-6-1960    TSO Table V
—        6-6-1961    Ch. 73 Sched. I;
                       Ch. 73 Sched. II
—        4-3-1962    TSO Table V
1963-13    9-3-1963    53.35—
                       53.45
1964-1     1-21-1964   52.07
1964-4     7-21-1964   31.01
—        9-15-1964   Ch. 73 Sched. III
                       151.002—
                       151.008;
                       151.020—
                       151.030;
                       151.045—
                       151.056;
1964-9     9-15-1964   151.070—
                       151.073;
                       151.085—
                       151.092;
                       151.105—
                       151.108;
                       151.999
                       151.002—
                       151.008;
                       151.020—
                       151.030;
                       151.045—
                       151.056;
1965-4     3-2-1965    151.070—
                       151.073;
                       151.085—
                       151.092;
                       151.105—
                       151.108;
                       151.999
                       31.05;
1965-12    8-17-1965   90.01—
                       90.09;
                       90.99
1965-13    8-17-1965   TSO Table VIII
—        9-21-1965   TSO Table III
65-16      9-21-1965   153.01;
                       153.99
                       151.002—
                       151.008;
                       151.020—
                       151.030;
                       151.045—
                       151.056;
1966-2     3-1-1966    151.070—
                       151.073;
                       151.085—
                       151.092;
                       151.105—
                       151.108;
                       151.999;
                       152.01
66-9       8-16-1966   111.01
1966-7     8-2-1966    52.09
                       151.002—
                       151.008;
                       151.020—
                       151.030;
                       151.045—
                       151.056;
1967-7     6-6-1967    151.070—
                       151.073;
                       151.085—
                       151.092;
                       151.105—
                       151.108;
                       151.999
—        5-8-1968    TSO Table V
                       151.002—
                       151.008;
                       151.020—
                       151.030;
                       151.045—
                       151.056;
1968-5     8-6-1968    151.070—
                       151.073;
                       151.085—
                       151.092;
                       151.105—
                       151.108;
                       151.999
1968-13    11-6-1968   91.02;
                       91.99
                       52.01—
1-1969     1-7-1969    52.06;
                       52.99
2-1969     3-4-1969    TSO Table II
15         1-1-1970    10.15
                       151.002—
                       151.008;
                       151.020—
                       151.030;
                       151.045—
                       151.056;
—        8-4-1970    151.070—
                       151.073;
                       151.085—
                       151.092;
                       151.105—
                       151.108;
                       151.999
1970-4     8-4-1970    TSO Table II
1971-8     9-7-1971    TSO Table II
—        8-1-1972    TSO Table V
2-1973     4-17-1973   TSO Table II
—        5-15-1973   TSO Table V
1974-11    9-3-1974    53.35—
                       53.45
1975-3     9-2-1975    TSO Table II
1976-1     3-2-1976    52.11;
                       52.12
1976-4     7-12-1976   53.35—
                       53.45
1976-7     8-17-1976   53.35—
                       53.45
1977-1     4-5-1977    TSO Table II
1977-2     5-3-1977    TSO Table II
—        5-23-1977   TSO Table V
1977-5     7-19-1977   TSO Table II
                       151.002—
                       151.008;
                       151.020—
                       151.030;
                       151.045—
                       151.056;
1977-12    11-1-1977   151.070—
                       151.073;
                       151.085—
                       151.092;
                       151.105—
                       151.108;
                       151.999
1-1978     2-21-1978   53.35—
                       53.45
1978-8     7-5-1978    53.35—
                       53.45
1978-7     7-18-1978   TSO Table II
1978-9     7-18-1978   TSO Table II
10-1978    9-5-1978    31.07
1978-16    12-5-1978   TSO Table II
                       151.002—
                       151.008;
                       151.020—
                       151.030;
                       151.045—
                       151.056;
1978-18    12-5-1978   151.070—
                       151.073;
                       151.085—
                       151.092;
                       151.105—
                       151.108;
                       151.999
                       31.05;
1979-2     8-7-1979    90.01—
                       90.09;
                       90.99
1979-7     10-16-1979  TSO Table II
20         1-1-1980    10.15
1980-3     5-20-1980   TSO Table II
1980-4     7-15-1980   53.35—
                       53.45
                       151.002—
                       151.008;
                       151.020—
                       151.030;
                       151.045—
                       151.056;
1980-8     9-16-1980   151.070—
                       151.073;
                       151.085—
                       151.092;
                       151.105—
                       151.108;
                       151.999
1980-9     10-7-1980   TSO Table II
1980-10    11-4-1980   TSO Table II
                       151.002—
                       151.008;
                       151.020—
                       151.030;
                       151.045—
                       151.056;
1980-11    11-4-1980   151.070—
                       151.073;
                       151.085—
                       151.092;
                       151.105—
                       151.108;
                       151.999
                       53.35—
1981-3     2-3-1981    53.45;
                       53.99
                       54.001—
                       54.006;
                       54.020—
                       54.026;
                       54.040—
2-1981     2-24-1981   54.048;
                       54.060—
                       54.067;
                       54.070;
                       54.071;
                       54.999
1981-7     9-1-1981    TSO Table II
1981-8     11-3-1981   52.10
                       151.002—
                       151.008;
                       151.020—
                       151.030;
                       151.045—
                       151.056;
1982-1     6-1-1982    151.070—
                       151.073;
                       151.085—
                       151.092;
                       151.105—
                       151.108;
                       151.999
                       54.001—
                       54.006;
                       54.020—
                       54.026;
                       54.040—
3-1982     7-6-1982    54.048;
                       54.060—
                       54.067;
                       54.070;
                       54.071;
                       54.999
2-1983     4-5-1983    30.01
1983-6     8-16-1983   Ch. 73 Sched. V
7-1983     10-4-1983   152.01
1983-8     10-18-1983  TSO Table III
1984-1     4-3-1984    TSO Table III
—        10-2-1984   TSO Table IV
25         1-1-1985    10.15
2, 1985    3-5-1985    31.02
                       151.002—
                       151.008;
                       151.020—
                       151.030;
                       151.045—
                       151.056;
1985-4     11-19-1985  151.070—
                       151.073;
                       151.085—
                       151.092;
                       151.105—
                       151.108;
                       151.999
                       93.20—
1-1987     6-16-1987   93.25;
                       93.99
1987-3     8-4-1987    TSO Table I
4, 1987    10-6-1987   TSO Table II
4-1988     7-5-1988    TSO Table VIII
88-2, 1988 8-2-1988    TSO Table II
7-1988     9-20-1988   TSO Table III
1988-9     11-1-1988   TSO Table I
5, 1989    7-5-1989    TSO Table II
3, 1989    8-1-1989    TSO Table I
6-1989     8-15-1989   TSO Table VIII
7, 1989    12-19-1989  Ch. 74 Sched. II
8, 1989    1-16-1990   TSO Table III
2, 1990    3-6-1990    TSO Table I
5-90, 1990 7-17-1990   152.02
                       93.01—
7, 1990    12-4-1990   93.06;
                       93.99
8-1990     12-18-1990  TSO Table VIII
7-1991     9-3-1991    TSO Table VIII
8, 1991    9-3-1991    31.03
9, 1991    12-3-1991   50.01
4, 1992    - -1992     71.07;
                       71.99
1992-1     5-5-1992    TSO Table I
2          5-19-1992   151.027
3-1992     5-19-1992   TSO Table I
                       150.001—
                       150.014;
                       150.025—
                       150.029;
                       150.040—
                       150.049;
5-1992     7-21-1992   150.060—
                       150.063;
                       150.075—
                       150.078;
                       150.090—
                       150.095;
                       150.999
3-1993     3-2-1993    33.01
1, 1993    3-16-1993   TSO Table I
2, 1993    3-16-1993   TSO Table I
10A-1993   5-4-1993    TSO Table III
                       91.15—
9, 1993    5-18-1993   91.20;
                       91.99
14, 1993   10-17-1993  50.02
7, 1994    - -1994     93.41;
                       93.99
6, 1994    7-19-1994   111.02;
                       130.01
13, 1994   12-6-1994   TSO Table I
14, 1994   12-6-1994   TSO Table I
16, 1994   12-6-1994   TSO Table I
1, 1995    4-4-1995    TSO Table I
2, 1995    4-4-1995    TSO Table I
3, 1995    4-4-1995    TSO Table I
                       91.35—
4, 1995    5-2-1995    91.39;
                       91.99
11-1995    7-18-1995   TSO Table VIII
11, 1995   9-19-1995   TSO Table I
12, 1995   9-19-1995   TSO Table I
15, 1995   11-21-1995  TSO Table I
1, 1996    3-19-1996   32.35—
                       32.41
2, 1996    3-19-1996   32.55—
                       32.69
7, 1996    11-5-1996   TSO Table I
                       152.20—
8, 1996    12-17-1996  152.32;
                       152.99
1, 1997    6-3-1997    TSO Table II
2, 1997    6-3-1997    TSO Table I
3, 1997    6-3-1997    TSO Table I
7-1997     9-16-1997   TSO Table VI
8, 1997    12-2-1997   71.08;
                       71.99
4-1998     - -1998     TSO Table VI
1, 1998    1-20-1998   TSO Table IV
2, 1998    4-21-1998   31.08
5, 2001    8-21-2001   Ch. 73 Sched. I;
                       Ch. 73 Sched. II
6-2001     8-21-2001   TSO Table VI
7, 2001    9-18-2001   152.05
8-2001     10-16-2001  TSO Table VI
                       153.15—
2001-12    2-5-2002    153.19;
                       153.99
1, 2002    3-5-2002    TSO Table I
2, 2002    4-2-2002    TSO Table I
6-2002     8-6-2002    32.15—
                       32.22
7, 2002    9-17-2002   TSO Table I
1-2004     1-20-2004   TSO Table VIII
2-2004     2-17-2004   32.01
3-2004     3-16-2004   TSO Table III
4-2004     3-16-2004   TSO Table III
1-2006     3-7-2006    TSO Table VIII
2-2006     5-16-2006   TSO Table VII
8-2006     11-21-2006  TSO Table VIII
9-2006     2-6-2007    TSO Table I
3-2007     7-17-2007   TSO Table VII
4-2007     9-18-2007   TSO Table I
1-2008     2-19-2008   TSO Table VIII
2-2008     8-5-2008    TSO Table I
                       130.01—
5-2008     8-5-2008    130.04;
                       130.99
1-2009     4-7-2009    TSO Table IV
9-2009     12-1-2009   TSO Table II
1-A-2010   5-4-2010    31.04
                       Ch. 73 Sched. III;
2-2010     7-6-2010    Ch. 73 Sched. IV;
                       Ch. 74 Sched. II
                       110.01—
1-2011     3-1-2011    110.07;
                       110.99
2-2011     6-21-2011   TSO Table I
3-2011     6-21-2011   TSO Table I
2-2012     5-15-2012   93.40;
                       93.99
6-2012     11-20-2012  30.02
6-2014     6-3-2014    94.01—
                       94.11
7-2014     10-21-2014  TSO Table I
                       154.01—
                       154.13;
                       154.25—
                       154.27;
12-2014    12-8-2014   154.40—
                       154.47;
                       154.60—
                       154.65;
                       154.99
9-2015     1-5-2016    51.01—
                       51.07
3-2016     4-27-2016   TSO Table VIII
11-2016    12-20-2016  33.02
                       34.01—
12-2016    12-20-2016  34.03;
                       34.15—
                       34.32
10-2016    1-3-2017    91.01;
                       91.99
                       51.20;
1-2017     2-21-2017   51.25—
                       51.32
6-2017     10-17-2017  TSO Table III
8-2018     11-6-2018   TSO Table VIII
9-2018     12-18-2018  TSO Table VIII
10-2018    1-15-2019   54.068;
                       54.069
4-2019     6-18-2019   TSO Table I
5-2019     8-6-2019    TSO Table I
11-2019    11-19-2019  TSO Table VII
3-2020     4-21-2020   72.01—
                       72.11
6-2020     7-21-2020   TSO Table I
7-2020     7-21-2020   TSO Table I
                       151.046;
13 2020    8-18-2020   151.053—
                       151.056;
                       151.999
14-2020    9-15-2020   TSO Table III
                       53.01—
18-2020    11-17-2020  53.09;
                       53.99
19-2020    12-15-2020  TSO Table VIII
02-2021    4-6-2021    TSO Table VIII
04-2021    4-20-2021   TSO Table VIII
08-2021    5-18-2021   TSO Table VIII
12-2021    9-21-2021   152.04
                       92.01—
11-2021    10-12-2021  92.12;
                       92.99
9-2021     10-19-2021  50.15—
                       50.21
13-2022    2-27-2023   TSO Table I
                       130.15—
1-2022     4-5-2022    130.18;
                       130.99
2-2022     5-17-2022   52.10
2022-03    6-21-2022   53.20—
                       53.22
2022-04    6-21-2022   51.21—
                       51.24
05-2022    8-2-2022    TSO Table III
                       71.01—
10 2022    11-1-2022   71.06;
                       Ch. 74 Sched. I;
                       Ch. 74 Sched. II
11-2022    12-6-2022   31.06
12 2022    1-3-2023    152.03
01-2023    2-7-2023    111.15—
                       111.17
4-2023     3-7-2023    TSO Table II
07-2023    6-6-2023    TSO Table I
10-2023    9-5-2023    Ch. 73 Sched. II
15-2023    12-19-2023  TSO Table I
                       155.001—
                       155.008;
                       155.020—
                       155.026;
                       155.040—
                       155.046;
01-2024    3-19-2024   155.060—
                       155.063;
                       155.080—
                       155.084;
                       155.100—
                       155.109;
                       155.120—
                       155.123
03-2024    3-19-2024   31.06
04-2024    3-19-2024   Adopting Ordinance
5-2024     3-19-2024   TSO Table VI
6-2024     7-2-2024    TSO Table I
7-2024     6-4-2024    155.140—
                       155.159
10-2024    6-4-2024    111.30
                       112.01—
11-2024    7-2-2024    112.06;
                       112.99
12-2024    7-2-2024    TSO Table I
24-2024    9-17-2024   TSO Table VI
2024-25    10-15-2024  TSO Table II
26-2024    11-6-2024   151.007,
                       151.027
27-2024    4-1-2025    TSO Table I
02-2025    4-1-2025    TSO Table I
4-2025     5-20-2025   152.45—
                       152.50
5-2025     3-18-2025   111.31
6-2025     4-1-2025    151.120—
                       151.131
7-2025     5-6-2025    30.02
                      
 
