HILLSBORO, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 2024-4, passed 10-14-2024
State Legislation current through 2025 A.L.S. Pamphlet #3
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NUMBER: 2018 - 8
TOWN OF HILLSBORO, FOUNTAIN COUNTY, INDIANA
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO RE-CODIFICATION OF THE HILLSBORO TOWN CODE
   WHEREAS, the Town of Hillsboro previously re-codified and re-adopted its
Code of Ordinances in  unknown year ; and
   WHEREAS, additional Ordinances and changes in the Code of Ordinances have
been done since  unknown year ; and
   WHEREAS, the Town has determined that re-codification of its Town Code is in
the best interests of the Town; and
   WHEREAS, I.C. § 36-1-5-6 authorizes a legislative body to restate or reenact
its ordinances without meeting the legal conditions for the effectiveness of an
original ordinance.
   IT IS HEREBY ESTABLISHED AND ORDAINED by the Town Council of Hillsboro,
Indiana as follows:
   The Hillsboro Town Code is re-codified and re-stated effective January 1,
2019 as set out in the attached "Hillsboro Town Code."
ALL OF WHICH IS PASSED AND ADOPTED THIS  12  DAY OF  November , 2018.
      Hillsboro Town Council
       /s/
      Council-President
       /s/
      Council member
       /s/
      Council member
ATTEST:
/s/
Clerk-Treasurer
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.17   Jurisdiction
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles,
chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the “Hillsboro Town
Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances” or
“code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto and newly enacted laws.
      (1)   Any previously existing law or amendment thereto reenacted by this
code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it had not been repealed by
this code.
      (2)   All rules and regulations adopted under laws reenacted in this code
shall remain in full force and effect unless repealed or amended subsequent to
the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application
or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in
law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town Council.
      COUNCIL. The Town Council.
      COUNTY. Fountain County.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      TOWN. The Town of Hillsboro, Indiana
      STATE. The State of Indiana.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING.  
         (a)   Include printing, lithographing or other modes of representing
words and letters.
         (b)   Where the written signature of a person is required, the terms
mean the proper handwriting of the person, or the person’s mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(I.C. 1-1-4-5)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable.
If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
   (D)   The repeal of a section or amendment stating that the provisions of a
chapter, subchapter or section are severable as provided in division (B) above
does not affect the operation of division (B) with respect to that chapter,
subchapter or section.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; on the effective date of that ordinance or following the
effective date, the rights, powers, duties or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers and rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall
not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under
the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture or
liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(I.C. 36-5-2-2)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the town and subsequently amended, the previous code section
number shall be indicated in the history by “(Prior Code, §      ).”
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.17 JURISDICTION.
   Unless otherwise provided in this code, this code shall apply to all acts
performed within the corporate limits of the town. Provisions of this code
shall also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits of the town and
up to the limits provided by law, where the law confers power on the town to
regulate such particular acts outside the corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 10.02)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent violations,
except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and parking.
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   TOWN COUNCIL
      
32.   TOWN OFFICIALS
      
33.   FINANCE
      
34.   ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
      
35.   TOWN POLICIES
      
36.   POLICE
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
30.01   Compensation of officers and employees
   
30.02   Town Hall kept locked
   
30.03   Equal opportunity in employment and programs
   
30.04   Drug-free workplace
§ 30.01 COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Officers and employees of the town shall be compensated at a rate as
established by Town Council ordinance from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 20.01)
§ 30.02 TOWN HALL KEPT LOCKED.
   The Town Hall shall be kept locked except at times that the utility office
is open, during special meetings or by permission of the Council.
(Ord. 81-13, passed 12-14-1981)
§ 30.03 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY IN EMPLOYMENT AND PROGRAMS.
   (A)   The town will comply with Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
The town will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment
because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin or sexual orientation.
The town will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed
and that employees are treated during employment, without regard to their race,
color, religion, sex or national origin. Such action shall include, but not be
limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer;
recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or
other forms of compensation; and selection for training.
   (B)   In all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on
behalf of the town, the town will state that all qualified applicants will
receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion,
sex or national origin.
   (C)   The town will comply with the provisions of the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967, as amended, and will not discriminate against
applicants or employees aged 40 to 70 in hiring, promotion, discharge, pay,
fringe benefits and other aspects of employment.
   (D)   The town will comply with the Equal Pay Act of 1963, and will not
discriminate on the basis of sex in the payment of wages to persons performing
substantially equal work.
   (E)   The town will comply with Executive Order 11246, as amended, in
connection with all federal contracts held by the town.
   (F)   The town will comply with §§ 503 and 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973, and will not discriminate against applicants and employees on the basis
of handicap. The town will make reasonable accommodations to permit persons
with a handicap or disability to perform the essential functions of the job.
   (G)   The town will comply with § 402 of the Vietnam Era Veterans
Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974 and will not discriminate against and
provide affirmative action to employ and advance in employment qualified
Vietnam-era veterans and qualified disabled veterans.
   (H)   The town will comply with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
The town will not discriminate on the basis of race, color or national origin
in programs or activities for which the town has received or is receiving
federal financial assistance.
   (I)   The authority and responsibility for administering and enforcing this
section shall be that of the Town Clerk-Treasurer and the Town Superintendent.
(Res. 95-03, passed 12-11-1995)
§ 30.04 DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE.
   (A)   Notice is hereby given that the Town Council resolves to provide all
current and future employees of the town with a drug-free workplace within
which to work.
   (B)   The policy statement providing that the town shall be a drug-free
workplace which is attached to the ordinance codified herein as Exhibit “A”
(the “policy statement”) is hereby adopted as the official policy of the town.
   (C)   All current employees of the town shall be provided a copy of the
policy statement promptly upon passage of this section. Future employees of the
town shall be provided a copy of the policy statement upon commencement of
employment with the town. Additional copies of the policy statement shall be
kept in the various work areas maintained by the town and shall be made
available to any employee of the town promptly upon request.
   (D)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer, the Town Marshal and the Town
Superintendent, in consultation with the Town Attorney, shall establish and
maintain a drug-free awareness program within the workplaces of the town.
(Res. 95-02, passed 11-13-1995)
CHAPTER 31: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Term of office; elections
   
31.002   Residency required
   
31.003   Powers and duties
   
31.004   President
Meetings; General Provisions
   
31.015   Open meetings
   
31.016   Executive sessions
   
31.017   Notice of meetings
   
31.018   Agenda
   
31.019   Record of meetings
   
31.020   Quorum
   
31.021   Clerk of Council; tie-breaking vote
Meetings; Rules of Procedure
   
31.035   Presiding officer
   
31.036   Quorum for conducting business
   
31.037   Absence of President
   
31.038   Duties of the President
   
31.039   Duties of Council members
   
31.040   Seconding of motions required
   
31.041   Withdrawal of motions
   
31.042   Division of questions
   
31.043   Record of motions
   
31.044   Vote
   
31.045   Precedence of motion
   
31.046   Undebatable motions and exceptions to order
   
31.047   Motion to adjourn
   
31.048   Motion to postpone indefinitely
   
31.049   Motion to amend
   
31.050   Amendments
   
31.051   Reconsideration
   
31.052   Policy regarding public participation at Town Council meetings
   
31.053   Reports, communications, petitions and the like
   
31.054   Adoption of Robert’s Rules of Order, Revised
   
31.055   Temporary suspension of rules; amendment of rules
Ordinances and Resolutions
   
31.070   Majority vote; when required
   
31.071   Two-thirds vote; when required
   
31.072   Date of adoption; publication
   
31.073   Public records available
   
31.074   Record of ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 TERM OF OFFICE; ELECTIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in I.C. 36-5-2-3(b), (c), (d) or (e), the
term of office of a member of the Town Council is four years, beginning at noon
January 1 after the member’s election and continuing until the member’s
successor is elected and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 21.01)
   (B)   (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 3-10-7-2.9, the members of the Town Council
shall stand for election in the year 2019 (or holdover in office under Article
15, Section 3 of the Indiana Constitution) and shall serve for the terms as
follows:
         (a)   At large seat 1, term expiring in 2019.
         (b)   At large seat 2, term expiring in 2019.
         (c)   At large seat 3, term expiring in 2019.
      (2)   An election for the successors to the members of the Town Council
at large seats one and two elected in the year 2019 will occur in the year 2022
and shall serve for a term of four years. An election for the successor to the
member of the Town Council at large seat three elected in the year 2019 will
occur in the year 2020. Thereafter all terms for members of the Town Council
shall be for four years and until a successor is elected and qualified.
      (3)   This division (B) will be effective for the elections beginning in
2019, forward, until this section is repealed pursuant to I.C. 3-10-7-2.9(d),
as amended or supplemented.
(Ord. 2018-6, passed 10-8-2018)
§ 31.002 RESIDENCY REQUIRED.
   (A)   A member of the Town Council must reside within:
      (1)   The town as provided in Indiana Constitution, Article 6, § 6; and
      (2)   The district from which the member was elected, if applicable.
   (B)   A member of the Town Council who is elected by the voters of a
district forfeits office if the member ceases to be a resident of the district.
   (C)   A member of the Town Council who is elected by the voters of the
entire town but is elected or selected as a candidate from a district forfeits
office if the member ceases to be a resident of the district.
   (D)   An at-large member of the Town Council forfeits office if the member
ceases to be a resident of the town.
(I.C. 36-5-2-6)
(Prior Code, § 21.02)
§ 31.003 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Town Council may:
   (A)   Adopt ordinances and resolutions for the performance of functions of
the town;
   (B)   Purchase, hold and convey any interest in property for the use of the
town; and
   (C)   Adopt and use a common seal.
(Prior Code, § 21.03)
§ 31.004 PRESIDENT.
   The Town Council shall select one of its members to be its President for a
definite term, which may not exceed his or her term of office as a member of
the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 21.04)
MEETINGS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.015 OPEN MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Town Council shall be held in accordance with state law
regarding open meetings, being I.C. 5-14-1.5.
(Prior Code, § 21.10)
§ 31.016 EXECUTIVE SESSIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section, PUBLIC OFFICIAL means a person:
      (1)   Who is a member of a governing body of a public agency; or
      (2)   Whose tenure and compensation are fixed by law and who executes an
oath.
   (B)   Executive sessions may be held only in the following instances:
      (1)   Where authorized by federal or state statute;
      (2)   For discussion of strategy with respect to any of the following:
         (a)   Collective bargaining;
         (b)   Initiation of litigation or litigation that is either pending or
has been threatened specifically in writing;
         (c)   The implementation of security systems; or
         (d)   The purchase or lease of real property by the Town Council up to
the time a contract or option to purchase or lease is executed by the parties;
however, all such strategy discussions must be necessary for competitive or
bargaining reasons and may not include competitive or bargaining adversaries.
      (3)   Interviews with industrial or commercial prospects or agents of
industrial or commercial prospects by the Department of Commerce, the State
Development Finance Authority, the Film Commission, the State Business
Modernization and Technology Corporation or Economic Development Commissions;
      (4)   To receive information about and interview prospective employees;
      (5)   With respect to any individual over whom the governing body has
jurisdiction:
         (a)   To receive information concerning the individual’s alleged
misconduct; and
         (b)   To discuss, before a determination, the individual’s status as
an employee, a student or an independent contractor who is a physician.
      (6)   For discussion of records classified as confidential by state or
federal statute;
      (7)   To discuss before a placement decision an individual student’s
abilities, past performance, behavior and needs;
      (8)   To discuss a job performance evaluation of individual employees.
This division (B)(8) does not apply to a discussion of the salary, compensation
or benefits of employees during a budget process;
      (9)   When considering the appointment of a public official, to do the
following:
         (a)   Develop a list of prospective appointees;
         (b)   Consider applications;
         (c)   Make one initial exclusion of prospective appointees from
further consideration; and
         (d)   Notwithstanding I.C. 5-14-3-4(b)(12), the Town Council may
release and shall make available for inspection and copying in accordance with
I.C. 5-14-3-3 identifying information concerning prospective appointees not
initially excluded from further consideration. An initial exclusion of
prospective appointees from further consideration may not reduce the number of
prospective appointees to fewer than three unless there are fewer than three
prospective appointees. Interviews of prospective appointees must be conducted
at a meeting that is open to the public.
      (10)   To train school board members with an outside consultant about the
performance of the role of its members as public officials; or
      (11)   To prepare or score examinations used in issuing licenses,
certificates, permits or registrations under I.C. 25.
   (C)   A final action must be taken at a meeting open to the public.
   (D)   Public notice of executive sessions must state the subject matter by
specific reference to the enumerated instance or instances for which executive
sessions may be held under division (B) above. The requirements stated in §
31.019 for memoranda and minutes being made available to the public is modified
as to executive sessions in that the memoranda and minutes must identify the
subject matter considered by specific reference to the enumerated instance or
instances for which public notice was given. The Town Council shall certify by
a statement in the memoranda and minutes of the Town Council that no subject
matter was discussed in the executive session other than the subject matter
specified in the public notice.
   (E)   The Town Council may not conduct an executive session during a
meeting, except as otherwise permitted by applicable statute. A meeting may not
be recessed and reconvened with the intent of circumventing this division (E).
(Prior Code, § 21.11)
§ 31.017 NOTICE OF MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Town Council shall be held at a time and place
established by the Town Council.
   (B)   Public notice of the date, time and place of any meetings, executive
sessions or of any rescheduled or reconvened meeting shall be given by the Town
Council by posting a copy of the notice at the principal office of the Town
Council, or if no such office exists, at the building where the meeting is to
be held.
(Prior Code, § 21.12)
§ 31.018 AGENDA.
   (A)   The Town Council, when utilizing an agenda, shall post a copy of the
agenda at the entrance to the location of the meeting prior to the meeting. A
rule, regulation, ordinance or other final action adopted by reference to
agenda number or item alone is void.
   (B)   The Town Council shall designate a person who shall prepare the agenda
for each meeting.
(Prior Code, § 21.13)
§ 31.019 RECORD OF MEETINGS.
   As the meeting progresses, the following memoranda shall be kept:
   (A)   The date, time and place of the meeting;
   (B)   The members of the Town Council recorded as either present or absent;
   (C)   The general substance of all matters proposed, discussed or decided;
   (D)   A record of all votes taken, by individual members if there is a roll
call; and
   (E)   Any additional information required under I.C. 5-14-1.5-3.5 or I.C. 5-
14.
(Prior Code, § 21.14)
§ 31.020 QUORUM.
   A majority of all the elected members of the Town Council constitutes a
quorum.
(Prior Code, § 21.15)
§ 31.021 CLERK OF COUNCIL; TIE-BREAKING VOTE.
   (A)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is the Clerk of the Town Council.
   (B)   Whenever the Town Council has an even number of members for any
reason, the Clerk- Treasurer is an ex officio member for the purpose of casting
the deciding vote to break a tie.
(Prior Code, § 21.16)
MEETINGS; RULES OF PROCEDURE
§ 31.035 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Council President shall take the chair at the hour appointed, or
to which the Council shall have adjourned, and shall immediately call the
members to order; whereupon, the Clerk of Council shall proceed to call the
roll of members.
   (B)   If a quorum is present, the Clerk of Council shall so announce and the
Council shall proceed with the order of business.
(Prior Code, § 21.20)
§ 31.036 QUORUM FOR CONDUCTING BUSINESS.
   (A)   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire Council, including
the Council President. A quorum shall be necessary to transact the business of
the Town Council.
   (B)   If no quorum is present, the Council shall not thereby stand
adjourned, but the members present shall adjourn or recess the Council by a
majority vote.
(Prior Code, § 21.21)
§ 31.037 ABSENCE OF PRESIDENT.
   (A)   At any meeting of the Council where a majority shall be assembled, and
if the President is temporarily absent, but within or near the community, the
Clerk of Council shall preside and call the roll, whereupon the Council shall
elect a Temporary Chairperson from its membership.
   (B)   In the event that the absence of the President shall be of a more
permanent nature, a President Pro Tem shall be elected.
(Prior Code, § 21.22)
§ 31.038 DUTIES OF THE PRESIDENT.
   (A)   The President shall serve as the Chair, shall preserve order and
decorum and may speak to points of order in preference to other members and
shall decide all questions of order subject to appeal.
   (B)   If the President refuses to allow the Council members to exercise
their right to appeal a decision of the Chair, the Council members may consider
and pass upon the matter in spite of the Chair’s failure to grant them appeal.
   (C)   The President shall have the power to require the Council room to be
cleared, or to have any disorderly person or persons ejected, in case of any
disturbances or disorderly conduct which prevent the meeting from being
continued in an orderly manner.
   (D)   Nothing in this code shall preclude the President from making or
seconding a motion, or from voting on any matters coming before the Council.
(Prior Code, § 21.23)
§ 31.039 DUTIES OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   While the President is stating the motion, or deciding a point of
order, the members shall be seated and no member shall leave the Council room
during the session without permission from the presiding officer.
   (B)   Every member, prior to his or her speaking, making a motion or
seconding the same, shall address the presiding officer and shall not proceed
with his or her remarks until recognized and named by the Chair.
   (C)   A member so recognized by the Chair shall confine himself or herself
to the question under debate.
   (D)   No member shall speak more than once on the same question, except by
permission of the Chair, and then not until every other member desiring to
speak shall have had an opportunity to do so.
   (E)   No member shall speak longer than five minutes at any one time, except
by consent of the Chair.
   (F)   While a member is speaking, no member shall hold any private
discussion, nor pass between the speaker and the Chair.
   (G)   A member, when called to order by the Chair, shall thereupon
discontinue speaking. The order or ruling of the Chair shall be binding and
conclusive, subject only to the right to appeal.
   (H)   Any member may appeal to the Council from a ruling of the Chair and,
if the appeal is seconded, the member making the appeal may briefly state his
or her reason for the same, and the Chair may briefly explain his or her
ruling; but there shall be no debate on the appeal and no other member shall
participate in the discussion. The Chair shall then put the question, “Shall
the decision of the Chair be overruled?” Otherwise, it shall be sustained.
   (I)   The right of a member to address the Council on a question of personal
privilege shall be limited to cases in which his or her integrity, character or
motives are assailed, questioned or impugned.
(Prior Code, § 21.24)
§ 31.040 SECONDING OF MOTIONS REQUIRED.
   No motion shall be put or debated in the Council or in committee unless it
be seconded. When a motion is seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding
officer before debate.
(Prior Code, § 21.25)
§ 31.041 WITHDRAWAL OF MOTIONS.
   After a resolution or a motion is stated by the President, it shall be
deemed to be in the possession of the Council, but it may be withdrawn by the
maker thereof with or without the consent of the Council member seconding the
motion prior to the call for the vote by the President.
(Prior Code, § 21.26)
§ 31.042 DIVISION OF QUESTIONS.
   If any question under consideration contains several distinct propositions,
the Council, by a majority vote of the members present, may divide such
questions.
(Prior Code, § 21.27)
§ 31.043 RECORD OF MOTIONS.
   In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered in the journal, the
name of the member moving and seconding the same shall be entered.
(Prior Code, § 21.28)
§ 31.044 VOTE.
   (A)   The ayes and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances
and on all propositions to create any liability against the town, or for the
expenditure or appropriation of its money, and upon any question and in all
other cases at the request of any member of the Council. When the Clerk of
Council has commenced to call the roll of the Council for the taking of a vote
by “Ayes” and “Nays,” all debate on the question before the Council shall be
deemed concluded, and during the taking of the vote a member shall be permitted
to briefly explain his or her vote and shall respond to the calling of his or
her name by the Clerk of Council by answering “Aye” or “Nay,” as the case may
be.
   (B)   The names of each member of the Council shall be listed on the
official copy of every ordinance passed indicating specifically the names of
those voting “Aye” and those voting “Nay.”
   (C)   An abstention is neither an affirmative vote, nor a negative vote.
Regardless of the number of abstentions, and except as otherwise provided by
law, an affirmative vote of the majority of the Council members is required to
pass a motion, ordinance, resolution or other action of the Town Council.
   (D)   The President shall announce the result of the Council’s vote and such
votes shall be entered in the journal of the proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 21.29)
§ 31.045 PRECEDENCE OF MOTION.
   When a question is before the Council, no motion shall be received, except
as specified in this section, and which shall have precedence in the following
order:
   (A)   To fix the time to which to adjourn;
   (B)   To adjourn;
   (C)   To take a recess;
   (D)   To raise a question of privilege;
   (E)   To call for the orders of the day;
   (F)   To lay on the table;
   (G)   To call for the previous question;
   (H)   To postpone to a certain time;
   (I)   To refer to committee;
   (J)   To amend;
   (K)   To postpone indefinitely; and
   (L)   To the main motion.
(Prior Code, § 21.30)
§ 31.046 UNDEBATABLE MOTIONS AND EXCEPTIONS TO ORDER.
   The motion to adjourn or to lay on the table shall be decided without
debate, and the motion to fix the time to which to adjourn and the motion to
adjourn shall always be in order, except:
   (A)   When a member is in possession of the floor;
   (B)   When the roll call votes are being called;
   (C)   While the members are voting;
   (D)   When adjournment was the last preceding motion; or
   (E)   When it has been decided that the “previous question” shall be taken.
(Prior Code, § 21.31)
§ 31.047 MOTION TO ADJOURN.
   A motion to adjourn cannot be amended; but a motion to adjourn to a given
day or time shall be open to amendment and debate.
(Prior Code, § 21.32)
§ 31.048 MOTION TO POSTPONE INDEFINITELY.
   When a question is postponed indefinitely, it shall not be taken up again
before the next regular meeting.
(Prior Code, § 21.33)
§ 31.049 MOTION TO AMEND.
   A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but a motion to amend an
amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained.
(Prior Code, § 21.34)
§ 31.050 AMENDMENTS.
   Only one amendment at a time may be offered to any question before the
Council. The vote shall first be taken on the amendment and, if the amendment
passes, then further amendments may be proposed. Finally, a vote shall be taken
on the principal motion as finally amended.
(Prior Code, § 21.35)
§ 31.051 RECONSIDERATION.
   (A)   A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time during the same
meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A motion for
reconsideration, once having been made and decided in the negative, shall not
be renewed. A matter once having been decided and a motion to reconsider such
matter having been defeated, it may nonetheless come before the Council at a
future time by way of a motion to rescind or as a new motion. If the Chair
determines that new facts are to be presented to the Council, or that there is
a likelihood that the Council will reverse its previous decision, the Chair
shall rule the motion in order. If a motion is continuously brought before the
Council and rejected, the Chair may rule its reintroduction under a motion to
rescind or as a new motion to be out of order.
   (B)   No motion to reconsider the approval or denial of the recommendation
of an advisory body required to hold public hearings shall be entertained
except at the same meeting at which the original action was taken or after the
matter has been referred to the advisory body for a further hearing and
recommendation.
   (C)   A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by members who voted
on the prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered, unless otherwise
provided by law; provided, however, that where a motion has received a majority
vote in the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on the ground that a
greater number of affirmative votes is required by statute for the passage or
adoption of such motion, then is such case a motion to reconsider may be made
and seconded only by those who voted in the affirmative on such question to be
reconsidered, so long as the issue presented is the same, no new information is
forthcoming, and the rights of third parties have not intervened.
(Prior Code, § 21.36)
§ 31.052 POLICY REGARDING PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AT TOWN COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Right of public to participate.
      (1)   Members of the public shall have a reasonable right to participate
in any matter being considered by the Town Council.
      (2)   Members of the public shall be provided with the opportunity to
participate in Council meetings, and the Council shall make reasonable efforts
to comply with the American with Disabilities Act and accommodate any other
special needs of the public.
      (3)   Members of the public shall have the right to bring before the
Council issues of public concern.
      (4)   This does not apply to executive sessions of the Town Council held
under I.C. 5-14-1.5, the Indiana Open Door Law, as it is from time to time
amended.
   (B)   Guidelines.
      (1)   Members of the public wishing to address the Council shall have
signed in prior to the start of the Council meeting.
      (2)   If a citizen wants to discuss a topic not currently on the
Council's agenda, they must contact the Hillsboro Clerk’s Office and request
the topic be added to the next scheduled meeting agenda at least 48 hours prior
to that meeting.
      (3)   Comments will be limited to current meeting’s agenda.
      (4)   Comments will be limited to two minutes per speaker with a maximum
of three speakers on each topic.
      (5)   Each speaker may only address one topic per Council meeting.
      (6)   Total time limit for public comments will be set at 30 minutes per
Council meeting. Council President may, with a simple majority approval of the
Council, extend the time limit for public comments. All other rules stated
above will remain in effect.
   (C)   Contempt and disorder in the Council room.
      (1)   No person shall use violent or contemptuous language, behave in a
disorderly manner, or refuse to obey the orders of the Presiding Officer in the
Council room while the Common Council is in session.
      (2)   Any person who violates this provision will be removed from the
premises immediately by the Town Marshal of Hillsboro.
(Res. 2018-02, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 31.053 REPORTS, COMMUNICATIONS, PETITIONS AND THE LIKE.
   All communications, reports, petitions or any other papers addressed to the
Council shall be made available to the Clerk of Council prior to the meeting.
The Clerk of Council shall endeavor to distribute copies or read such material
to the members of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 21.38)
§ 31.054 ADOPTION OF ROBERT’S RULES OF ORDER, REVISED.
   The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in the latest published
edition of Robert’s Rules of Order, Revised shall govern the Council in all
cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with
the ordinances of the town including these rules, or the statutes of the state.
(Prior Code, § 21.39)
§ 31.055 TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF RULES; AMENDMENT OF RULES.
   The rules of the Council may be temporarily suspended, altered or amended,
by concurrence of a majority vote of all the Council members then in office.
(Prior Code, § 21.40)
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
§ 31.070 MAJORITY VOTE; WHEN REQUIRED.
   (A)   A requirement that an ordinance, resolution or other action of the
Town Council be passed by a majority vote means at least a majority vote of all
the elected members.
   (B)   A majority vote of the Town Council is required to pass an ordinance
unless a greater vote is required by statute.
(Prior Code, § 21.50)
§ 31.071 TWO-THIRDS VOTE; WHEN REQUIRED.
   (A)   A requirement that an ordinance, resolution or other action of the
Town Council be passed by a two-thirds vote means at least a two-thirds vote of
all the elected members.
   (B)   A two-thirds vote of all the elected members, after unanimous consent
of the members present to consider the ordinance, is required to pass an
ordinance of the Town Council on the same day or at the same meeting at which
it is introduced.
   (C)   Division (B) above does not apply to the following:
      (1)   A zoning ordinance or an amendment to a zoning ordinance adopted
under I.C. 36-7; or
      (2)   An ordinance to increase the number of Town Council members adopted
under I.C. 36-5-2-4.2, unless the ordinance also establishes new legislative
body districts.
(Prior Code, § 21.51)
§ 31.072 DATE OF ADOPTION; PUBLICATION.
   (A)   An ordinance, order or resolution passed by the Town Council is
considered adopted when it is signed by the President of Council. If required
by statute, an adopted ordinance, order or resolution must be promulgated or
published before it takes effect.
   (B)   An ordinance prescribing a penalty for a violation must, before it
takes effect, be published in the manner prescribed by I.C. 5-3-1 unless:
      (1)   It is published under I.C. 36-1-5; or
      (2)   It declares an emergency requiring its immediate effectiveness and
is posted in:
         (a)   One public place in each district in the town; or
         (b)   A number of public places in the town equal to the number of
Town Council members, if the town has abolished legislative body districts
under I.C. 36-5-2-10.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a zoning ordinance or amendment to a
zoning ordinance, or a resolution approving a comprehensive plan, that is
adopted under I.C. 36-7.
(Prior Code, § 21.52)
§ 31.073 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
(Prior Code, § 21.53)
§ 31.074 RECORD OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Within a reasonable time after an ordinance of the Town Council is
adopted, the Clerk-Treasurer shall record it in a book kept for that purpose.
The record must include:
      (1)   The signature of the President of Council;
      (2)   The attestation of the Clerk-Treasurer; and
      (3)   The date of each recorded item.
   (B)   The record or a certified copy of it constitutes presumptive evidence
of the adoption of the ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 21.54)
CHAPTER 32: TOWN OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Travel expense
Clerk-Treasurer
   
32.15   Residency requirement
   
32.16   Election; term of office
   
32.17   Powers and duties
   
32.18   Deputies and employees of the Clerk-Treasurer
   
32.19   Office space for the Clerk-Treasurer
   
32.20   Authority to pay Duke bills before penalty date
Town Marshal
   
32.35   Creation; appointment; compensation
   
32.36   Removal from office; discipline
   
32.37   Powers and duties
Utility Employees
   
32.50   Generally
Town Attorney
   
32.65   Generally
Cross-reference:
   Finance, see
Chapter 33
   Police, see
Chapter 36
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 TRAVEL EXPENSE.
   The Town Council shall allow the prevailing rate per mile travel expense to
be paid to officials in event of duties taking said officials beyond town
limits.
(Ord. 80-16, passed 9-13-1980)
CLERK- TREASURER
§ 32.15 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.
   The Clerk-Treasurer must reside within the town as provided in Indiana
Constitution Article 6, § 6. The Clerk-Treasurer forfeits office if the Clerk-
Treasurer ceases to be a resident of the town.
(Prior Code, § 22.01)
§ 32.16 ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Election. The Clerk-Treasurer shall be elected under I.C. 3-10-6 or
I.C. 3-10-7 by the voters of the whole town.
   (B)   Term of office. Except as provided in I.C. 36-5-6-3(c) or (d), the
term of office of the Clerk-Treasurer is four years, beginning at noon on
January 1 after election and continuing until a successor is elected and
qualified.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 3-10-7-2.9, the current Town Clerk-Treasurer shall
stand for election in the year 2019 (or holdover in office under Article 15,
Section 3 of the Indiana Constitution) and serve for a one-year term and take
office on the first day of January following his or her election (or holdover
in office), with the term ending December 31, 2020. An election for the
successor to the Town Clerk-Treasurer elected in the year 2019 will occur in
the year 2020 and shall serve for a term of four years. Thereafter all terms
for office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be for four years and until a
successor is elected and qualified.
      (2) Division (B)(1) above will be effective for the elections beginning
in 2019, forward, until this section is repealed pursuant to I.C. 3-10-7-2.9
(d), as amended or supplemented.
(Prior Code, § 22.02) (Ord. 2018-6, passed 10-8-2018)
§ 32.17 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer is both the Town Clerk and the Town Fiscal
Officer.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer may administer oaths, take depositions and take
acknowledgments of instruments required by statute to be acknowledged.
   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall do the following:
      (1)   Receive and care for all town money and pay the money out only on
order of the Town Council;
      (2)   Keep accounts showing when and from what sources the Clerk-
Treasurer has received town money and when and to whom the Clerk-Treasurer has
paid out town money;
      (3)   Prescribe payroll and account forms for all town offices;
      (4)   Prescribe the manner in which creditors, officers and employees
shall be paid;
      (5)   Manage the finances and accounts of the town and make investments
of town money;
      (6)   Prepare for the Town Council the budget estimates of miscellaneous
revenue, financial statements and the proposed tax rate;
      (7)   Maintain custody of the town seal and the records of the Town
Council;
      (8)   Issue all licenses authorized by statute and collect the fees fixed
by ordinance;
      (9)   Serve as Clerk of the Town Council by attending its meetings and
recording its proceedings;
      (10)   Administer oaths, take depositions and take acknowledgment of
instruments that are required by statute to be acknowledged, without charging a
fee; and
      (11)   Perform all other duties prescribed by statute.
(Prior Code, § 22.03)
§ 32.18 DEPUTIES AND EMPLOYEES OF THE CLERK-TREASURER.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall appoint the number of deputies and employees
needed for the effective operation of the office, with the approval of the Town
Council. The Clerk-Treasurer’s deputies and employees serve at the Clerk-
Treasurer’s pleasure.
   (B)   If the town owns a utility and the Clerk-Treasurer is directly
responsible for the billing and collection of that utility’s rates and charges,
the Clerk-Treasurer shall appoint those employees who are also responsible for
that billing and collection. These employees serve at the Clerk-Treasurer’s
pleasure.
   (C)   (1)   The Clerk-Treasurer may hire or contract with competent
attorneys or legal research assistants on terms the Clerk-Treasurer considers
appropriate.
      (2)   Appropriations for the salaries of attorneys and legal research
assistants employed under this division (C) shall be approved in the annual
budget.
(Prior Code, § 22.04)
§ 32.19 OFFICE SPACE FOR THE CLERK-TREASURER.
   If office space exists in a building owned or leased by the town, the Town
Council shall provide suitable office space for the Clerk-Treasurer and staff
and records of the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 22.05)
§ 32.20 AUTHORITY TO PAY DUKE BILLS BEFORE PENALTY DATE.
   In view of the fact that Duke of Indiana claims are now being received
bearing penalty dates preceding town regular monthly meetings of the Town
Council, the Clerk-Treasurer is now given authority to pay such Duke bills
before penalty date when it falls before the regular monthly meeting, with
later presentation at meeting for action on such payment.
(Res. passed - -)
TOWN MARSHAL
§ 32.35 CREATION; APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION.
   There is hereby created the office of Town Marshal. The Town Marshal shall
be employed and appointed by the Council as provided by law. Upon the
appointment of the Town Marshal, he or she shall be consistent with the powers
and duties of a Town Marshal as provided by law. The Town Marshal shall be paid
such compensation as shall be determined by the Council annually, on or before
December 31, to take and be in effect for the next succeeding calendar year. In
the event of the resignation or other termination of the employment of the Town
Marshal during the year, his or her salary shall be deemed payable on a monthly
basis, shall be pro-rated to the end of the month during which such termination
of employment occurs, and he or she shall not be paid for any month in which no
services are performed. The salary of the Town Marshal shall be in addition to
any allowance for expenses.
(Prior Code, § 22.10)
§ 32.36 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; DISCIPLINE.
   The Town Marshal serves at the pleasure of the Town Council. However, before
terminating or suspending a Town Marshal who has been employed by the town for
more than six months after completing the minimum basic training requirements
adopted by the Law Enforcement Training Board under I.C. 5-2-1-9, the Town
Council must conduct the disciplinary removal and appeals procedures prescribed
by I.C. 36-8 for town fire and police departments.
(Prior Code, § 22.11)
§ 32.37 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Town Marshal is the chief police officer of the town and has the
powers of other law enforcement officers in executing the orders of the Town
Council and enforcing laws.
   (B)   The Town Marshal or his or her deputy:
      (1)   Shall serve all processes directed to him or her by the Town
Council;
      (2)   Shall arrest without process all persons who commit an offense
within his or her view, take them before a court having jurisdiction and detain
them in custody until the cause of the arrest has been investigated;
      (3)   Shall suppress breaches of the peace;
      (4)   May, if necessary, call the power of the town to his or her aid;
      (5)   May execute search warrants and arrest warrants; and
      (6)   May pursue and jail persons who commit an offense.
(Prior Code, § 22.12)
UTILITY EMPLOYEES
§ 32.50 GENERALLY.
   All municipal utilities now owned by or hereafter acquired by the town shall
be operated and administered by and through the Council. The Council shall hire
such employees or administrators to conduct the business of the utilities as it
may from time to time deem necessary or convenient.
(Prior Code, § 22.20)
TOWN ATTORNEY
§ 32.65 GENERALLY.
   There is hereby created and established for the town the Department of Law,
which shall consist of the Town Attorney.
   (A)   The Town Attorney shall be a person holding an unlimited license to
practice law within the state, and the residence of such attorney shall not be
a condition of employment.
   (B)   The Town Attorney shall be employed by the Council by virtue of a
contract of employment, either oral or written, but in no event shall such
contract of employment be for a term longer than a calendar year, but shall be
renewable from year to year unless terminated by action of the Council, with
reasonable notice of termination communicated to the Town Attorney.
   (C)   Compensation of the Town Attorney shall be determined annually as are
the salaries of other town officials, as hereinafter set out.
   (D)   In the event of the termination of employment of the Town Attorney,
whether voluntary or involuntary, he or she shall be deemed to be paid on a
semi-annual basis and compensation to the Town Attorney shall be pro-rated to
the end of the payment period in which such employment is terminated.
   (E)   The annual compensation of the Town Attorney shall be in such amount
and for the sole purpose of the general retaining of the services of the Town
Attorney, his or her attendance at and participation in Council meetings for
general town purposes as may be requested by the Council, his or her services
in preparation of general town ordinances and resolutions, and the rendering of
routine legal advice, whether in person or by telephone. The Town Attorney
shall be entitled to additional payment, over and above such annual
compensation, for actual expenses advanced on behalf of the town, postage,
photocopy, long-distance telephone or other unusual office expenses advanced or
assumed by the attorney’s private law office. The services of the attorney in
performance of functions on behalf of the town utilities, conduct of
litigation, negotiation of disputes and the like shall be the subject of
separate compensation agreements.
(Prior Code, § 22.30)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE
Section
General Provisions and Disbursement of Funds
   
33.01   Allowance of claims
   
33.02   Warrants for payment of claims
   
33.03   Claim payments in advance of allowance
   
33.04   Transfer of funds
   
33.05   Promotion of town businesses
   
33.06   Town credit card account
Budgets
   
33.20   Preparation of annual budget estimates
   
33.21   Preparation and approval of ordinance fixing tax rate and making annual
appropriations
   
33.22   Increase or decrease of appropriations after approval of ordinance
Funds
   
33.35   Cash Reserve Fund
   
33.36   Rainy Day Fund
   
33.37   Fund 257
   
33.38   Public Safety Fund
   
33.39   CEDIT Fund
   
33.40   Local Road and Streets Matching Grant Fund
   
33.41   ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Grant Fund
Written Billing Policy Procedure; Utilities
   
33.50   General provisions
Cash Handling Policy
   
33.65   Purpose
   
33.66   Scope
   
33.67   Definitions
   
33.68   Internal controls standards for cash handling
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS
§ 33.01 ALLOWANCE OF CLAIMS.
   (A)   Except as provided in section §
33.04, the Town Council or a board of the town may allow a claim:
      (1)   Only at a meeting of the Town Council; and
      (2)   Only if the claim was filed in the manner prescribed by I.C. 5-11-
10-2 at least five days before the meeting.
(Prior Code, § 23.03)
§ 33.02 WARRANTS FOR PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
   (A)   As used in this section, CLAIM means a bill or an invoice submitted
for goods or services.
   (B)   Except as provided in §
33.04, a warrant for payment of a claim against a town may be issued only if
the claim is:
      (1)   Supported by a fully itemized invoice or bill under I.C. 5-11-10-
1.6;
      (2)   Filed with the town fiscal officer;
      (3)   Certified by the fiscal officer before payment that each invoice is
true and correct; and
      (4)   Allowed by the Town Council or by the board of the town having
jurisdiction over allowance of the payment of the claim.
   (C)   The certification by the fiscal officer under division (B)(3) above
must be on a form prescribed by the State Board of Accounts.
(Prior Code, § 23.04)
§ 33.03 CLAIM PAYMENTS IN ADVANCE OF ALLOWANCE.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to make claim payments in advance of
Town Council allowance for the following types of expenses:
      (1)   Property or services purchased or leased from the federal
government or an agency or a political subdivision of the federal government;
      (2)   License fees or permit fees;
      (3)   Insurance premiums;
      (4)   Utility payments or utility connection charges;
      (5)   Federal grant programs if advance funding is not prohibited and the
contracting party provides sufficient security for the amount advanced;
      (6)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute;
      (7)   Maintenance agreements or service agreements;
      (8)   Lease agreements or rental agreements;
      (9)   Principal and interest payments on bonds;
      (10)   Payroll;
      (11)   State, federal or county taxes;
      (12)   Expenses that must be paid because of emergency circumstances; and
      (13)   Expenses described in an ordinance.
   (B)   Each payment of expenses under this section must be supported by a
fully itemized invoice or bill and certification by the fiscal officer.
   (C)   The Town Council shall review and allow the claim at the Council’s
next regular or special meeting following the preapproved payment of the
expense.
(Prior Code, § 23.05)
§ 33.04 TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
   Notwithstanding I.C. 8-14-1 and I.C. 8-14-2, the town may transfer money
distributed to the town from the Motor Vehicle Highway Account under I.C. 8-14-
1, the Local Road and Street Account under I.C. 8-14-2, or the Motor Vehicle
Highway Account under I.C. 8-14-1 and the Local Road and Street Account under
I.C. 8-14-2 to any other town fund after the passage of an ordinance or a
resolution by the Town Council that specifies the amount of the transfer, the
funds involved, the date of the transfer and the general purpose of the
transfer; however, the total amount of all money transferred by the town under
this section may not exceed $40,000.
(Prior Code, § 23.06)
§ 33.05 PROMOTION OF TOWN BUSINESS.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the “Promotion of Town Business
Ordinance.”
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to pay properly submitted claims for
promotional expenses of the town, including, but not limited to, rental of
meeting places, meals, decorations, memorabilia, commemorative objects, awards,
expenses incurred in promoting industrial, commercial and residential
development and tourism, expenses incurred developing relationships with other
governmental units, expenses for membership dues, assessments, conference
registrations and other assistance in local, regional, state and national
associations of a civic, educational or governmental nature which have as their
purpose for the betterment and improvement of municipal operations, the direct
expenses incurred for travel, meals and lodging in conjunction with municipal
business or meetings or organizations to which the municipality belongs and any
other expenses of a civic or governmental nature deemed by the Town Council to
be in the best interest of the town.
(Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-11-2016)
§ 33.06 TOWN CREDIT CARD ACCOUNT.
   (A)   The Town Council authorizes the Clerk-Treasurer to open a town credit
card account with a total limit of $10,000.00.
   (B)   The Town Council authorizes the Town Clerk-Treasurer, Town Deputy
Marshal/Marshal and Town Superintendent to have a town credit card with their
names on it, and once possessed are responsible for possession of town credit
card.
   (C)   For all credit cards maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall maintain an accounting system or log recording the name of each
individual to which a credit card is issued and the date credit card is
returned to the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (D)   The Town Council and Clerk Treasurer require all receipts for all
charges to the credit card within 72 hours of purchase.
   (E)   Charges made on any account shall be only for items which are
authorized.
   (F)   Credit cards and accounts shall not be used to bypass or avoid the
accounting system of the town, and charges to the credit cards and accounts
shall be paid by the Clerk-Treasurer only on the basis of original receipts and
from appropriate budgeted funds, accounts and line items pursuant to the claims
procedures of the town.
   (G)   The Town Council requires the town’s general sales tax exemption
certificate to be used.
   (H)   The Town Council authorizes the town credit card/s to be used when
traveling (late conference registration fees, airfare, rental car, rental car
gas, hotel, parking, toll road fees, meals (no alcohol).
   (I)   The Town Council authorizes payment of an annual fee to the credit
card company, if applicable.
   (J)   No credit card or account shall be used to obtain cash advances by an
employee.
   (K)   No credit card or account issued in the name of the town shall be used
for private purchases. Any employee who fails to provide a receipt for a
purchase shall be personally liable to the town for the full amount of such
charge and shall be subject to discipline by the town.
(Ord. 2016-012, passed 10-10-2016)
BUDGETS
§ 33.20 PREPARATION OF ANNUAL BUDGET ESTIMATES.
   Before the publication of notice of budget estimates required by I.C. 6-1.1-
17-3, the town shall formulate a budget estimate for the ensuing budget year in
the following manner, unless the town provides by ordinance for a different
manner:
   (A)   Each department head shall prepare for his or her department an
estimate of the amount of money required for the ensuing budget year, stating
in detail each category and item of expenditure he or she anticipates;
   (B)   The town fiscal officer shall prepare an itemized estimate of revenues
available for the ensuing budget year, and shall prepare an itemized estimate
of expenditures for other purposes above the money proposed to be used by the
departments;
   (C)   The President of Council shall meet with the department heads and the
fiscal officer to review and revise their various estimates; and
   (D)   After the President’s review and revision, the fiscal officer shall
prepare for the President a report of the estimated department budgets,
miscellaneous expenses and revenues necessary or available to Finance the
estimates.
(Prior Code, § 23.30)
§ 33.21 PREPARATION AND APPROVAL OF ORDINANCE FIXING TAX RATE AND MAKING ANNUAL
APPROPRIATIONS.
   The town fiscal officer shall present the report of budget estimates to the
Town Council under I.C. 6-1.1-17. After reviewing the report, the Town Council
shall prepare an ordinance fixing the rate of taxation for the ensuing budget
year and an ordinance making appropriations for the estimated department
budgets and other town purposes during the ensuing budget year. The Town
Council, in the appropriation ordinance, may change any estimated item from the
figure submitted in the report of the fiscal officer. The Town Council shall
promptly act on the appropriation ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 23.31)
§ 33.22 INCREASE OR DECREASE OF APPROPRIATIONS AFTER APPROVAL OF ORDINANCE.
   After the passage of the appropriation ordinance, the Town Council may make
further or additional appropriations by ordinance, unless their result is to
increase the tax levy set under I.C. 6-1.1-17. The Town Council may, by
ordinance, decrease any appropriation set by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 23.32)
FUNDS
§ 33.35 CASH RESERVE FUND.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall establish a Cash Reserve Fund within the
Water Works Utility Fund. The Clerk-Treasurer is further directed to transfer
to the Cash Reserve Fund all surplus earnings as prescribed by I.C. 8-1.5-3-11.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer is further authorized to re-establish the
Depreciation Fund for the water utility and deposit 5% of the revenue of the
water utility each month to said fund as set out in I.C. 8-1.5- 3-11.
(Ord. 81-9, passed 11-9-1981)
§ 33.36 RAINY DAY FUND.
   (A)   Creation of Rainy Day Fund. There is hereby established a Rainy Day
Fund to receive transfers of unused and unencumbered funds raised by a general
or special tax levy on taxable property within the town whenever the purpose of
such tax levy has been fulfilled and an unused and unencumbered balance
remains.
   (B)   Purposes of the fund. The funds deposited in the Rainy Day Fund may be
used for the operation of the town and its various departments, when the town
does not have sufficient levies or funds to pay such costs, including, but not
limited to, salaries and wages, cost of services, supplies, equipment, capital
improvements, repairs and similar expenditures.
   (C)   Transfers to fund. On or before December 31 of each year, the Town
Council shall determine the amount, if any unused and unencumbered funds
available to be transferred to the Rainy Day Fund, which transfer may not
exceed more than 10% of the town’s total budget for that fiscal year.
   (D)   Appropriations. The Town Council may authorize the expenditure of
funds from the Rainy Day Fund by appropriations made in the same manner as
other funds are appropriated that receive tax moneys, upon making a finding
that the proposed use of the funds is consistent with the intent of the fund.
(Ord. 04-02, passed 3-8-2004)
§ 33.37 FUND 257.
   Fund 257 be established and the funds received as part of the special
distribution be allocated as follows: 75% be placed into Fund 257 and used for
local road and streets budgeted for budget year 2017 and 25% be placed into the
Town Rainy Day Fund and be used as allowed per town Ord. 04-02 (codified in §
33.36 above).
(Ord. 2016-007, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 33.38 PUBLIC SAFETY FUND.
   (A)   A fund is hereby established, within the various funds of the town, to
be known as the Public Safety Fund, which fund shall be maintained by the
Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   Moneys shall be deposited to the fund as follows: in each calendar
year, during the existence of the Public Safety Fund, all moneys received from
the County Auditor sharing taxes shall be deposited in the fund.
   (C)   Moneys in the fund shall be maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer and paid
out only as may be appropriated by the Town Council.
   (D)   Moneys from this fund may be appropriated by the Town Council for the
following purposes: for any public safety purpose pursuant to I.C. 6-3.6-6-8.
(Ord. 2016-009, passed 8-8-2016)
§ 33.39 CEDIT FUND.
   (A)   A fund is hereby established, within the various funds of the town, to
be known as the CEDIT Fund, which fund shall be maintained by the Clerk-
Treasurer.
   (B)   Moneys shall be deposited to the fund as follows: In each calendar
year, during the existence of the CEDIT Fund, all moneys received from the
County Auditor sharing taxes shall be deposited in the fund.
   (C)   Moneys in the fund shall be maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer and paid
out only as may be appropriated by the Town Council.
   (D)   Moneys from this fund may be appropriated by the Town Council for the
following purposes: for any purpose pursuant to I.C. 6-3.6-10.
(Ord. 2016-010, passed 8-8-2016)
§ 33.40 LOCAL ROAD AND STREETS MATCHING GRANT FUND.
   (A)   A fund is hereby established, within the various funds of the town, to
be known as the Local Road and Streets Matching Grant Fund, which shall be
maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   Monies shall be deposited into the fund as follows: In each calendar
year, during the existence of the Local Road and Streets Matching Grant Fund,
all monies received from the Indiana Department of Transportation shall be
deposited into the fund.
   (C)   Monies in the fund shall be maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer and paid
out only as may be appropriated by the Town Council.
   (D)   Monies from this fund may be appropriated by the Town Council for the
following purposes: For any road construction purpose pursuant to I.C. 8-23-30-
2.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 33.41 ARP CORONAVIRUS LOCAL FISCAL RECOVERY GRANT FUND.
   (A)   The Town Council, upon direction by and through the Indiana State
Board of Accounts (SBOA), has a need to establish a local fund for receipt and
disbursement of funds received through the American Coronavirus Local Fiscal
Recovery Grant Fund of 2021 (Fund # 176) and pursuant to I.C. 5-11.
   (B)   The single source of income for Fund 176 shall be receipt of monies
from the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021(ARP) and/or any subsequent deposit of
funds which could or might be directed by state and federal agencies to the
fund.
   (C)   Funds receipted into Fund 176 shall require additional appropriation
(Town Council) approval and any expense must adhere to eligible purposes as
detailed in Section 603(c) of ARP as established in 2021, and to such
amendments in Section 603(c) which could be forthcoming. The primary purpose of
the ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Grant Fund is to track monies
allocated to the town from the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (ARPA) and to
ensure that the use of the funds is consistent with the plan adopted by the
town.
   (D)   Management of the fund shall be completed in adherence to processes
and accounting procedures as detailed by the Indiana State Board of Accounts
(SBOA) in State Examiner Directive 2021-1 and subsequent memorandum dated March
18, 2021, and in accordance with in-place accounting procedures as approved
through the SBOA and any and all subsequent directives through the SBOA.
(Ord. 2021-1, passed 6-14-2021)
WRITTEN BILLING POLICY PROCEDURE; UTILITIES
§ 33.50 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The Town Council adopts the written billing policy, attached to the
ordinance codified herein, to be used for and by the town in the billing and
collection process of its municipal utilities.
   (B)   Any exceptions to or deviations from the procedures described in the
attached written billing policy procedure shall be brought before the Town
Council and the proposed deviation or exception shall be decided by the Council
members at a monthly or special Council meeting.
   (C)   The written billing policy procedure attached to the ordinance
codified herein shall be uniformly followed and is effective for use on and
after the date of the adoption of this section.
(Res. 001-2016, passed 3-14-2016)
CASH HANDLING POLICY
§ 33.65 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the cash handling policy is to define the acceptable level of
internal controls for cash handling operations for all town departments to
ensure clear and consistent practices within the town for the handling of all
cash. This policy is designed to avoid and prevent fraudulent activity in the
handling of town cash.
(Res. 2017-001, passed 6-12-2017)
§ 33.66 SCOPE.
   This policy applies to all town operating departments with employees, staff,
volunteers, students, elected officials, contractors, consultants, boards,
agencies, commissions and business partners who accept cash on behalf of the
town and whose financial transactions are captured within the town’s financial
system. It is not always practical for the town to maintain strict segregation
of duties due to limited staff size, but the following standards are aimed to
control the risks associated with inabilities to segregate.
(Res. 2017-001, passed 6-12-2017)
§ 33.67 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CASH. Coin, currency, checks, money orders and credit or debit card
transactions.
   CASHIER. Any employee who performs the function of receiving, transmitting,
safeguarding and/or depositing cash for the Town of Hillsboro.
   REFUND. A reimbursement to a customer or vendor for returned, cancelled or
unsatisfactory goods or services after the original purchase transaction is
completed.
(Res. 2017-001, passed 6-12-2017)
§ 33.68 INTERNAL CONTROLS STANDARDS FOR CASH HANDLING.
   (A)   A procedure must be in place, which will ensure that all payments
received are processed on a timely basis and that any payment may be traced
from initial receipt to bank reconciliation.
   (B)   Cash handling procedures should include the following internal control
procedures.
      (1)   Maintain strict control over all receipt documentation.
      (2)   Use pre-numbered or sequentially numbered receipts, either manual
or point of sale generated, for all money received. Receipts must include the
mode of payment information and identify the issuer. Spoiled receipts should be
marked “VOID” and retained in the receipt book. On a monthly basis, the Deputy
Clerk will sign and verify that all receipts are intact and accountable for
each account for the current year. If the Deputy Clerk is unavailable to sign,
then the duty will fall onto the President of the Council, or the Vice
President if the President is unavailable.
      (3)   All cash received must be accounted for in detail and reconciled to
a corresponding bank deposit batch or cash summary report.
      (4)   Cash received from any type of fundraising activity for any
department must be turned over to the Clerk-Treasurer by the end of the next
working business day after the fundraising event. Cash shall be accompanied by
a signed receipt with two separate signatures that verify the amount of cash
presented to the Clerk-Treasurer for deposit. At no point shall a department,
except the Clerk-Treasurer’s office, hold cash in their office or personal
possession from the fundraising event beyond the end of the fundraising event,
unless the event is held on a Friday and the next working business day for the
Clerk-Treasurer’s office is following Monday.
      (5)   During non-business hours and business periods, where access to
cash is not required, all funds are required to be in a locked vault, safe or
other secure cabinet/drawer.
      (6)   Vault or safe combinations and/or keys must be limited to the
Clerk-Treasurer only. Upon the absence of the Clerk-Treasurer, the Deputy Clerk
may be given temporary access with permission from the Clerk-Treasurer.
      (7)   Funds are to be deposited in the bank on a timely basis. Deposits
taken to and/or picked up from the bank, will be recorded using a bank log book
which documents the date, time out, verification that the bag was locked,
signature of the town employee releasing the deposit, signature of the town
employee taking custody of the funds, the date returned, time returned and
signature of employee returning the bag. The Clerk-Treasurer must also sign to
verify that a receipt was received from the bank that matches the amount of the
deposit.
      (8)   The Clerk-Treasurer and Deputy Clerk is responsible to ensure that
the cash box is locked, placed into the safe, and the safe is locked when they
leave the office. No funds are to be left unattended and unsecured at any time.
      (9)   Checks received in the mail or in person, must be endorsed with the
town’s “For deposit only” stamp immediately upon receipt.
      (10)   Under no circumstances should cash disbursements be made from cash
receipts, unless cash is being used in the change making process.
      (11)   The Clerk-Treasurer will prepare monthly bank reconciliation. Bank
reconciliation shall be recorded in Key Fund Accounting program and reconciled
to each accounts bank statement on a monthly basis. The town’s Deputy Clerk
will perform review and sign off on the bank reconciliation. If the Deputy
Clerk is unavailable, this duty will fall unto the Town Council’s President and
then unto the Vice President if the President is unavailable. Any discrepancies
between funds deposited and bank activity should be investigated and resolved
with assistance from the Deputy Clerk when necessary.
      (12)   All cash shortages and overages are recorded with the ability to
ascertain individual accountability.
      (13)   All refunds and voided transactions shall have the following
supporting documentation when available:
         (a)   Transaction date;
         (b)   Customer or vendor name, address, phone number and signature (if
available);
         (c)   Original customer receipt (when available); and
         (d)   Reason for the refund or voided transaction.
(Res. 2017-001, passed 6-12-2017)
CHAPTER 34: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Section
   
34.01   Establishment
   
34.02   Violations Clerk designated
   
34.03   Payment of violations
   
34.04   Enforcement
   
34.05   Real property; action to bring compliance; expenses as lien against
property
   
34.06   Violations
§ 34.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Town Council (also referred to within this chapter as to the municipal
corporation) appoints the Clerk-Treasurer for the town to be the Administrator
of the Bureau as set forth under I.C. 33-36-2-1.
(Prior Code, § 24.01) (Ord. 04-08, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 34.02 VIOLATIONS CLERK DESIGNATED.
   (A)   As set forth under I.C. 33-36-2-3, the Violations Clerk may accept the
following:
      (1)   Written appearances;
      (2)   Waivers of trial;
      (3)   Admissions of violations; and
      (4)   Payment of civil penalties of not more than $100; in ordinance
violations cases, subject to the schedule as prescribed under I.C. 33-36-3 by
the legislative body, the civil penalties shall be paid to, receipted and
accounted for by the Clerk-Treasurer of the town under the procedures provided
by the State Board of Accounts.
   (B)   Such payments may be receipted to the General Fund.
(Prior Code, § 24.02) (Ord. 04-08, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 34.03 PAYMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   Payments of civil penalties must be made by money order or a bank cashier’s
check. These payments may be made in person to the Town Clerk-Treasurer at the
office during normal business hours or mailed to the Town Clerk-Treasurer at PO
Box 95 Hillsboro, IN 47949-0095 or to another agent designated by the Town
Council.
(Prior Code, § 24.03) (Ord. 04-08, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 34.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Town Marshal, Deputy Marshal, or in their absence the County
Sheriff Deputy, Sheriff or any other law enforcement officer or their designees
of Town Council, may issue violation citations and orders to appear before the
Violations Bureau Clerk.
   (B)   Town ordinances may be enforced by this Violations Bureau without
proceeding in court by:
      (1)   An admission of a violation before the violations clerk of an
ordinance set forth by the town; or
      (2)   Administrative enforcement under I.C. 36-1-6-9.
   (C)   The town may bring civil action to enjoin any person from:
      (1)   Violating an ordinance regulating or prohibiting a condition or use
of property; or
      (2)   Engaging in conduct without a license if an ordinance requires a
license to engage in the conduct.
   (D)   The town may adopt an ordinance providing that certain other
ordinances may be enforced through a proceeding before an administrative body
of the town. Such ordinances brought before the administrative body are limited
to those restricting or prohibiting actions harmful to the land, air or water,
safety of persons or those ordinances that govern the use of public way, or the
standing or parking of vehicles, under I.C. 36-1-6-9.
(Prior Code, § 24.04) (Ord. 04-08, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 34.05 REAL PROPERTY; ACTION TO BRING COMPLIANCE; EXPENSES AS LIEN AGAINST
PROPERTY.
   (A)   If a condition violating an ordinance set forth by the town exists on
private real property the officials of the municipal corporation may enter onto
the property and take appropriate action to bring the property into compliance
with an ordinance violated; however, before action to bring the property into
compliance with an ordinance, all persons holding a substantial interest in the
property must be given a reasonable opportunity of at least ten days but not
more than 60 days to bring the property into compliance.
      (1)   If the municipal corporation takes action to bring compliance, the
expenses incurred by the municipal corporation to bring compliance may
constitute a lien against the property.
      (2)   The lien is superior to all other liens except for taxes, in an
amount not to exceed:
         (a)   Two thousand five hundred dollars for real property that:
            1.   Contains one or more occupied or unoccupied single- or double-
family dwellings or the appurtenances or additions to those dwellings; or
            2.   Is unimproved.
         (b)   Ten thousand dollars for all other real property not described
in division (A)(2)(a) above.
   (B)   The town may also issue a bill to the owner of the real property for
the costs incurred by the governing municipal corporation in bringing the
property into compliance with the ordinance, including administrative costs and
removal costs.
   (C)   If the owner of the real property fails to pay a bill issued under
division (A)(2)(a)2. above, the municipal corporation may after 30 days,
certify to the County Auditor the amount of the bill, plus any additional costs
incurred in the certification. The Auditor shall place the total amount
certified on the tax duplicate for the property affected, and the total amount,
including accrued interest, shall be collected as delinquent taxes are
collected and shall be disbursed to the General Fund of the municipal
corporation.
(Prior Code, § 24.05) (Ord. 04-08, passed 11-8-2004)
§ 34.06 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   If a person is charged with violation or code set forth by the Town
Council and wants to exercise his or her right to a trial, the person shall
appear before the Violations Clerk and deny the violation or enter a written
denial with the Clerk.
   (B)   If a person:
      (1)   Denies an ordinance or code violation;
      (2)   Fails to satisfy a civil penalty assessed by the Violations Clerk
after having entered an admission of violation; or
      (3)   Fails to deny or admit the violation.
   (C)   The Clerk shall report this fact to the official of the County Small
Claims Court. Proceedings in the court against the person shall then be
initiated for the alleged ordinance violation.
   (D)   An ordinance violation admitted does not constitute a judgment for the
purposes of state law, and an ordinance violation costs fee may not be
collected from the defendant under state law. In addition, an ordinance
violation processed may not be considered for the purposes of state law when
determining the percentage of ordinance violations prosecuted in certain
courts.
(Prior Code, § 24.06) (Ord. 04-08, passed 11-8-2004)
CHAPTER 35: TOWN POLICIES
Section
General Policies
   
35.01   Nepotism and conflict of interest policies
   
35.02   Materiality and process for reporting material items
   
35.03   Uniform internal control standards
   
35.04   Personnel policy manual
Tort Claims Against Town
   
35.15   Clerk-Treasurer to receive notice
   
35.16   Form and service of notice
   
35.17   Employee policies
GENERAL POLICIES
§ 35.01 NEPOTISM AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICIES.
   (A)   The town finds that it is necessary and desirous to adopt a policy of
conduct with regard to nepotism in the employment with the town and in
contracting with the town in order to continue to be able to provide local
government services to its residents and to comply with the laws known as I.C.
36-1-20.2 and I.C. 36-1-21.
   (B)   On 11-9-2015, the town shall have a nepotism and a contracting with a
unit policy that complies with the minimum requirements of I.C. 36-1-20.2
(herein after “nepotism policy”) and I.C. 36-1-21 (hereinafter “contracting
with a unit by a relative policy”) and implementation will begin.
   (C)   The town nepotism policy is hereby established effective 11-9-2015 by
adopting the minimum requirements provisions of I.C. 36-1-20.2, and including
all future supplements and amendments thereto which become law from time to
time, and making them a part hereof as if fully set out herein.
   (D)   The town contracting with a unit by a relative policy is hereby
established effective 11-9-2015 by adopting the minimum requirements provisions
of I.C. 36-1-21, and including all future supplements and amendments thereto
which become law from time to time, and making them a part hereof as if fully
set out herein.
   (E)   The town finds that both I.C. 36-1-20.2 and I.C. 36-1-21 specifically
allow a unit to adopt requirements that are “more stringent or detailed” and
that more detailed are necessary.
   (F)   The town further finds that a single member of the legislative body
cannot act for the body to make work assignments, compensation, grievances,
advancement or a performance evaluation without prior authority of a majority
of the body and therefore without such authority by the majority he or she will
not be in the direct line of supervision. See I.C. 36-4-6-11 and I.C. 36-5-2-
9.4.
   (G)   The town finds that a single member of governing bodies with authority
over employees in the town cannot act for the governing body to make work
assignments, compensations, grievances, advancement or a performance evaluation
without prior authority of a majority of the body, when a statute provides that
a majority is needed to act, and therefore, without such authority by the
majority the single member will not be in the direct line of supervision.
   (H)   All elected and appointed officials and employees of the town are
hereby directed to cooperate fully in the implementation of the policies
created by this section and demonstrating compliance with these same policies.
   (I)   Failure to abide by or cooperate with the implementation, compliance
and certifications connected with the nepotism policy is a violation and may
result in the discipline, including termination, of an employee or a transfer
from the direct line of supervision or other curative action. An elected or
appointed official of the town who fails to abide by or cooperate with the
implementation, with the compliance and with mandated certifications of either
the nepotism policy may be subject to action allowed by law.
   (J)   Failure to abide by or cooperate with implementation, compliance and
certifications connected with the nepotism policy is a violation and may result
in the discipline, including termination, of an employee or a curative action.
An elected or appointed official of the town who fails to abide by or cooperate
with the implementation, with the compliance and with mandated certifications
of either the nepotism policy or the contracting with unit by a relative policy
may be subject to action allowed by law.
   (K)   The policies created by this section are hereby directed to be
implemented by any of the following actions:
      (1)   Posting a copy of this section in its entirety in at least one of
the locations in the town where it posts employer posters or other notices to
its employees;
      (2)   Providing a copy of this section to its employees and elected and
appointed officials:
      (3)   Providing or posting a notice of the adoption of this section; or
      (4)   Any such other action or actions that would communicate the
policies established by this section to its employees and elected and appointed
officials. Upon any of these actions these policies are deemed implemented by
the town.
   (L)   A copy of the provisions of I.C. 36-1-20.2 and I.C. 36-1-21 effective
are annexed hereto.
   (M)   Two copies of I.C. 36-1-20.2 and I.C. 36-1-21, and as supplemented or
amended, are on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer for the town for
public inspection as may be required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 11-11-2015)
§ 35.02 MATERIALITY AND PROCESS FOR REPORTING MATERIAL ITEMS.
   (A)   All erroneous or irregular variances, losses, shortages or thefts of
town funds or property, or funds or property the town holds in trust, shall be
reported to the Clerk-Treasurer and Town Council President or his or her
designee promptly.
   (B)   It will be the policy of the town to report to the State Board of
Accounts any erroneous or irregular variances, losses, shortages or thefts of
cash in excess of $200, except for inadvertent clerical errors that are
identified timely and promptly corrected with no loss to the town.
   (C)   It will be the policy of the town to report promptly to the State
Board of Accounts any erroneous or irregular variances, losses, shortages or
thefts of non-cash items in excess of $300, estimated market value, except for
those resulting from inadvertent clerical errors or misplacements that are
identified timely and promptly corrected with no loss to the town, and except
for losses from genuine accidents.
   (D)   All elected town officials shall, and all town employees and agents
are, directed to comply with this policy.
(Ord. 2016-003, passed 3-14-2016)
§ 35.03 UNIFORM INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS.
   (A)   The recitations in the ordinance codified herein are adopted as
findings by the Town Council.
   (B)   It is further ordered and determined that the town hereby adopts as
policy the internal control standards as set forth by the State Board of
Accounts Uniform Internal Control Standards for Indiana Political Subdivisions
Manual as expressly written and published by the Indiana State Board of
Accounts in September, 2015, and as amended from time to time.
   (C)   It is further ordained that at the time the annual financial report is
electronically filed, the Clerk-Treasurer as fiscal officer of the town shall
certify in writing that the Uniform Internal Control Standards for Indiana
Political Subdivisions have been adopted and shall certify that the personnel
have been trained as required by law.
   (D)   The town adopts as policy the internal control standards as set forth
by the Indiana State Board of Accounts Uniform Internal Control Standards for
Indiana Political Subdivisions Manual as expressly written and published by the
State Board of Accounts in September, 2015, and as amended from time to time.
In order to implement these standards, the Clerk-Treasurer shall certify in
writing that personnel as defined in statute have received the required
training. All officers, elected officials and employees are required to comply
with the policy. Employees who fail to comply with this policy are subject to
discipline, including but not limited to termination of their employment.
(Ord. 2016-005, passed 4-11-2016)
§ 35.04 PERSONNEL POLICY MANUAL.
   The personnel policy manual of the town is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 2016-013, passed 11-14-2016)
TORT CLAIMS AGAINST TOWN
§ 35.15 CLERK-TREASURER TO RECEIVE NOTICE.
   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is hereby designated as the town official to
receive notice of a tort claim under I.C. 34-13-3-1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 25.01)
§ 35.16 FORM AND SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   (A)   The notice of a tort claim against the town must be in writing and
must be delivered in person or by registered or certified mail.
(I.C. 34-13-3-12)
   (B)   The notice must comply with the provisions of I.C. 34-13-3-1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 25.02)
§ 35.17 EMPLOYEE POLICIES.
   An Employee Handbook is adopted as shown in Appendix B attached to the
ordinance codified herein.
(Prior Code, § 25.03)
CHAPTER 36: POLICE
Section
   
36.01   Appointment of reserve marshals
   
36.02   Policies on emergencies and pursuit driving
   
36.03   Policies on use of force
§ 36.01 APPOINTMENT OF RESERVE MARSHALS.
   (A)   Authorization for reserve officers. The town marshal of the town is
hereby authorized to appoint up to six reserve officers or marshals to exercise
police powers in the town.
   (B)   Limitations. No reserve officers appointed pursuant to this section
shall be considered members of the Town Marshal Department for the town.
Reserve marshals shall not be entitled to compensation, other than a uniform
allowance and compensation for time lost from other employment because of court
appearances, to the event that money is appropriated for either of those
purposes from time to time.
   (C)   Training. No reserve officer shall be appointed until he or she has
completed the training and probationary period specified by the Town Marshal.
No reserve officer/marshal shall make an arrest, conduct a search or a seizure
of a person or property, or carry a firearm unless the reserve officer/ marshal
successfully completes a pre-basic course under I.C. 5-2-1-9(f).
(Prior Code, § 26.01) (Ord. 98-03, passed 6-8-1998; Ord. 2020-3, passed 3-9-
2020; Ord. 2021-3, passed 9-13-2021)
§ 36.02 POLICIES ON EMERGENCIES AND PURSUIT DRIVING.
   (A)   Statement of policy. The town recognizes that violators of the law
will occasionally attempt to elude apprehension or attempt to escape the lawful
application of the law by the officers of the law. In their zeal to elude
capture or sanctions of the law, known or suspected violators of the law have
fled from officers attempting to stop such violators by use of a properly
marked police vehicle making full use of all available emergency equipment.
Such flight is frequently evidenced by use of excessive speed and other erratic
driving behaviors that can expose innocent residents of the town and its
environs to injury or loss of life. The need to bring known or suspected law
violators to justice must always be balanced against the jeopardy to the
citizenry imposed by a police pursuit. The procedures that follow provide the
guidelines to ensure that police pursuits by members of the town’s police force
are undertaken with the greatest degree of due care; however, this policy is
established for the use and guidance of the town’s police force only and does
not apply in criminal or civil proceedings. This policy should not be construed
as creating a higher standard of safety or care in an evidentiary sense with
respect to third party claims than is imposed by law.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMERGENCY DRIVING. Driving to a situation that is life threatening or
involves extreme property loss or driving which justifies the legal use of
emergency warning devices. Returning from a scene is not considered EMERGENCY
DRIVING.
      FLEEING. According to I.C. 35-44.1-3-1(a)(3), a person commits resisting
law enforcement if a person knowingly or intentionally flees from a law
enforcement officer after the officer has, by visible or audible means,
identified himself or herself and ordered the person to stop. Resisting law
enforcement is normally a Class A misdemeanor, but is a Class D felony if the
person draws or uses a deadly weapon, inflicts bodily injury on another person,
or operates a vehicle in a manner that creates a substantial risk of bodily
injury to another person. The offense is a Class C felony if, while committing
it, the person operates a motor vehicle in a manner that causes serious bodily
injury to another person and a Class B felony if, while committing it, the
person operates a vehicle in a manner that causes the death of another person.
      PURSUIT DRIVING. The act of a sustained chase of a fleeing person in a
motor vehicle in an attempt to apprehend the driver. This includes both closing
the distance between the officer and violator before a visual signal to stop
(red and blue lights) is given. This also includes the period in which the
offender is resisting arrest by knowingly or intentionally failing to yield to
the officer.
   (C)   Pursuit procedures.
      (1)   Authorization of pursuit driving. An officer must be driving an
authorized Town Marshal or town police vehicle which specifically excludes any
personally owned vehicle. The vehicle must be equipped with visual and audible
warning devices. Seat and shoulder belts must be worn at all times the vehicle
is in motion. A pursuit may not be initiated when the vehicle is occupied by
prisoners, suspects, complainants, witnesses or any other person not on duty as
a police officer. This prohibition applies whether or not the passenger has
signed a waiver of liability. Pursuit driving, when permitted by the above, may
be initiated for the apprehension of a known or suspected felon when the
pursuit is initiated within the corporate limits of the town or within one mile
outside the corporate limits; for apprehension of a traffic or misdemeanor
violator, when the infraction or misdemeanor has been committed within the
corporate limits of the town and in the presence of the officer giving pursuit
or in presence of another officer of the town’s police force, or when directed
by the county dispatcher to assist another officer already in pursuit.
      (2)   Pursuit procedures.
         (a)   The officer has the authority when pursuit driving is permitted
to, disregard certain traffic regulations (such as speed limits and the
requirement for a complete stop at signs and signals) in disregarding traffic
regulations, the officer must still drive with due regard for the safety of
others and must not unnecessarily endanger life or property.
         (b)   Unless the suspect is already fleeing from the officer, the
officer should attempt to close the distance between the police vehicle and the
violator before activating the emergency lights and siren to avoid alerting the
offending driver. Once the officer has successfully closed the distance with
the offending driver, the emergency lights and siren should be activated. If
the suspect has already fled from the officer or another law enforcement
officer, the emergency lights and siren should be activated immediately upon
initiating the pursuit.
         (c)   When the pursuit is initiated, the officer should notify the
County Dispatcher of the pursuing status, location, direction of travel, reason
for pursuit and as complete a description of the vehicle and occupants as
possible. The dispatcher should be advised of the status of the pursuit as
frequently as possible. Under police pursuit conditions, the emergency lights
(red and blue) and siren must be operating. All possible precautions must be
taken by police vehicles engaged in such pursuit to insure the safety of the
public and other officers.
         (d)   The maximum speed, if conditions allow, for pursuit driving is
50 mph within the town and 100 mph outside the town limits. The maximum length
of the pursuit of a felony suspect (which does not include a person who is only
a suspected felon and is fleeing from a law enforcement officer in a motor
vehicle in a manner that creates a substantial risk of bodily injury to another
person) is five miles (but in no event should the pursuit be continued within
the corporate boundaries of another municipality). Misdemeanor and traffic
violators shall not be pursued more than one mile outside the corporate limits
of the town. An officer who is pursuing a vehicle and is required to disengage
from the pursuit under this division (C)(2)(d) shall notify the dispatcher and
seek assistance from other police agencies in continuing the pursuit.
         (e)   Pursuit driving should be terminated or avoided if the subject
has been identified and can be arrested at a later time. Pursuit driving should
also be terminated when the danger to the public caused by the fleeing vehicle
outweighs the interests of the community in apprehending the violator, i.e.,
consideration should be given to the speed of the suspect through crowded
areas, driving the wrong way on a one-way street or divided highway, or other
ways that the fleeing driver demonstrates a total disregard for his or her
safety and the safety of others.
         (f)   At no time shall more than two police vehicles (including
vehicles from other agencies) be in actual pursuit of another vehicle. The
second police vehicle, if any, shall maintain a safe distance from the initial
pursuit vehicle and will be responsible for keeping the dispatcher advised of
information relating to the pursuit. At no time will additional assisting units
convoy behind the pursued vehicle. Other police units relatively close may move
into the general area of the pursuit using normal emergency limitations, but
such units will not use pursuit driving conditions.
         (g)   An unmarked police vehicle may initiate a pursuit provided the
police vehicle possesses at least a revolving red/blue light and siren. A
pursuit by an unmarked police vehicle shall be discontinued immediately when a
properly marked police vehicle is able to take up the pursuit. Sustained
pursuits by unmarked police vehicles should be undertaken only in situations
involving extreme jeopardy.
         (h)   Upon being notified of a pursuit initiated within the county by
another law enforcement agency in which the assistance of the town’s police
force is requested, all due assistance shall be rendered to the officers of
such other agency. All other policies, and procedures described in this
ordinance shall apply. Specific permission to join the pursuit is not required.
         (i)   Under no circumstances are officers of the town’s police force
authorized to intentionally ram or to intentionally make contact with the
vehicle that is being pursued.
         (j)   The forcible stopping of a fleeing vehicle by members of the
town’s police force may be considered by the use of a roadblock. Roadblocks
shall only be established and maintained regarding a vehicle pursuit in an
attempt to prevent the escape of a fleeing felon (which does not include a
person who is only a suspected felon and is fleeing from a law enforcement
officer in a motor vehicle in a manner that creates a substantial risk of
bodily injury to another person) who presents a clear and present danger to
other citizens. The authority to establish a roadblock shall rest with the Town
Marshal. Roadblocks may only be attempted using town, city or county vehicles
or temporary vehicles. At no time shall the citizens of this community be
ordered to subject either person or property to a roadblock effort. The use of
a “rolling” roadblock to bring the suspect vehicle gradually to a stop is not
permitted. The use of a roadblock shall only be instituted after exhausting all
other efforts to terminate the flight of the fleeing felon.
   (D)   Emergency driving/emergency response procedures.
      (1)   For most responses requiring emergency driving, the maximum speed
if conditions allow outside the town limits is 80 mph; and 50 mph, if
conditions allow, within the town limits. If the call regards an “officer
down,” “assist officer” or “man with gun,” the maximum speed if conditions
allow is 100 mph outside the limits of the town and 55 mph within the town. All
speeds shall be lowered at night, in areas of dense population, during known
farm activity and under adverse weather conditions.
      (2)   During an emergency run, day or night, there must be a continuous
visual warning, i.e., red and blue lights with wig-wag headlights if possible.
Also, day or night, there must be a continuous audible warning signal, i.e.,
siren. The pitch should be changed or horn sounded at intersections when
nearing intersections.
      (3)   All personnel operating the town’s police vehicles shall exercise
due regard for the safety of all persons.
(Prior Code, § 26.02) (Ord. 99-03, passed 6-14-1999)
§ 36.03 POLICIES ON USE OF FORCE.
   (A)   Statement of policy. The need to use force, whether deadly or non-
deadly, is one of the most demanding and critical decisions that a law
enforcement officer must make. There are, however, situations when an officer
must make the irreversible decision of whether or not to use deadly or non-
deadly force. Such a decision can have a powerful and possible harmful effect
on the officer, the department and the community.
      (1)   Recognizing that the town cannot make the decision for its police
officers in advance, it must provide some guidance to aid in the making of that
decision. The procedures that follow provide the guidelines to ensure that the
use of force by members of the town’s police force is undertaken with the
greatest degree of due care; however, this policy is established for the use
and guidance of the town’s police force only and does not apply in criminal or
civil proceedings. This policy should not be construed as creating a higher
standard of safety or care in an evidentiary sense with respect to third party
claims than is imposed by law.
      (2)   The policy of the town is to allow its police officers to use only
that force which is reasonable and necessary to effect an arrest or to protect
themselves or others from personal attack, physical resistance, harm or death.
The decision to exercise force of any level, must be based upon the
circumstances that the officer reasonably believes to exist. The decision to
use force is better predicated upon the danger posed by a subject confronted by
the police than one based upon the general nature or category of an offense.
      (3)   While the use of deadly force is most commonly associated with
firearms, it is not limited to such weapons, but may include other so-called
“non-deadly” protective instruments issued to the town’s police officers, such
as batons and flashlights or any other means (including the use of hands) used
by an officer.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DEADLY FORCE. Defined in I.C. 35-31.5-2-85, and means force that creates
a substantial risk of serious bodily injury.
      FORCIBLE FELONY. Defined in I.C. 35-31.5-2-138 as a felony that involves
the use or threat of force against a human being, or in which there is imminent
danger of bodily injury to a human being.
      NON-DEADLY FORCE. All force used by a police officer other than deadly
force.
      PROTECTIVE INSTRUMENT. Any device authorized for use by the Town Marshals
and utilized by a police officer to apply force to another person.
   (C)   Use of force.
      (1)   Levels of force. The town recognizes four levels of authority,
including three levels of force that may be applied by officers in the official
execution of their duties. These are:
         (a)   Communication/verbal, control/presence. In the daily performance
of his or her job requirements, a police officer’s presence represents
government authority. Situations that officers encounter may require not only
their presence, but frequently some form of verbal or non-verbal communication.
This communication may take the form of providing information, giving commands,
asking or answering questions, physical gestures, conducting interviews or the
like. It may also take the form of issuing specific instructions to individuals
or groups, dealing with arguments, verbal assaults, threats and handling
disputes or disagreements. In the event that the presence, communication or
verbal control is not sufficient to protect, control or arrest, then the
officer may be justified to use reasonable and necessary force from the
appropriate force options set forth below;
         (b)   Physical force. A situation between an officer and an individual
or individuals may escalate to physical force. Physical force between officers
and citizens ranges, from the slightest touching to the infliction of severe
injury or death. Any use of force that creates a substantial risk of serious
bodily injury may be employed only as provided in division (C)(2) below.
Reasonable physical force that does not rise to the level of deadly force may
be used if the officer reasonably believes that the force is necessary to
effect a lawful arrest, to detain a suspect already in custody, to protect
himself or herself or a third person from what the officer reasonably believes
to be the imminent use of unlawful force, or to immediately prevent or
terminate a suspect’s actions. Physical force as contemplated in this division
(C)(1)(b) entails the use of any human body parts such as head, teeth,
shoulders, arms, hands, knees and feet. In the event that physical force is not
sufficient to protect, control or arrest, then the officer is justified in
using reasonable and necessary force from the appropriate higher level options
listed below;
         (c)   Protective instruments. The use of verbal communication or
physical force to control a situation may escalate to the use of a protective
instrument by the officer. The officer may not employ protective instruments
when the use of the same creates a substantial risk of serious bodily injury
except in accordance with the procedures set forth in division (C)(2) below;
and
         (d)   Deadly force. Deadly force will be used only in accordance with
the procedures set forth in division (C)(2) below. Deadly force includes the
use of firearms, protective instruments or other force options which creates a
substantial risk of serious bodily injury. While it is intended that officers
use the lowest level of force possible. Options are not predicated on strict
hierarchical sequence, nor must the officer always elect to start at the lowest
level. The officer must evaluate the immediate circumstances and select the
appropriate level of force for those circumstances. While consideration of the
crime committed or attempted may play a role, it should not be the determining
factor. Rather, it is the level of force being used against the officer or
citizen and the immediate potential for death or serious physical injury to the
officer or innocent bystanders or victims upon which officers should base their
decision to use force of any level.
      (2)   Authorized use of deadly force. Officers may use deadly force:
         (a)   If the officer reasonably believes that deadly force is
necessary to prevent serious bodily injury to himself or herself or a third
person;
         (b)   1.   If the officer has probable cause to believe that deadly
force is necessary:
               a.   To prevent the commission of a forcible felony; or
               b.   To effect an arrest of a person who the officer has
probable cause to believe poses a threat of serious bodily injury to the
officer or a third person.
            2.   The officer has given a warning, if feasible, to the person
against whom the deadly force is to be used.
         (c)   To prevent the escape of an arrested person if the officer:
            1.   Has probable cause to believe that deadly force is necessary
to prevent the escape from custody of a person who the officer has probable
cause to believe poses a threat of serious bodily injury to the officer or a
third person; and
            2.   Has given a warning, if feasible, to the person against whom
the deadly force is to be used.
      (3)   Other uses of force.
         (a)   The discharge of firearms to destroy dangerous and/or injured
animals (where no other alternatives are reasonably available), to relieve
their suffering or to protect the officer or third persons from serious bodily
injury is authorized. The officer shall complete a use of force report.
         (b)   An officer may utilize deadly force outside of the corporate
limits of the town only in the circumstances permitted in division (C)(2)(a)
above.
         (c)   Firearms may be drawn whenever officers have reason to fear for
their safety or the safety of others.
         (d)   When discharging a firearm for any reason, officers must
exercise reasonable caution in order to avoid unnecessarily endangering the
lives of bystanders. When possible, officers should give consideration to the
shooting background, bystanders and location.
      (4)   Prohibited uses of force. Officers of the town shall not fire
warning shots or fire shots at or from a moving vehicle. When confronted by an
oncoming vehicle, officers shall move out of its path, if possible, rather than
fire at the vehicle.
      (5)   Medical care. 
         (a)   Officers will be required to obtain medical attention and
evaluations for individuals who show signs of any injury as a result of any use
of force, who complain of any injury as a result of any use of force, who
become unconscious either during or following any use of force, or when the
officer reasonably believes an individual is in need of a medical evaluation or
medical attention as a result of any use of force.
         (b)   Medical attention shall be provided immediately or as soon as
practicable.
         (c)   Medical evaluation may be performed by responding emergency
medical personnel at the scene of the incident or by medical clinic or hospital
personnel.
         (d)   Once on the scene, officers will adhere to the advice given by
emergency medical personnel as to the need for further medical care beyond that
provided at the scene.
   (D)   Use of force reporting requirement.
      (1)   When required. The use of force report will be completed any time
force is used:
         (a)   Which results in an injury to an individual;
         (b)   Where an individual claims that he or she is injured as a result
of the amount of force used;
         (c)   Where force is applied by the use of any protective instrument;
         (d)   When a firearm is discharged other than during authorized target
practice; or
         (e)   As provided in division (C)(3)(a) above.
      (2)   Officer’s responsibility. An officer required to complete a use of
force report shall complete and forward the same, prior to the end of the
officer’s tour of duty, to the officer’s supervisor (or the Town Clerk-
Treasurer, if the use of force was by the Town Marshal) who shall review the
same and forward the same to the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 26.03) (Ord. 99-04, passed - -)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
51.   SOLID WASTE
      
52.   WATER SYSTEM
      
53.   SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
50.01   Sewer and water deposits
§ 50.01 SEWER AND WATER DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Any owner of real estate or renter of real estate wishing to establish
an account for sewer or water services with the town shall be required to pay a
$150 deposit before any utility services shall be rendered by the town.
   (B)   Upon termination of the utility services, the town is authorized to
apply the $150 deposit towards any unpaid balance owed by the owner or renter.
(Ord. 2011-02, passed 12-12-2011)
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
51.01   Collection and disposal services
   
51.02   Fee for services
   
51.03   Appropriation
§ 51.01 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICES.
   Commencing 1-1-1999, the town shall provide solid waste collection and
disposal services to all residences within the corporate limits of the town by
contracting with an independent contractor to provide such services. The town
shall comply with I.C. 36-9-30-5 in entering into each such contract.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 9-14-1998)
§ 51.02 FEE FOR SERVICES.
   Commencing with the first billing cycle after the completion of all computer
billing changes, the monthly fee charged by the town for residential solid
waste collection and disposal services shall increase to a total charge of $12
each month per resident. A late fee equal to 10% of the outstanding, unpaid fee
shall be assessed if such fee is not paid in full by the fifteenth of each
month. The Clerk-Treasurer shall collect the fee by having the same included on
the monthly water and sewer bills of all residential customers in the town. All
fees collected for such services shall be deposited in a separate fund, the
Solid Waste Fund.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 9-14-1998; Ord. 08-10, passed 10-13-2008)
§ 51.03 APPROPRIATION.
   All funds deposited in the Solid Waste Fund are appropriated to pay the
expenses of providing the solid waste collection services, collecting the fees
and administering the solid waste collection program.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 9-14-1998)
CHAPTER 52: WATER SYSTEM
Section
   
52.01   Town Council to oversee waterworks
   
52.02   Protection of water; backflow; cross-connection
   
52.03   Rates and charges
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 TOWN COUNCIL TO OVERSEE WATERWORKS.
   It is hereby ordained that the Town Council shall operate the waterworks of
the town pursuant to I.C. 8-1.
(Ord. 83-12, passed - -)
§ 52.02 PROTECTION OF WATER; BACKFLOW; CROSS-CONNECTION.
   (A)   A CROSS-CONNECTION shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains
potable water from the town water system, and the other, water from a private
source, water of unknown or questionable safety or steam, gases or chemicals,
whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow
depending on the pressure differential between the two systems.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross-connection. No
interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply
of the town may enter the supply or distribution system of said municipality,
unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of
connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the town
utilities and by the State Department of Environmental Management in accordance
with 327 I.A.C. 8-10.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the town utilities to cause inspections to be
made of all properties served by the public water system where cross
connections with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of
inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall
be established by the town utilities.
   (D)   Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the town
utilities shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to
examine the property served by a connection to the public water system of the
town for cross-connections.
      (1)   On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served
shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the
piping system or systems on such property.
      (2)   The refusal of access or refusal of requested pertinent information
shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connections.
   (E)   The town utilities is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this
section exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary
to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system. Water
service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice is served on the
owner, lessee or occupants of the property or premises where a violation is
found or suspected to exist. Water service to such property shall not be
restored until the cross-connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with
the provisions of this section.
   (F)   (1)   If it is deemed by the town utilities that a cross-connection or
an emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate
action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the Clerk-Treasurer
of the town and delivered to the consumer’s premises, service may be
immediately discontinued.
      (2)   If requested in writing, the consumer shall have an opportunity for
hearing before the Town Council within ten days of such emergency
discontinuance.
   (G)   All consumers using toxic or hazardous liquids, all hospitals,
mortuaries, wastewater treatment plants, laboratories and all other hazardous
users install and maintain a reduced pressure principal backflow preventer in
the main water line serving each building on the premises. The backflow
preventer must be installed in an easily accessible location not subject to
flooding or freezing.
   (H)   The reduced pressure principal backflow preventers shall not be
installed below ground level.
   (I)   This section does not supersede the State Plumbing Code, being 675
I.A.C. 16, the IDEM Rule 327 I.A.C. 8-10 or any town plumbing ordinance, but is
supplementary to them.
   (J)   In addition to IDEM Rule 327 I.A.C. 8-10-4(c), the following customer
facilities need a backflow prevention device: funeral homes.
   (K)   (1)   If, in the judgment of the Superintendent of Utilities, or his
or her designee, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the
safety of the public water system, the Superintendent of Utilities will give
notice to the water customer to install such an approved device immediately.
      (2)   The water consumer shall, at his or her own expense, install such
an approved device at the location and in a manner approved by the
Superintendent of Utilities and shall have inspections and tests made of such
approved devices as required by the Superintendent of Utilities and in
accordance with the IDEM Rule 327 I.A.C. 8-10.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 52.03 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   (1)   The rates and charges of the town’s waterworks shall be the
rates as shown in division (C) below.
      (2)   The rates will be effective as soon as practicable, but no later
than March 2016 usage and April 2016 billing.
   (B)   The Town Council finds that the rates and charges, as adopted, are
nondiscriminatory, reasonable, equitable and just, and are necessary to produce
sufficient revenue to:
      (1)   Pay all the legal and other necessary expenses incident to the
operation of the utility, including:
         (a)   Maintenance costs;
         (b)   Operating charges;
         (c)   Upkeep;
         (d)   Repairs;
         (e)   Depreciation;
         (f)   Interest charges on bond or other obligations, including leases;
and
         (g)   Costs associated with the acquisition of utility property under
I.C. 8-1.5-2.
      (2)   Provide a sinking fund for the liquidation of bonds or other
obligations, including leases;
      (3)   Provide a debt service reserve for bonds or other obligations,
including leases, in an amount established by the municipality, not to exceed
the maximum annual debt service on the bonds or obligations or the maximum
annual lease rentals;
      (4)   Provide adequate money for working capital; and
      (5)   Provide adequate money for making extensions and replacements to
the extent not provided for through depreciations (I.C. 8-1.5-3-8).
   (C)   The Council hereby authorizes and directs the appropriate officials
and representatives of the town to take all necessary actions to implement,
bill and collect the rates and charges in the manner described in division (A)
above, as approved and adopted herein, following the date of final adoption of
this section.
      (1)   Metered rates.
 
Metered Rates Per 1,000 Gallons per Month
            Present Rates Proposed Rates Difference Amount Difference Percent
First 2,500  $15.87        $17.64         $1.77             11.18%
Next 2,501 - $6.51         $7.24          $0.73             11.18%
5,000
Next 5,001 - $5.42         $6.03          $0.61             11.18%
10,000
Over 10,000  $3.80         $4.22          $0.42             11.18%
 
      (2)   Minimum charge per month.
Minimum Charge Per Month
 Present Rates Proposed Rates Difference Amount Difference Percent
Minimum Charge Per Month
                Present Rates Proposed Rates Difference Amount Difference
                                                                Percent
5/8 inch meter   $19.06        $21.19         $2.13             11.18%
3/4 inch meter   $23.61        $26.25         $2.64             11.18%
1 inch meter     $32.75        $36.41         $3.66             11.18%
1-1/4 inch meter $46.47        $51.67         $5.20             11.18%
1-1/2 inch meter $54.38        $60.46         $6.08             11.18%
2 inch meter     $77.26        $85.90         $8.64             11.18%
3 inch meter     $125.41       $139.43        $14.02            11.18%
4 inch meter     $193.79       $215.46        $21.67            11.18%
6 inch meter     $327.02       $363.59        $36.57            11.18%
8 inch meter     $486.82       $541.26        $54.44            11.18%
 
      (3)   Bulk sales. Per 1,000 gallons:
 
Present Rates Proposed Rates Difference Amount Difference Percent
$11           $12.23         $1.23             11.18%
 
         (a)   Pool fills:
 
Present Rates Proposed Rates Difference Amount Difference Percent
$11           $12.23         $1.23             11.18%
 
            1.   To be filled by the Superintendent via a hydrant when
possible.
            2.   If there is no hydrant nearby, then the water will run through
the resident's water meter. Resident will be billed via invoice by the Clerk-
Treasurer's Office and payment is due within 30 days of the invoice date.
         (b)   7% sales tax to be billed on bulk sales total dollar amount.
      (4)   Hydrant rental.
 
Fire Hydrant Rental
                  Present Rates Proposed Rates Difference Amount Difference
                                                                 Percent
Municipal Hydrant $712.01       $791.63        $79.62            11.18%
Private Hydrant   $703.26       $781.90        $78.64            11.18%
 
      (5)   Automatic sprinklers.
Automatic Sprinklers Per Month
 Present Rates Proposed Rates Difference Amount Difference Percent
Automatic Sprinklers Per Month
                Present Rates Proposed Rates Difference Amount Difference
                                                                Percent
1 inch meter     $43.90        $48.81         $4.91             11.18%
1-1/4 inch meter $68.58        $76.25         $7.67             11.18%
1-1/2 inch meter $98.74        $109.78        $11.04            11.18%
2 inch meter     $175.54       $195.17        $19.63            11.18%
3 inch meter     $394.90       $439.06        $44.16            11.18%
4 inch meter     $702.04       $780.54        $78.50            11.18%
6 inch meter     $1,579.65     $1,756.29      $176.64           11.18%
8 inch meter     $1,636.20     $1,819.16      $182.96           11.18%
 
      (6)   Customer deposit.
 
Customer Deposits
            Present Rates Proposed Rates Difference Amount Difference Percent
Renter       $175          $175           $0                0
Homeowner    $150          $150           $0                0
3 Times Late $100          $100           $0                0
 
      (7)   Connection charge. All new connections: Actual cost of making the
connection.
      (8)   Returned check charge. Per check on all returned checks: $27.
      (9)   Reconnection fee. Reconnection after disconnection: $50.
      (10)   Late charge penalty. All bills 30 days or more delinquent: 10% of
bill.
(Ord. 2016-002, passed 2-16-2016; Ord. 2020-9, passed 12-14-2020; Ord. 2022-2,
passed 8-15-2022; Ord. 2024-3, passed 10-14-2024)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates §
52.02 will be subject to fines of $50 per day for each separate day a violation
continues. Costs of collection and reasonable attorney fees may also be
assessed against any violator.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 3-11-2013)
CHAPTER 53: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Deposits required
   
53.02   Rates and charges
   
53.03   Construction and connection of lateral sewer lines to town’s wastewater
collection system
Sewers and Drains
   
53.15   Definitions
   
53.16   Unlawful acts
   
53.17   Private system
   
53.18   Permits
   
53.19   Discharges
   
53.20   Pretreatment
   
53.21   Facilities, plans, approval
   
53.22   Regulations
   
53.23   Administration
   
53.24   Appeal procedure
 
   
53.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 DEPOSITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Habitually delinquent customers defined. A customer of the town’s
sanitary sewer system shall be considered a “habitually delinquent customer” if
the customer’s sanitary sewer bill becomes delinquent three or more times in
any 12 consecutive monthly billing periods.
   (B)   Deposit required. Upon becoming a habitually delinquent customer, such
a customer shall be required to pay a deposit for the provisions of sanitary
sewer services in the amount of $100. The deposit shall be held until otherwise
directed by the Town Council or until such customer’s account is closed and all
charges for sanitary sewer services are paid. If the customer has closed the
account and paid all charges for sewer services, any remaining deposit may be
applied to any other amounts owing by such customer to the town, including
amounts owed for water services and/or trash services, and the balance shall be
returned to the customer.
   (C)   Termination of water service authorized. The employees of the town are
authorized and directed to terminate water service to any habitually delinquent
customer who fails to make the deposit required by division (B) above within
ten days after being notified in writing to do so by the town.
(Ord. 2012-3, passed 4-9-2012)
§ 53.02 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Sewer rates for use of and service rendered by the sewer works, each
user shall be charged in an amount based upon a fee schedule, shown in division
(B) below.
   (B)   Rates and charges.
Treatment Rate Per 1,000 Gallons Per Month
 Present Rates Proposed Rates Difference Amount Difference Percent
Treatment Rate Per 1,000 Gallons Per Month
                  Present Rates Proposed Rates Difference Amount Difference
                                                                 Percent
User charge       $9.15         $10.74         $1.59             17.36%
Base charge per
month
5/8 inch meters   $23.81        $27.94         $4.13             17.36%
3/4 inch meters   $23.81        $27.94         $4.13             17.36%
1 inch meters     $54.42        $63.87         $9.45             17.36%
1-1/4 inch meters $85.06        $99.82         $14.76            17.36%
1-1/2 inch meters $121.85       $143.00        $21.15            17.36%
2 inch meters     $207.57       $243.60        $36.03            17.36%
3 inch meters     $472.93       $555.01        $82.08            17.36%
4 inch meters     $819.81       $962.10        $142.29           17.36%
6 inch meters     $1,860.83     $2,183.80      $322.97           17.36%
Un-metered
service,
residential
Residential       $59.38        $69.69         $10.31            17.36%
charge, monthly
Tap-on fee/
connection charge
5/8 inch and 3/   $1,500.00     $1,500.00
4 inch meters
All other meter   $1,500.00     $1,500.00
sizes
 
(Ord. 2012-2, passed 2-11-2013 ; Ord. 2024-4, passed 10-14-2024 )
§ 53.03 CONSTRUCTION AND CONNECTION OF LATERAL SEWER LINES TO TOWN’S WASTEWATER
COLLECTION SYSTEM.
   (A)   Materials for construction of lateral sewer lines. Ord. 94-07 (§§
53.15 through 53.24) of the town requires the owner of all buildings situated
within the town and abutting a public sanitary sewer to connect the building
sewer to the public sewer by means of a lateral sewer line (the “lateral”), at
the owner’s sole cost and expense, within 90 days after the date official
notice to do so is provided to the owner. The lateral, whether constructed
within such 90-day period or at a later date, must be constructed of: SDR 35 or
equivalent pipe; or Schedule 40 or better pipe. The lateral must be four inches
in diameter or wider.
   (B)   Installation of lateral. The owner may employ any person the owner
chooses to install and construct the lateral. The owner shall notify the town’s
Inspector, as far in advance as possible of the date and time when the owner
intends to construct its lateral and connect its building to the town’s public
sewer system. The owner shall not refill the trench in which the lateral has
been constructed until the town’s Inspector has inspected the lateral and its
connections to the building and public sewer system and has approved such
lateral. Approval of an owner’s lateral shall not be construed as a warranty by
the town as to the quality or effectiveness of the lateral.
   (C)   Cleanout required. Each owner shall include at least one cleanout on
the exterior of his or her premises to enable a “snake” or similar device to be
inserted into the owner’s lateral to clean out the lateral in the event it
becomes clogged.
   (D)   Trench. The trench in which the lateral is constructed must be
backfilled or bedded in sand or pea gravel.
   (E)   Old septic tanks. At the same time as the owner’s building is
connected to the public sewer system by the lateral, the owner shall cause the
septic tank on the owner’s property to be pumped out and either: removed; caved
in; or filled with sand or pea gravel.
(Ord. 95-02, passed 6-12-1995)
SEWERS AND DRAINS
§ 53.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (or BOD). The quantity of oxygen expressed in mg/
l utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures with nitrification inhibition in five days at 20°C.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning
three feet outside the building wall.
      (1)   BUILDING DRAIN, SANITARY. A building drain which conveys sanitary
or industrial sewage only.
      (2)   BUILDING DRAIN, STORM. A building drain which conveys storm water
or other clear water drainage, but no wastewater.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal. Also called HOUSE CONNECTION.
      (1)   BUILDING SEWER, SANITARY. A building sewer which conveys sanitary
or industrial sewage only.
      (2)   BUILDING SEWER, STORM. A building sewer which conveys storm-waste
or other Clearwater drainage, but no sanitary or industrial sewage.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or
surface water.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES
permit if the treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in
fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. The term substantial
degree is not subject to precise definition, but generally contemplates
removals in the order of 80% or greater. Minor incidental removals in the order
of 10% to 30% are not considered substantial. Examples of the additional
pollutants which may be considered COMPATIBLE include:
      (1)   Chemical oxygen demand;
      (2)   Total organic carbon;
      (3)   Phosphorus and phosphorus compounds;
      (4)   Nitrogen and nitrogen compounds; and
      (5)   Fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin (except as
prohibited where these materials would interfere with the operation of the
treatment works).
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FECAL COLIFORM. Any of a number of organisms common to the intestinal tract
of man and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pollution.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state, such that will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment facility
approved by the town.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible
pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from employee wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.
   INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to,
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. (INFILTRATION does
not include and is distinguished from inflow.)
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both infiltration and
inflow without distinguishing the source.
   INFLOW. The water discharge into a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar,
yard and area drains, foundation drains, unpolluted cooling water discharges,
drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross- connections from
storm sewers, and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface run-off,
street wash waters or drainage. (INFLOW does not include, and is distinguished
from, infiltration.)
   INSPECTOR. The person or persons duly authorized by the town, through its
Town Council, to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and
their connection to the public sewer system.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industry that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste;
      (3)   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under § 307(a) of Pub. L. No. 92-500, being 33 U.S.C. 1317(a);
or
      (4)   Has a significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on a treatment works or on the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   NH3N. The same as ammonia nitrogen measured as nitrogen. The laboratory
determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in
Standard Methods as defined herein.
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued under the national pollutant discharge
elimination system for discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of the
United States pursuant to § 402 of Pub. L. No. 92-500, being 33 U.S.C. 1342.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
groundwater.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Has the same meaning as defined in the sewage rate
ordinance.
   P or PHOSPHORUS. The chemical element phosphorus.
   pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
group or other entity.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of industrial sewage from privately owned
industrial sources prior to introduction into a public treatment works.
   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned by a public authority.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is owned and controlled by the public authority
and will consist of the following increments.
      (1)   COLLECTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewaters from individual point source discharges.
      (2)   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
      (3)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from-collector sewers to a treatment facility.
      (4)   PUMPING STATION. A station positioned in the public sewer system at
which wastewater is pumped to a higher level.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sanitary and industrial wastes, and to
which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. The combination of liquid- and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions (including polluted
cooling water). The three most common types of sewage are:
      (1)   COMBINED SEWAGE. Wastes including sanitary sewage, industrial
sewage, stormwater, infiltration and inflow carried to the wastewater treatment
facilities by a combined sewer;
      (2)   INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE. A combination of liquid- and water-carried
wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment, and resulting from any
trade or process carried on in that establishment (this shall include the
wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water); and
      (3)   SANITARY SEWAGE. The combination of liquid- and water-carried
wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
   SEWAGE WORKS. The structures, equipment and processes to collect, transport
and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent and
accumulated residual solids.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SHALL. Mandatory; MAY is permissive.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than ten minutes more than three times the average 24 hours’
concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the
collection system.
   STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition,
at the time of analysis, of Standard methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer for conveying water, ground water or unpolluted water
from any source and to which sanitary and/or industrial wastes are not
intentionally admitted.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the municipal sewage works of the Town
of Hillsboro, Indiana, or his or her authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering under standard laboratory procedure.
   TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
   TOXIC AMOUNT. Concentrations of any pollutant or combination of pollutants,
which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause adverse
effects, such as cancer, genetic mutations and physiological manifestations, as
defined in standards issued pursuant to § 307(a) of Pub. L. No. 92-500.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER. The material in the sewage solids transformed to
gases or vapors when heated at 55°C for 15 to 20 minutes.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 9-26-1994)
§ 53.16 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property with the town
or in any area under the jurisdiction of said town any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sanitary
sewer, either directly or indirectly, storm waters, surface water, ground
water, roof run-off, subsurface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted water or
unpolluted industrial process water. The town shall require the removal of
unpolluted waters from any wastewater collection or treatment facility.
   (C)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, subsurface
drainage, cooling water, unpolluted water or unpolluted industrial process
water may be admitted to storm sewers which have adequate capacity for their
accommodation. No person shall use such sewers, however, without the specific
permission of the town. No new connection shall be made to any sanitary or
storm sewer unless there is capacity available in all downstream sewers, lift
stations, force mains and the sewage treatment plant including capacity for BOD
and suspended solids.
   (D)   No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner on public or private property within the jurisdiction of the
town any wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with provisions of this subchapter and the
NPDES permit.
   (E)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural
outlet any wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with provisions of this subchapter and the
NPDES permit.
   (F)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (G)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the town
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
a public sanitary sewer of the town is hereby required at his or her expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided
that said public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 9-26-1994) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.17 PRIVATE SYSTEM.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
53.16(G), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of $25 shall be paid to the town at
the time the application is filed.
   (C)   (1)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent.
      (2)   He or she shall be allowed to inspect the works at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours
of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Board of Health. No
permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing
subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than
20,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge
to any natural outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system as provided in division (D) above, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this
subchapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the town.
   (G)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within 90 days and the private sewage disposal system
shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
   (H)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health
Officer.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 9-26-1994)
§ 53.18 PERMITS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential and commercial service; and
         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In
either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special
form furnished by the said town. The permit application shall be supplemented
by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the
judgement of the Inspector.
      (2)   A permit and inspection fee of $10 for residential or commercial
building sewer permit and $25 for an industrial building sewer permit shall be
paid to the Clerk-Treasurer at the time the application is filed; provided,
however, no permit and inspection fee will be charged to customers connecting
to the sewer within 90 days of the date on which such sewer was available for
connection.
   (C)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
   (E)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the said Inspector, to meet all
requirements of this subchapter.
   (F)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and W.P.C. Manual of Practice No. FD-5 shall apply.
   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (H)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface run-off or ground
water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (I)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the town or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice
in No. FD-5. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Superintendent before installations.
   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the said
Inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of
the said Inspector or his or her representative. The applicant shall provide
access to all structures (and areas of structures) to the Inspector for the
purpose of establishing compliance with division (H) above.
   (K)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the said town.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 9-26-1994) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.19 DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic (as described in § 307A of
the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. 1317(a)) or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works or interfere with any treatment
process;
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, paper, dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either
whole or ground by garbage grinders;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies of jurisdiction of such discharge to the receiving waters;
      (6)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (7)   Any waters or wastes having pH in excess of 9.5;
      (8)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; and/or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      (9)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amendable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
   (B)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in division (A) above, and which in
judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
         (a)   Require any industries to submit information on wastewater
quantities and characteristics and obtain prior approval for discharges;
         (b)   Reject the wastes in whole or in part for any reason deemed
appropriate by the town;
         (c)   Require pretreatment of such wastes to within the limits of
normal sewage as defined;
         (d)   Require control or flow equalization of such wastes so as to
avoid any “slug” loads or excessive loads that may be harmful to the treatment
works; or
         (e)   Require payment of a surcharge on any excessive flows or
loadings discharged to the treatment works to cover the additional costs of
having capacity for and treating such wastes.
      (2)   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   (C)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
   (D)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense, and shall be maintained so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
Agents of the town, the State Water Pollution Control Agencies, and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing.
   (E)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this subchapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole, except for applications for NPDES permits and
report thereof which shall be conducted in accordance with rules and
regulations adopted by the U.S. EPA (40 C.F.R. part 136). In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all
outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should
be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined
from periodic grab samples.
   (F)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the town and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the town for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the
industrial concern, at such rates as are compatible with the rate ordinance.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 9-26-1994) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.20 PRETREATMENT.
   Pretreatment of industrial wastes from major contributing industries prior
to discharge to the treatment works is required and is subject to the rules and
regulations adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (U.S.
EPA) (40 C.F.R. part 403), and Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for
Analysis of Pollutants (40 C.F.R. part 136), in addition to any more stringent
requirements established by the town and any subsequent state or federal
guidelines and rules and regulations.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 9-26-1994) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.21 FACILITIES, PLANS, APPROVAL.
   Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
pretreatment or control facilities shall be submitted for approval of the town
and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until approval in
writing is granted. Where such facilities are provided, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operating order by the
owner at his or her expense and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the
town to determine that such facilities are being operated in conformance with
applicable federal, state and local laws and permits. The owner shall maintain
operating records and shall submit to the town a monthly summary report of the
character of the influent and effluent to show the performance of the treatment
facilities and for comparison against town monitoring records.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 9-26-1994) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.22 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Unpolluted water from air conditioners, cooling, condensing systems or
swimming pools, shall be discharged to a storm sewer, where it is available, or
to a combined sewer approved by the town. Where a storm sewer is not available,
discharge may be to a natural outlet approved by the town and by the state.
Where a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural sewer is not available, such
unpolluted water may be discharged to a sanitary sewer upon prior written
approval by the town.
   (B)   Industrial cooling water, which may be polluted with insoluble oils or
grease or suspended solids, shall be pretreated for removal of pollutants and
the resultant clear water shall be discharged in accordance with division (A)
above.
   (C)   The town may require users of the treatment works, other than
residential users, to supply pertinent information on wastewater flows and
characteristics. Such measurements, tests and analysis shall be made at the
user’s expense. If made by the town, an appropriate charge may be assessed to
the user at the option of the town.
   (D)   The strength of wastewaters shall be determined, for periodic
establishment of charges provided for in the rate ordinance, from samples taken
at the aforementioned structure at any period of time and of such duration and
in such manner as the town may elect, or, at any place mutually agreed upon
between the user and the town. Appropriate charges for sampling and analysis
may be assessed to the user at the option of the town. The results of routine
sampling and analysis by the user may also be used, for determination of
charges after verification by the town.
   (E)   (1)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided
when, in the opinion of the town they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand and other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors or traps will
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
or traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the town and shall be
located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
      (2)   They shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperatures and shall be of
substantial construction, be gas-tight, water-tight and equipped with easily
removable covers. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors or
traps shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously
efficient operation at all times.
   (F)   Users of the treatment works shall immediately notify the town of any
unusual flows or wastes that are discharged accidentally or otherwise to the
sewer system.
   (G)   All provisions of this subchapter and limits set herein shall comply
with any applicable state and/or federal requirements now, or projected to be,
in effect.
   (H)   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of criminal
mischief.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 9-26-1994) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.23 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Superintendent, Inspector and other duly authorized employees of
the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. The
Superintendent or his or her representative shall have no authority to inquire
into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic,
paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the
town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
town employees and the town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage
to its property by town employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
§
53.19(E).
   (C)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the town
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the town holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 9-26-1994)
§ 53.24 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   The rules and regulations promulgated by the town, after approved by the
Town Council shall, among other things, provide for an appeal procedure whereby
a user shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Administrator of the
sewage system to the Town Council and that any decision concerning sewage
system of the Town Council may be appealed to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 9-26-1994)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of §§
53.15 through
53.24, except §
53.22(H) shall be served by the town with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation (other than a violation
of §
53.16(B)) beyond the time limit provided for in division (A) above shall be, on
conviction of a violation of this subchapter, fined in an amount not exceeding
$500 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall
become liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the town
by reason of such violation.
      (4)   (a)   Any person violating §
53.16(B) shall be subjected to a penalty of $50 per month (or fraction thereof
in which the violation occurs).
         (b)   A person may avoid payment of said penalty by consenting to an
inspection described in §
53.18(J), for the purpose of establishing compliance with §
53.16(B).
         (c)   A person consenting to such an inspection and found in violation
shall be given 90 days to comply with §
53.16(B) without being subject to penalty.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 9-26-1994)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   OFF-ROAD VEHICLES AND GOLF CARTS
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
Traffic Control Devices
   
70.20   Establishment and maintenance of traffic control devices
   
70.21   Obedience to signals
   
70.22   Interference with signals
   
70.23   Unauthorized signals or markings
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. The following vehicles:
      (1)   Fire Department vehicles;
      (2)   Police Department vehicles;
      (3)   Ambulances;
      (4)   Emergency vehicles operated by or for hospitals or health and
hospital corporations under I.C. 16-22-8;
      (5)   Vehicles designated as emergency vehicles by the State Department
of Transportation under I.C. 9-21-20-1;
      (6)   Motor vehicles that, subject to I.C. 9-21-20-2, are approved by the
State Emergency Medical Services Commission, that are:
         (a)   Ambulances that are owned by persons, firms, limited liability
companies or corporations other than hospitals; or
         (b)   Not ambulances and that provide emergency medical services,
including extrication and rescue services (as defined in I.C. 16-18-2-110).
      (7)   Vehicles of the Department of Correction that, subject to I.C. 9-
21-20-3, are:
         (a)   Designated by the Department of Correction as emergency
vehicles; and
         (b)   Responding to an emergency.
(I.C. 9-13-2-6)
   DRIVER. A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
(I.C. 9-13-2-47)
   ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. A self-balancing, two
nontandem- wheeled device that is designed to transport only one person and
that has the following:
      (1)   An electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts or
one horsepower; and
      (2)   A maximum speed of less than 20 mph when operated on a paved level
surface, when powered solely by the propulsion system referred to in division
(1) above, and when operated by an operator weighing 170 pounds.
(I.C. 9-13-2-49.3)
   HIGHWAY or STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
publicly maintained way when any part of the way is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel. The term includes an alley.
(I.C. 9-13-2-73)
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within:
         (a)   The prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or if
none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways that join
at or approximately at right angles; or
         (b)   The area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways at least 30 feet apart, every
crossing of each roadway of the divided highway by an intersecting highway is
regarded as a separate INTERSECTION. If the intersecting highway also includes
two roadways at least 30 feet apart, every crossing of two roadways of the
intersecting highway is regarded as a separate INTERSECTION.
(I.C. 9-13-2-84)
   MOTOR VEHICLE.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this definition, a vehicle that is
self-propelled. The term does not include a farm tractor, an implement of
agriculture designed to be operated primarily in a farm field or on farm
premises, an electric bicycle, an electric foot scooter, or an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
      (2)   MOTOR VEHICLE also means:
         (a)   A vehicle that is self-propelled; or
         (b)   A vehicle that is propelled by electric power obtained from
overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
(I.C. 9-13-2-105(a) and (b))
   MOTORCYCLE.
      (1)   A motor vehicle with motive power that:
         (a)   Has a seat or saddle for the use of the rider;
         (b)   Is designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground; and
         (c)   Satisfies the operational and equipment specifications described
in 49 C.F.R. part 571 and I.C. 9-19.
      (2)   The term includes an autocycle, but does not include a farm
tractor, an electric bicycle, or a motor driven cycle.
(I.C. 9-13-2-108)
   OPERATOR. An individual who operates a vehicle, watercraft, off-road
vehicle, or snowmobile.
(I.C. 9-13-2-118(a))
   OWNER. A person, other than a lienholder, that:
      (1)   Holds the property in or title to, as applicable, a vehicle,
manufactured home, mobile home, off-road vehicle, snowmobile, or watercraft; or
      (2)   Is entitled to the use or possession of, as applicable, a vehicle,
manufactured home, off-road vehicle, snowmobile, or watercraft, through a lease
or other agreement intended to operate as a security.
(I.C. 9-13-2-121)
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of a highway.
(I.C. 9-13-2-155)
   ROADWAY.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (2) below, that part of a highway
improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
      (2)   As used in I.C. 9-21-12-13, the part of a highway that is improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. The term does not include the
sidewalk, berm or shoulder, even if the sidewalk, berm or shoulder is used by
persons riding bicycles or other human powered vehicles.
(I.C. 9-13-2-157)
   STREET. See HIGHWAY.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. A highway or portion of a highway at the entrance to which
vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield right-
of-way to vehicles on the through highway, in obedience to either a stop sign
or a yield sign.
(I.C. 9-13-2-178)
   VEHICLE. A device in, upon, or by which a person or property is, or may be,
transported or drawn upon a highway. The term does not include the following: a
device moved by human power; a device that runs only on rails or tracks; a
wheelchair; and/or an electric foot scooter.
(I.C. 9-13-2-196(a))
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.20 ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   The town may establish and maintain official traffic control devices
necessary within the town. All traffic control devices, including signs, shall
be employed to indicate one particular warning or regulation, shall be uniform,
and as far as possible shall be placed uniformly. All traffic control devices
and signs shall conform to required state specifications.
§ 70.21 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the
signal of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code or of a traffic barrier or sign erected by any
of the public departments or public utilities of the town, or any electric
signal, gate or watchman at railroad crossings, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer. However, the type and the right to or necessity for the barrier
or sign must be approved by the town.
   (B)   The sign, signal, marking or barrier shall have the same authority as
the personal direction of a police officer.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.22 INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person without authority to attempt to or in
fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official control device or
any railroad sign or signal, or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or
any part thereof.
Penalty see §
70.99
§ 70.23 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or display on
or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be, is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic device,
railroad sign or signal which attempts or purports to direct the movement of
traffic, or which conceals or hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or signal. No
person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit on any
street, any traffic sign or signal containing any commercial advertising.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as restricting any public department
or public utility of the town in any emergency or temporarily from marking or
erecting any traffic barrier or sign whose placing has been approved by the
town.
   (B)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to be a
public nuisance and the town is empowered forthwith to remove it or cause it to
be removed.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this title for
which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $2,500. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Trucks prohibited on certain streets
   
71.02   Stop intersections
   
71.03   One-way streets
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned/junk vehicles, see §
93.04
Statutory reference:
   Authority to enact local traffic regulations, see I.C. 9-21-1-3
   Authority to lower local speed limits, see I.C. 9-21-5-6
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   No trucks, other than pickup trucks and passenger trucks and vans, shall be
allowed to operate on any posted town streets unless they must use the
particular street in question for the purpose of local pickup or delivery.
Posted streets are those which have signs on them indicating that their use by
through trucks is prohibited.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The town may designate intersections as stop intersections and require
all vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to the intersections.
   (B)   The town shall post signs at designated intersections, giving notice
of the designation as a stop intersection.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the markings or
signs posted under this section.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   The town may designate streets or highways as one-way streets or
highways, and may require that all vehicles operated on the street or highway
be moved in one specific direction.
   (B)   The town shall post signs at the entrance to the street or part of the
street that is affected, giving notice of the designation as a one-way street.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the markings or
signs posted under this section.
Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   No parking where posted
   
72.02   Limited parking
   
72.03   Other parking restrictions
   
72.04   Parking for persons with physical disability
   
72.05   Truck parking
   
72.06   Snow removal and parking
 
   
72.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned/junk vehicles, see §
93.04
Statutory reference:
   Authority to enact local parking regulations, see I.C. 9-21-1-3
§ 72.01 NO PARKING WHERE POSTED.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon the public streets of the
town at any place where official signs or where appropriate devices, marks or
painting, either upon the surface of the street or the curb immediately
adjacent thereto, prohibit those acts.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 LIMITED PARKING.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon the public streets of the
town where official signs are erected limiting the parking time thereon, for a
period of time in excess of the time as designated by the official signs.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 OTHER PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The Town Council may order the placing of signs, devices or marks, or
the painting of streets or curbs prohibiting or restricting the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles on any street where, in its opinion, the
stopping, standing or parking is dangerous to those using the highway, or where
the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the
free movement of traffic thereon.
   (B)   The signs, devices, marks or painting shall be official signs,
devices, marks or painting; and no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle
in violation of the restrictions thereon or as indicated thereby.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITY.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      PERSON WITH A PHYSICAL DISABILITY. Any person who has been issued a
placard or special registration plate or decal for a motor vehicle by the State
Bureau of Motor Vehicles under I.C. 9-8.5-8, or the laws of another state.
   (B)   Parking prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle,
motorcycle, moped, bicycle or other vehicle of any nature, which does not have
displayed a placard for a person with a physical disability issued under the
laws of this state or the laws of another state, in a parking space reserved
for a vehicle of a person with a physical disability.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly park in a parking
space reserved for a person with a physical disability while displaying a
placard to which neither the person nor the person’s passenger is entitled.
   (C)   Violation. If any vehicle is parked unlawfully in violation of any of
the provisions of this section, and the identity of the driver cannot be
determined, the owner or person in whose name the vehicle is registered shall
be held prima facie responsible for the violation.
   (D)   Towing. In addition to any fines which may be given as a result of
violations of this section, any vehicle which is parked in a manner in
violation of this section may be towed to an area designated by the town at the
owner’s expense. The owner shall also be required to pay any and all storage
fees resulting from this action.
Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see I.C. 5-16-9
§ 72.05 TRUCK PARKING.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the general welfare
and protect the general public through the regulation of truck traffic within
the town, and to preserve and protect the streets of the town from damage by
heavy truck traffic.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      PARKING. The standing of any vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon any
street, alley or public place other then temporarily for the purpose and while
actually engaging in loading or unloading, or in obedience of traffic
regulations or traffic signs or signals.
   (C)   Unlawful acts.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park a
truck upon the streets of the town that is rated a two and a half ton truck or
over, except if the truck is being loaded with cargo or merchandise, or
unloaded.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park or
leave standing any truck, attended or unattended, upon the travel portion of
any public alley in the town, except for the purposes of loading or unloading
the vehicle, and in such case not to exceed a period of 30 minutes.
   (D)   Application of section. Nothing in this section shall restrict the
operation of trucks on state highways through the town.
   (E)   Injunction. In addition to any penalties set out in §
72.99 for violation of this section, the town shall have the additional right
and option to seek an injunction against any person, firm or corporation
violating the terms hereof, and to file civil action for the recovery of
damages resulting to the streets and public ways of the town.
(Ord. 06-01, passed 4-10-2006) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 SNOW REMOVAL AND PARKING.
   Any vehicle parked on the streets of the town that is in the way of snow
removal equipment shall be moved at the owner’s expense if he or she does not
move the vehicle when told to do so by the snow removal crew.
(Ord. 74-2, passed 1-14-1974) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $100. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   (1)   Any firm, person or corporation found to be in violation of §
72.05 shall be fined as follows:
 
$50  For the first offense, plus the costs of enforcement of such violation
$100 For any subsequent offense, plus the costs of enforcement of such
     violation
 
      (2)   In the event a violation of §
72.05 constitutes an immediate hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, the
truck being operated or parked in violation may be towed away and impounded by
the Town Marshal, and the person found to be in violation shall be liable for
such expense.
(Ord. 06-01, passed 4-10-2006)
CHAPTER 73: OFF-ROAD VEHICLES AND GOLF CARTS
Section
   
73.01   Title
   
73.02   Definitions
   
73.03   Purposes
   
73.04   Persons authorized to operate off-road vehicles and golf carts on town
roads and alleys
   
73.05   Insurance
   
73.06   Registration/compliance with state law
   
73.07   Restrictions on operation
   
73.08   Operation on town roads and alleys
   
73.09   Right to restrict off-road vehicle traffic and golf cart traffic on
designated town roads and alleys
   
73.10   Enforcement
   
73.11   Application and effectiveness
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Off-Road Vehicle and Golf Cart
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2014-7, passed 8-11-2014)
§ 73.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOLF CART. A four-wheel motor vehicle originally and specifically designed
and intended to transport one or more individuals and golf clubs for the
purpose of playing the game of golf on a golf course.
   HIGHWAY, ROAD or RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire width between the boundary lines
of every way maintained by and within the jurisdiction of Hillsboro, Indiana,
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
   OFF-ROAD VEHICLE.  
      (1)   A motor driven vehicle capable of cross country travel without the
benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, water, snow, ice,
marsh, swampland or other natural terrain.
      (2)   It includes, but is not limited to, a multi-wheel driven or low
pressure tier vehicle, amphibious machine, ground effect air cushion vehicle or
other means of transportation deriving power form a source other than muscle or
wind.
      (3)   It does not include a farm vehicle being used for farming or a
vehicle used for military or law enforcement purposes, a construction, mining
or other industrial related vehicle used in performance of its common function,
a snowmobile, a golf cart, a registered aircraft or any other vehicle properly
registered by the State Bureau of Motor Vehicles, and any watercraft which is
registered to state statutes.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on and to be in actual physical control of the
operation of an off-road vehicle or golf cart.
   OPERATOR. Any person at least 16 years old, holding a valid Indiana license
to operate a motor vehicle, or a valid license to operate a motor vehicle from
another state.
(Ord. 2014-7, passed 8-11-2014)
§ 73.03 PURPOSES.
   The purpose of this chapter is:
   (A)   To authorize persons at least 16 years old holding a valid Indiana
motor vehicle driver’s license (or a valid motor vehicle license from another
state) to operate off-road vehicles registered with the State Department of
Natural Resources and the Town of Hillsboro Police Department over and upon
town roads and alleys;
   (B)   To authorize persons at least 16 years old holding a valid Indiana
motor vehicle driver’s license (or a valid motor vehicle license from another
state) to operate golf carts registered with the Town Police Department over
and upon town roads and alleys;
   (C)   To establish rules and regulations for the operation of off-road
vehicles and golf carts over and upon town roads and alleys; and
   (D)   To permit the safety of persons and property, responsible enjoyment in
and connected with the use and operation of off-road vehicles and golf carts,
and understanding consistent with the rights of all the citizens of this town.
(Ord. 2014-7, passed 8-11-2014)
§ 73.04 PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO OPERATE OFF-ROAD VEHICLES AND GOLF CARTS ON TOWN
ROADS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   All persons at least 16 years old who hold a valid motor vehicle
driver’s license are hereby authorized to operate an off-road vehicle and/or
golf cart over and upon town roads and alleys under the conditions set forth in
this chapter, and solely for the purpose of reaching a predetermined
destination.
   (B)   No person shall operate an off-road vehicle or golf cart on any town
road or alley without a valid motor vehicle driver’s license.
(Ord. 2014-7, passed 8-11-2014) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Any person who owns and operates or allows to be operated, an off-road
vehicle or golf cart over and upon town roads and alleys shall maintain
recreational vehicle liability insurance in the minimum amount of $100,000 per
person and $300,000 per occurrence insuring against injury to persons and
damage to property arising from the use and operation of such off-road vehicle
or golf cart upon town roads and alleys.
   (B)   Any person who owns and operates or allows to be operated, an off-road
vehicle or golf cart over an upon town roads and alleys shall carry proof of
such insurance on his or her person and a copy in the vehicle at all times when
operating an off-road vehicle or golf cart on town roads and alleys.
(Ord. 2014-7, passed 8-11-2014) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.06 REGISTRATION/COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   An off-road vehicle shall not be operated on a town road and alley unless it
is duly registered with the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and meets
all of the standards, requirements and regulations set forth in I.C. 14-16-1-
1 et seq. An off-road vehicle and a golf cart shall not be operated on a town
road and alley unless it is duly registered with the Police Department. Said
registration shall last for a period of three years to coincide with the DNR
registration. Registration fees for off-road vehicles are set but the DNR and
are not subject to modification or collection by the town. Golf cart
registrations, in the amount of $20 per vehicle for the same three-year period
as DNR registrations. The Council reserves the right to modify the amount of
golf cart registrations at their discretion. Such registrations are non-
transferable and must be carried with the golf carts at all times they are
being driven on town streets and alleys. The town shall issue a sticker to be
affixed to the golf cart for the entirety of the registration period. Failure
to display the sticker may result in a citation and/or fine to be issued by the
Town Marshal. Application forms are available at the Town Hall.
(Ord. 2014-7, passed 8-11-2014 ; Ord. 2023-1, passed 7-10-2023 ) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATION.
   No person shall operate an off-road vehicle or golf cart:
   (A)   At a rate of speed greater than 20 mph, and is reasonable and proper
having due regard for conditions then existing;
   (B)   While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or unlawful under the
influence of narcotic or other habit forming or dangerous depressant or
stimulant drugs;
   (C)   During the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour
before sunrise without displaying a lighted headlight and tail-light;
   (D)   On or across a cemetery or burial ground;
   (E)   On a railroad track or railroad right-of-way, except railroad
personnel in performance of their duties;
   (F)   In a forest nursery, a planting area or public land posted or
reasonably identified as an area of forest or plant reproduction and when
growing stock may be damaged;
   (G)   On the frozen surface of public waters within:
      (1)   One hundred feet of an individual not in or upon a vehicle; or
      (2)   One hundred feet of a fishing shanty or shelter except at speed of
not more than five mph.
   (H)   Unless the vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working order
and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying
smoke;
   (I)   Within 100 feet of a dwelling between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except
on the individual’s own property or property under the individual’s control or
as an invited guest;
   (J)   On any property without the consent of the landowner;
   (K)   An individual shall not operate an off-road vehicle or golf cart while
a bow is present in or on the off-road vehicle or golf cart if the nock of an
arrow is in position on the string of the bow;
   (L)   Unless the off-road vehicle or golf cart is equipped with a lighted
taillight, the off-road vehicle or golf cart shall display reflective tape or a
slow moving vehicle emblem on the rear of the off-road vehicle or golf cart; or
   (M)   On or about town property, specifically, but not limited to, the town.
(Ord. 2014-7, passed 8-11-2014) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08 OPERATION ON TOWN ROADS AND ALLEYS.
   A person shall comply with the following rules when operating an off-road
vehicle or golf cart on town roads and alleys.
   (A)   The operator of an off-road vehicle or golf cart shall abide by all
traffic laws governing the operation of motor vehicles in the state, set forth
in I.C. 9 and 14.
   (B)   The operator of an off-road vehicle or golf cart may not cross a town
road or enter upon a town road other than at right angles.
   (C)   The operator of an off-road vehicle or golf cart shall bring his or
her vehicle or cart to a complete stop before proceeding onto or across a town
road or alley and shall yield the right-of-way to traffic.
(Ord. 2014-7, passed 8-11-2014) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.09 RIGHT TO RESTRICT OFF-ROAD VEHICLE TRAFFIC AND GOLF CART TRAFFIC ON
DESIGNATED TOWN ROAD AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   The Town Council may restrict off-road vehicular and golf cart traffic
on town roads and alleys by designating such roads as unsuitable for off-road
vehicular or golf carts and by posting signs on such designated roads and
alleys.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this chapter to operate an off-road vehicle
or golf cart on any town road or alley so designated and posted.
(Ord. 2014-7, passed 8-11-2014) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   Unless otherwise prohibited by state law, all law enforcement officers
having jurisdiction in the town, including officers of the State Department of
Natural Resources, shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2014-7, passed 8-11-2014)
§ 73.11 APPLICATION AND EFFECTIVENESS.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply only to the incorporated areas of the town.
   (B)   This chapter shall not be construed to permit the use of off-road
vehicles or golf carts on state highways.
   (C)   This chapter shall become in full force and effect from and after
adoption by the Town Council and its publication in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1.
   (D)   Any violations of state law that occurred prior to the enactment of
this chapter shall not be exempted from enforcement.
(Ord. 2014-7, passed 8-11-2014)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person that operates an off-road vehicle or golf cart in violation
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined as follows:
      (1)   First offense: $50;
      (2)   Second offense: $75; and
      (3)   Third offense: $150, plus revocation of driving privileges under
this chapter.
   (B)   Violators may also be assessed reasonable attorney fees and costs of
collection incurred in enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-7, passed 8-11-2014)
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Load limits
      
II.   Stop signs
      
III.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   The total gross weight with load in pounds of any vehicle shall not
exceed 12,000 pounds on Park Avenue Bridge.
   (B)   The total weight concentrated on roadway service from any tandem axle
group shall not exceed 4,000 pounds for each axle of a tandem assembly on Park
Avenue Bridge.
   (C)   This schedule shall not apply as to marked and identified federal or
state routes or highways.
   (D)   This schedule shall be superseding and shall not apply as to any
roadway over which the county maintains jurisdiction and the responsibility to
repair and maintain said roadway, in which case the load limits should not
exceed those imposed by the county.
   (E)   Violation of this schedule shall be a Class A infraction and penalized
as provided in the state for Class A infractions.
(Ord. 90-1, passed - -)
SCHEDULE II. STOP SIGNS.
   (A)   Stop signs shall be erected at the entrances to the intersections
specified below:
Street Location
Street           Location
                 At the east entrance from Cherry Street to its intersection
Cherry Street    with Park Avenue, and at the east entrance from Cherry Street
                 (also known as Hershey Lane) to its intersection with Hobson
                 Street
Coal Creek Drive At the south entrance from Coal Creek Drive to its
                 intersection with U.S. Highway 136 (Main Street)
                 At the north and south entrances from Cross Street to its
Cross Street     intersection with U.S. Highway, 136 (Main Street), and at the
                 north and south entrances from Cross Street to its
                 intersection with Market Street
                 At the east and west entrances from Davidson Street to its
                 intersection with Park Avenue, at the east and west entrances
Davidson Street  from Davidson Street to its intersection with Thompson Street,
                 at the east and west entrances from Davidson Street to its
                 intersection with Murphy Street, and at the east and west
                 intersections with Hobson Street
                 At the east and west entrances from First Street to its
First Street     intersection with Water Street, and at the west entrance from
                 First Street to its intersection with Park Avenue
                 At the north entrance from Hobson Street to its intersection
Hobson Street    with U.S. Highway 136 (Main Street), and at the south entrance
                 from Hobson Street to its intersection with Cherry Street
                 At the east and west entrances from Lucas Street to its
Lucas Street     intersection with Water Street, and at the west entrance from
                 Lucas Street to its intersection with Park Avenue
                 At the east and west entrances from Market Street to its
                 intersection with Water Street, at the east and west entrances
                 from Market Street to its intersection with Cross Street, at
                 the east and west entrances from Market Street to its
Market Street    intersection with Thompson Street, at the east and west
                 entrances from Market Street to its intersection with Murphy
                 Street, at the west entrance from Market Street to its
                 intersection with Hobson Street, and at the east and west
                 intersections with Park Avenue
                 At the north entrance from Murphy Street to its intersection
Murphy Street    with U.S. Highway 136 (Main Street), and at the south entrance
                 from Murphy Street to its intersection with Cherry Street
Park Avenue      At the north entrance from Park Avenue to its intersection
                 with U.S. Highway 136 (Main Street)
Second Street    At the west entrance from Second Street to its intersection
                 with Park Avenue
Short Street     At the north entrance from Short Street to its intersection
                 with U.S. Highway 136 (Main Street)
                 At the south entrance from Park Avenue to its intersection
                 with U.S. Highway 136 (Main Street), at the north and south
Thompson Street  entrances from Thompson Street to its intersection with
                 Davidson Street, and at the south entrance from Thompson
                 Street to its intersection with Cherry Street
                 At the north entrance from Water Street to its intersection
Water Street     with U.S. Highway 136 (Main Street), and at the south entrance
                 from Water Street to its intersection with Second Street
                 At the east entrance from Wright Street running east and west
                 and lying north of Davidson Street and south of Cherry Street
                 to its intersection with Park Avenue, at the west entrance
Wright Street    from Wright Street to its intersection with Thompson Street,
                 at the east entrance from Wright Street to its intersection
                 with Murphy Street, and at the west entrance from Wright
                 Street to its intersection with Hobson Street
 
   (B)   The employees of the town are hereby authorized and directed to post
and maintain stop signs at the entrances specified above in accordance with the
Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. The
acts of the employees of the town in previously erecting stop signs at such
entrances to intersections are hereby ratified and confirmed in all respects.
   (C)   Any operator of a motor vehicle who fails to come to a full and
complete stop at any of the entrances to intersections designated by this
schedule or who disregards any of the stop signs erected and maintained
pursuant to this schedule shall be fined up to $500 for each violation.
(Ord. 94-05, passed - -1994)
SCHEDULE III. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Speed limits.
 
Street          Location                           Speed Limit
Hobson Street   From US 136 north to Cherry Street 20 mph
Murphy Street   From US 136 north to Cherry Street 20 mph
Park Avenue     From US 136 north to Hayes Street  20 mph
Thompson Street From US 136 north to Cherry Street 20 mph
Water Street    From US 136 north to Hayes Street  20 mph
 
   (B)   Out of concern for the safety of all, particularly children, the
following speed limit has been set out around the perimeter of the park:
 
Street          Location                           Speed Limit
Davidson Street Between Murphy and Thompson        20 mph
Murphy Street   Between Davidson and Cherry Street 20 mph
Park Avenue     Between Cherry and Market Street   20 mph
Thompson Street Between Davidson and Cherry Street 20 mph
 
   (B)   (1)   The boundaries of Betty Bailey Park are defined as follows:
         (a)   Western boundary: the west right-of-way line of Thompson Street;
         (b)   Northern boundary: the south lot lines of Lots 23 and 28 in the
Bert S. Thompson First Addition to the Fairview Addition to the town, as such
lines are extended to the west right-of-way line, of Thompson Street and the
east right-of-way line of Murphy Street;
         (c)   Eastern boundary: the eastern right-of-way line of Murphy
Street; and
         (d)   Southern boundary: the southern right-of-way line of Davidson
Street.
      (2)   The maximum speed limit on the streets within Betty Bailey Park as
described above in division (B)(1) is decreased to 20 mph pursuant to the
authority of I.C. 9-21-5-6(e).
      (3)   The employees of the town are hereby authorized and directed to
post “20 Miles Per Hour Speed Limit” signs on the streets in Betty Bailey Park
consistent with this schedule.
      (4)   Any operator of a motor vehicle who violates the provisions of this
division (B) shall be fined up to $500 for each violation.
   (C)   Sign posting. Employees of the town are hereby authorized and directed
to post speed limit signs on the designated streets consistent with this
schedule.
   (D)   Penalties. Any person who violates this schedule shall be subject to
fines and costs as allowed under I.C. 9-21-5-13.
(Res. passed - -; Ord. passed 8-12-1985; Ord. 94-4, passed 7-11-1994; Ord.
2021-5, passed 10-11-2021)
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Handicap parking
      
II.   No parking
      
III.   Parallel parking
      
IV.   Authorized vehicles only
SCHEDULE I. HANDICAP PARKING.
   (A)   The following areas in within the corporation limits of the town shall
be designated “Handicapped Parking Only:”
      (1)   One space at the first spot on the west side of the south end of
Water Street in the town; and
      (2)   One space directly in front of the Town Hall.
   (B)   The Town Street Department shall erect appropriate signs designating
said parking spaces as “Handicapped Parking Only.”
   (C)   It is further ordained that the penalty for violation of this schedule
shall be a fine not to exceed $50.
(Ord. 04-06, passed - -)
SCHEDULE II. NO PARKING.
   (A)   Parking shall be restricted as follows.
 
Restriction               Location
                          South side of U.S. 136 in the town from the west edge
No parking anytime        of SR 341 west a distance of 120 feet, a distance of
                          approximately 120 feet
                          On the south side of U.S. 136, S.R. 341 (Main St.)
No parking here to corner from the southeast corner of SR 341 to a point 30
                          feet east of the southeast corner of S.R. 341, a
                          distance of approximately 30 feet
                          On the south side of U.S. 136, S.R. 341 (Main St.)
No parking here to corner from a point 30 feet west of the southwest corner of
                          Cross Street to the southwest corner of Cross Street,
                          a distance of approximately 30 feet
                          On the east side of S.R. 341 from a point 45 feet
No parking here to corner south of the southeast corner of U.S. 136 to the
                          southeast corner of U.S. 136, a distance of
                          approximately 45 feet
No parking                On the east side of Hobson Street from State Highway
                          136 north 150 feet
                          Along the south edge of U.S. 136 from the southeast
                          corner of the intersection of U.S. 136 at Cross
No parking                Street east approximately 70 feet to a point
                          approximately 70 feet east of the southeast corner of
                          the intersection of U.S. 136 at Cross Street a total
                          distance of approximately 70 feet
 
   (B)   (1)   The parking of vehicles on the west side of Thompson Street
between Davidson Street on the south and Cherry Street on the north in the town
is hereby prohibited.
      (2)   The parking of motor vehicles on the east side of Murphy Street
between Davidson Street on the south and Cherry Street on the north in the town
is hereby prohibited.
      (3)   The employees of the town are hereby authorized and directed to
post “No Parking” signs on Thompson and Murphy Streets consistent with
divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above.
      (4)   Any owner or operator of a motor vehicle who violates the
provisions of this division (B) shall be fined up to $100.
   (C)   (1)   Parking a vehicle along the south side of U.S. 136 in front of
the Town Hall which is commonly known as 100 W. Main Street is prohibited.
      (2)   The employees of the town are hereby authorized and directed to
post “No Parking” signs in said parking area.
      (3)   Those persons parking in said area shall have a penalty of not to
exceed $50 imposed against them for violating this division (C).
   (D)   (1)   Parking a vehicle along the west side of the street from 300-302
North Murphy Street is prohibited.
      (2)   The employees of the town are hereby authorized and directed to
post “No Parking” signs in said parking area.
      (3)   Those persons parking in said area shall have a penalty of not to
exceed $50 imposed against them for violating this division (D).
   (E)   (1)   Parking a vehicle on the east side on Water Street from Market
Street to Lucas Street is prohibited.
      (2)   Parking a vehicle on the west side on Water Street from Lucas
Street to Hayes Street is prohibited.
      (3)   The employees of the town are hereby authorized and directed to
post “No Parking” signs in said parking areas.
      (4)   Those persons parking in said area shall have a penalty of not to
exceed $50 imposed against them for violating this division (E).
   (F)   (1)   Parking on the north side of Wright Street from Thompson Street
to Park Avenue is a no parking area.
      (2)   The employees of the town are hereby authorized and directed to
post “No Parking” signs along the north side of Wright Street from Thompson
Street to Park Avenue consistent with this division (F).
      (3)   Those persons parking in said area shall have a penalty of not to
exceed $50 imposed against them for violating this division (F).
(Ord. 84-16, passed - -; Res. passed 8-21-1969; Res. passed 12-31-1980; Ord.
passed 9-13-1993; Ord. 00-02, passed 2-14-2000; Ord. 03-02, passed 2-10-2003;
Ord. 03-04, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 03-05, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 04-05, passed
7-12-2004)
SCHEDULE III. PARALLEL PARKING.
   (A)   Parking on the east side of Water Street from “1” to the “110” block
is by parallel parking only.
   (B)   The employees of the town are hereby authorized and directed to post
“Parallel Parking Only” signs along the east side of the “1” to “110” block of
Water Street consistent with this schedule.
(Ord. 01-10, passed 11-5-2001)
SCHEDULE IV. AUTHORIZED VEHICLES ONLY.
   (A)   Parking a vehicle in the parking area on the real property commonly
known as 100 E. Main Street, is prohibited except for authorized vehicles only.
   (B)   The employees of the town are hereby authorized and directed to post
“Authorized Vehicles Only” signs in said parking area.
   (C)   Those persons parking in said area shall have a penalty of not to
exceed $50 imposed against them for violating this schedule.
(Ord. 03-01, passed 2-10-2003)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FAIR HOUSING
      
92.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
93.   NUISANCES
      
94.   OPEN BURNING
      
95.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
96.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Animals at large
   
90.03   Animals in heat
   
90.04   Vicious and nuisance animals
   
90.05   Abandonment of animals
   
90.06   Complaints; procedure for handling
   
90.07   Issuance of warning
   
90.08   Police to enforce chapter
   
90.09   Impoundment fees
   
90.10   Interference unlawful
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT. The voluntary relinquishment of possession by the owner with
the intention of terminating his or her ownership but without vesting it in any
other person.
   ANIMAL. Primarily means all members of the canine, feline, rodent families
and reptiles. Also any animal domestic, domesticated or wild, the keeping or
harboring of which might violate any section hereof.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner while not under the control of the
owner or another person by leash, cord, chain or other device of actual
physical restraint or under control of the owner or another person who has the
ability to control the animal by voice command.
   NUISANCE. A condition which arises by an animal emitting noises consistently
so as to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, or who consistently
or at intervals, chases bicycles, automobiles or pedestrians on the streets and
sidewalks of the town, or any other condition created by an animal which would
destroy or deface shrubbery, gardens, lawns or flowers, or which might result
in the general discomfort of citizens in the community where such animal is
harbored.
   OWNER. Any person or persons or entity owning, keeping or harboring an
animal.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal that without one provocation has been known to
have scratched or bitten a human being, inflicting a personal injury or who
promiscuously attacks other animals.
(Prior Code, § 62.01)
§ 90.02 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner of or having immediate
custody of any animal whether taxed or untaxed, licensed or unlicensed, to
suffer or permit such animal to run at large within the town limits.
(Prior Code, § 62.01) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 ANIMALS IN HEAT.
   All owners shall confine within a building or secure enclosure any animal
when in heat or rutting; and it shall be unlawful for any owner to remove such
animal from such building or enclosure at any time so as to permit contact with
another animal except for controlled breeding purposes.
(Prior Code, § 62.01) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 VICIOUS AND NUISANCE ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep within the town any
animal covered by this chapter that is vicious or that creates a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 62.01) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal to abandon the same within
the corporate limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 62.01) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 COMPLAINTS; PROCEDURE FOR HANDLING.
   Any persons complaining to the Town Police Department (and/or Town/County
Animal Shelter) of an animal violating any section or sections of this chapter
shall be required to sign a complaint form provided by said departments and
available at Town Hall, describing said animal, the violation, the location of
said violation, and make known to said responding department, the owner of said
animal if known by complainant.
(Prior Code, § 62.01)
§ 90.07 ISSUANCE OF WARNING.
   One such completely filed complaint shall be sufficient cause for the Town
Police Department to issue a warning to the owner or to have the animal stated
in the complaint impounded in the best interest of the public safety.
(Prior Code, § 62.01)
§ 90.08 POLICE TO ENFORCE CHAPTER.
   It shall be the duty of the Town Police Department (and/or Town/County
Animal Shelter) to enforce the provisions of this chapter and at its discretion
to impound all animals not conforming to this chapter. Any dangerous, fierce or
vicious animal found at large that cannot be safely taken up or impounded may
be destroyed by any person authorized to impound the same as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 62.01)
§ 90.09 IMPOUNDMENT FEES.
   (A)   Such impounded animals shall be redeemed by the owner within ten days
by payment of an impoundment fee of $25 or impoundment fee as set forth by
Animal Control. A receipt will be issued and must be presented to the
Department of Animal Control when redeeming impounded animal(s).
   (B)   In addition, a shelter or boarding fee will be payable directly to the
Department of Animal Control over the accumulated period during which the
animal(s) was impounded. If impounded animal is not redeemed by the owner
within ten days, the Department of Animal Control shall have the option of
adopting out or destroying the impounded animal(s). Furthermore, the Town/
County Animal Shelter shall have the right to have an impounded animal
inoculated against rabies at the owner’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 62.01)
§ 90.10 INTERFERENCE UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with any person
authorized to perform any duty described in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 62.01) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating or failing to comply with this chapter, or any person
failing to have an animal inoculated against rabies shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter and will be fined $25 for the first offense per
animal and $50 for the second offense per animal. On a third violation, it may
be ordered that any animals of the same owner may be turned over to the
Department of Animal Control to be disposed of by said officers in a humane
manner. In addition, a $100 fine may be imposed to cover expenses of the
Department of Animal Control.
(Prior Code, § 62.01)
CHAPTER 91: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
91.01   Policy statement
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Unlawful practice
   
91.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
91.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions
   
91.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
91.07   Interference, coercion, or intimidation
   
91.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
   
91.09   Equal access to housing in HUD programs
   
91.10   Exemptions
   
91.11   Administrative enforcement of chapter
   
91.12   Severability of provisions
§ 91.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   It shall be the policy of the town to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the federal Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 2018-5, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON.  Includes any person who:
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-2)
   COMMISSION. The Indiana Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C. 22-
9-1-4, et seq.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)
   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint under
I.C. 22-9.5-6.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)
   DISABILITY.   
      (1)   With respect to a person:
         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of such person's major life activities;
         (b)   A record of having such an impairment;
         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;
         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; or
         (e)   Any other impairment defined in 910 IAC 2-3.
      (2)   The term DISABILITY shall not include current illegal use of or
addictions to a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802, 910 IAC 2-
3-2(14); nor does the term DISABILITY include an individual solely because that
individual is a transvestite 910 IAC 2-3-2(14).
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
91.04, 91.05, 91.06, 91.07, or 91.08 of this chapter or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that
is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as/or designed or intended for occupancy as a
residence by one or more families.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-8).
   FAMILIAL STATUS. One or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18
years being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody of
such individual or the written permission of such parent or other person. The
protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status
shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing
legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual, with the status of such family being
further defined above in the definition of “familial status” in this section.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-9)
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under 11 U.S.C., receivers, and fiduciaries.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the occupant.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)
(Ord. 2018-5, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 91.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   Subject to the provisions of division (B) of this section, §
91.09 of this chapter, and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against
discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in I.C. 22-9.5-5-
1 and in §
91.04 of this chapter shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by I.C. 22-9.5-3(B);
   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) of this section, nothing in
§
91.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses
at any one time; provided that in the sale of such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or
exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24-month period. The
private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on his or her behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses
at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be
exempted from application of this section only if such house is sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or any person in the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any
such broker, agent or salesman, or person; and
         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
91.04(C) of this chapter, but noting in this provision shall prohibit the use
of attorneys, escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title; or
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent,
other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in providing sales
or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions involving the sale
or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
      (3)   They are the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Ord. 2018-5, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 91.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   As made applicable by §
91.03 and except as exempted by §
91.03(B) and §
91.09, it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status or national origin;
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services of
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status or national origin;
   (C)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published
any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on
race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin, or
an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination;
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available;
   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion,
sex, disability, familial status or national origin;
   (F)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability
of:
      (1)   That buyer or renter;
      (2)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after
it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
      (3)   Any person associated with that person.
   (G)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a disability of:
      (1)   That person;
      (2)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after
it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
      (3)   Any person associated with that person.
   (H)   (1)   For purposes of this section, DISCRIMINATION includes:
         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with a
disability, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such
person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the
landlord may where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a
modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to
the condition that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear
excepted;
         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months after
September 13, 1998, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a
manner that:
            1.   The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by persons with a disability;
            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
persons with a disability in wheelchairs; and
            3.   All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
               a.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
               b.   Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
               c.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
      (2)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard for Buildings
and Facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically disabled
people (commonly cited as DANSI A117.1") suffices to satisfy the requirements
of division (H)(1)(c)3.c. above.
      (3)   Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made available
to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health
of safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
(Ord. 2018-5, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 91.05 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED
TRANSACTION means any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, disability, or familial
status.
(Ord. 2018-5, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 91.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her
in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on
account of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national
origin.
(Ord. 2018-5, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 91.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
91.03,
91.04,
91.05 or
91.06 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-5, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 91.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempt to injure,
intimidate or interfere with the following, shall be fined according to local,
state and federal law; and if bodily injury results shall be fined not more
than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and if death
results shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for life:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status, or national origin and because he or she is or has
been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in division (A)
above; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate; or
   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A) above, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate.
(Ord. 2018-5, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 91.09 EQUAL ACCESS TO HOUSING IN HUD PROGRAMS.
   Pursuant to 24 C.F.R. part 5.403 and 24 C.F.R. part 574.3 the definition of
FAMILY is revised to include families regardless of the actual or perceived
sexual orientation, gender identity, or marital status of its members.
(Ord. 2018-5, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 91.10 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq. shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those activities or
organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) of this section.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national
origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact
open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members
or from giving preference to its members.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply with
respect to housing for older persons. As used in this section, HOUSING FOR
OLDER PERSONS means housing:
      (1)   Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of
the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the state civil
rights commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program) or;
      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or
older; or
      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years
of age or older per unit.
(Ord. 2018-5, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 91.11 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering this
chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioner as set forth
in division (B) hereof shall be vested in the Chief Elected Official of the
town.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the town, because
of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully administer
enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this chapter, herein
elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the articles of this
chapter by complainants to the Indiana Civil Rights Commission for
administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6 and the Chief
Elected Official of the town shall refer all said complaints to the Commission
as provided for under division (A) of this section to said Commission for
purposes of investigation, resolution and appropriate relief as provided for
under I.C. 22-9.5-6.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the town shall administer
their departments, programs and activities relating to housing and urban
development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter
and shall cooperate with the Chief Elected Official and the Commission to
further such purposes.
   (D)   The Chief Elected Official of the town, or the Chief Elected
Official’s designee, shall provide information on remedies available to any
aggrieved person or complainant requesting such information.
(Ord. 2018-5, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 91.12 SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances shall be determined to be invalid, the remainder of the chapter
and the application of its provisions to other persons not similarly situated
or to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 2018-5, passed 7-9-2018)
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
92.01   Department of Parks and Recreation
   
92.02   Public use of Betty Bailey Park
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
   (A)   The town establishes a Department of Parks and Recreation, consisting
of a Park and Recreation Board pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-4 et seq., and the
President of the Town Council is hereby authorized to appoint four members to
the Park and Recreation Board, consisting of two Democrats and two Republicans
for the following terms:
      (1)   One member for a term of one year;
      (2)   One member for a term of two years;
      (3)   One member for a term of three years; and
      (4)   One member for a term of four years.
   (B)   All terms are to expire on the first Monday in January and each
succeeding appointment shall be for a term of four years.
   (C)   All powers and duties pursuant to state law are hereby conferred upon
the new Board.
(Ord. 88-9, passed 8-8-1988)
§ 92.02 PUBLIC USE OF BETTY BAILEY PARK.
   (A)   (1)   The park shall be considered open for use by the general public
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be inside the park before or
after these stated hours.
   (B)   Facilities at the park shall be on a first come-first served basis
with the exception of the baseball diamond which will have an approved schedule
for summer leagues.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle, motorized
or electric, on the grassy areas of the park with the exception that town-owned
vehicles and disability assistance devices such as wheelchairs are allowed.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a pet to allow his or her animal
into the park unless the animal is on a leash or other restraint device.
   (E)   All pet owners shall be required to clean up after their animals.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or consume alcoholic
beverages in the park.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to litter or leave trash in the
park.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring dangerous weapons into
the park.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge fireworks within the
park.
   (J)   (1)   All patrons of the park shall conduct themselves in a polite
manner.
      (2)   Persons who use offensive conduct or language that is dangerous or
offensive to other park visitors will be required to leave.
   (K)   Commercial or political advertising along with any forms of
solicitation activity are prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 66.01) (Ord. 09-1, passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 2014-6, passed 6-9-
2014) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Persons violating §
92.02 shall be subject to the following fines:
 
$25  For the first violation in a 12-month period
$50  For the second violation in a 12-month period
$100 For three or more violations in a 12-month period
 
      (2)   Any person adjudged responsible for violating any provision of §
92.02 shall also be liable for payment of the costs of prosecution, including
reasonable attorney fees and court costs.
(Prior Code, § 66.01) (Ord. 09-1, passed 4-13-2009)
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
   
93.01   Nuisance declared
   
93.02   Word usage
   
93.03   Definitions
   
93.04   Unlawful acts
   
93.05   Administration and enforcement
   
93.06   Investigation of complaints
   
93.07   Fees to be charged for weeds/vegetation removal
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   In addition to what is declared in this chapter to be a public nuisance,
those offenses which are known to the common law and the statutes of the state
as public nuisance, may in case any thereof exist within the town limits, be
treated as such and be against as is provided in this chapter, or in accordance
with any other provision of the law wherever the word “nuisance” is used in
this chapter it refers to a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 62.01)
§ 93.02 WORD USAGE.
   (A)   Whenever the singular of the words “person,” “owner,” “occupant,”
“tenant,” “agent,” “representative,” “company,” “corporation” or any other word
referring a person or entity subject to this chapter is used, the use thereof
shall likewise include the plural of such word and likewise when the plural of
such word is used, it shall include the singular.
   (B)   Whenever the word “person” or “persons” is used to denote someone
subject to the terms of this chapter, such word or words shall include
companies, corporations, partnerships and other legal entities, as the case may
be.
(Prior Code, § 62.01)
§ 93.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMOBILE. A vehicle, used to transport persons or property that is moved
by an engine or motor that is a part of said vehicle, over streets, highways,
tracks or road.
   AUTOMOBILE PARTS. Any portion or parts of any motor driven vehicle, whether
used in the transportation of persons, animals, personal property or
merchandise of any nature that is detached from the automobile as a whole.
   DEBRIS. Broken scattered remains of anything, such as tree limbs, bottles,
appliances, building material and paper that would create an unkempt condition.
   JUNK. Scraps, parts or obsolete pieces of anything, including, but not
limited to, metal, glass, paper, rags, tires or other rubber products, wood,
masonry and plastics.
   JUNK VEHICLES. Any style or type of conveyance, whether for the
transportation of persons or property that is unfit for further use as a
vehicle that will conform to all the specifications required to pass a legal
inspection; a conveyance not bearing a current license plate; or a conveyance
that appears to be obsolete and derelict and that has been placed on blocks or
jacks for a period exceeding 30 days.
   NOXIOUS WEEDS. Any weed, over 12 inches height, defined by the U.S.D.A. as
of a prohibited or restricted nature, and includes, but is not limited to:
Canadian and bull thistles, bind weed, wild garlic, wild grasses, such as crab,
Johnson, pepper, and quack giant fox tail winter crest, buckhorn, corn cockle,
curled dock, dodder, horse nettle, oxeye daisy, penny crest, wild mustard and
horse weeds.
   RAGS. Cloth products of any such nature whether wearing apparel bed
clothing, towels or other, usually in a dilapidated state or otherwise
discontinued from use.
   SCRAP LUMBER. Anything of a wood nature that could not be construed as
suitable for building in the commonly accepted manner.
   SCRAP METAL. Pieces or parts of steel, iron, tin, zinc, copper, aluminum or
any alloy. Any pieces or parts of metal covered with porcelain, paint or other
material shall be considered SCRAP.
   SCRAP PAPER. Paper of any kind whether loose, baled or bundled, and
includes, but is not limited to: boxes, whether assembled or knocked down;
newspapers, in whole or in part; wrapping paper, loose or in a roll whether it
be brown, waxed, white or any color; plastics such as visqueen, Saran wrap and
such.
(Prior Code, § 62.01)
§ 93.04 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, it shall not be essential that the
nuisance be created or contributed to by the owner, or tenants, or their agents
or representatives, but it shall suffice if the nuisance be contributed to by
licensees, invitees and guests, habitual trespassers or other persons whose
presence on the premises is subject to the control of the conduct they have
been made aware or ought to become aware by the exercise of reasonable care.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful, inside the corporation boundaries of the town,
for any person, firm, partnership or corporation:
      (1)   To store or keep junk vehicles or automobile parts on a public
right-of-way or on a public right-of-way or on a private or public lot exposed
to the view of the general public;
      (2)   To put, throw, dump, leave or deposit or to cause or allow the
putting, throwing, dumping, leaving or depositing of junk, scrap of any kind,
rags, debris or junk vehicles in or upon or within the limits of any street,
alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare or public way;
      (3)   To allow any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or her
to become or remain in a filthy condition or the permission of the use or
occupation of same in such a manner as to create noxious or offensive smells or
odors in connection therewith or the allowance of the accumulation or creation
of scrap, junk, rags or other unwholesome and offensive matter or the allowance
of the breeding of flies, rodents or other vermin on the premises to the menace
of the public health or the annoyance of people residing in the vicinity;
      (4)   To permit any building, house or structure owned by same to become
so out of repair and dilapidated that it constitutes a fire hazard liable to
catch on fire or communicate fire because of its condition and lack of repair
or that due lack of adequate maintenance or neglect it endangers the public
health welfare or safety, or materially devalues and interferes with the
peaceful enjoyment by owners or occupants of adjacent property;
      (5)   To erect, use or maintain a dwelling which is unfit for human
habitation, a “dwelling” shall include any part of any building or its premises
used as a place of residence or habitation or for sleeping by any person. A
dwelling is “unfit for human habitation” when it is dangerous or detrimental to
life or health because of want of repair, defects in the drainage, plumbing,
lighting, ventilation or construction, infection with contagious disease or the
existence on the premises of an unsanitary condition likely to cause sickness
among occupants of the dwelling;
      (6)   To cause or allow any tree, stack or other object to remain
standing upon such premises in such circumstance that it shall, if the
condition is suffered to endanger the life, limb or property or cause, hurt,
damage or injury to persons or property upon the public streets or public ways
adjacent thereto, by the falling thereof or parts thereof;
      (7)   To permit to emit from premises into the surrounding atmosphere
such odors, dusts, smoke or other debris as to render ordinary use or physical
occupation of other property in the vicinity uncomfortable or impossible;
      (8)   To allow any pool of stagnant water to accumulate and stand on any
property; or
      (9)   To cause or allow debris, junk, noxious weeds, such an accumulation
on any premises of filth, trash, garbage or other waste materials that it
endangers the public health, welfare or safety or materially interferes with
the peaceful enjoyment by owners or occupants of adjacent property because of
the danger of its catching or communicating fire, its attracting and
propagating vermin, rodents or insects or its blowing into any street, sidewalk
or property of another. It shall be the duty of the persons owning or being in
charge of those business establishments whose patrons purchase goods or
services from their automobiles, commonly known as “drive-ins,” to furnish
sufficient covered receptacles for the deposit of wastes created in the
operation of such business, and to clean up such wastes as are not deposited in
receptacles at the close of business each day (if such business operates
continuously, at least one each day) and at such other times when weather
conditions are such that waste from the operation of such business is being
blown to adjoining premises.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant or persons in charge of
any lot of land within the town to cause noxious weeds to be destroyed by
spraying with a chemical approved by the Town Council or by cutting them or
digging them under.
(Prior Code, § 62.01) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   In any case where any nuisance may exist, it shall be the duty of the
Town Marshal at the direction of the Town Council to serve notice upon the
owner of the premises where such nuisance exists and upon any other person so
causing such nuisance to abate such nuisance within 30 days of said notice.
   (B)   If the owner, occupant and any other person or entity served with a
notice to abate the nuisance shall refuse or neglect to abate such nuisance
within the designated time:
      (1)   Such person, persons, or entity stall be subject to the penalties
provided in §
93.99;
      (2)   In addition thereto, the Town Council may remove or cause to be
removed or do or cause to be done such other acts as are necessary and
reasonable to abate said nuisance, and the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall make a
certified statement of the actual costs incurred by the town in such removal
which statement shall be delivered to the owner of such real estate by the Town
Marshal, or by certified mail, or where appropriate, by publication, provided
such owner shall have been served with notice as provided in §
93.06(A), and such owner shall have not more than ten days within which to pay
said amount to the Clerk-Treasurer of the town. If such owner failed to pay the
sum within the prescribed time, a certified copy of the statement of such costs
shall be filed in the Auditor’s office of the county wherein said real estate
is located, and the said Auditor shall place the amount so claimed on the tax
duplicate against the real estate of the owner affected by said work, and the
same shall be collected as taxes are collected or said costs may be collected
by suit; or
      (3)   The Town Council may cause such nuisance to be abated in any manner
authorized by law including the institution in the name of the town against the
owner, occupant or other person, of any action therefore and for the recovery
of the amount of expense of such abatement.
   (C)   The requirement for service of notice under the provisions of this
section of this chapter may be complied with by the certified mailing of such
notice to the person or persons sought to be notified, provided, however, that
names the real estate taxes on said real estate are shown on record in the
office of the Auditor of the county, wherein said real estate is located, by
registered or certified mail to the last known address of the person or persons
sought to be notified, or when the address of such persons or persons is
unknown, by publication of said notice once each week for three consecutive
weeks in a newspaper of county-wide circulation, published in the county.
(Prior Code, § 62.01)
§ 93.06 INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.
   For the purpose of carrying the provisions of this chapter into effect, it
is hereby made the duty of all officers and employees of the town to report the
existence of nuisances to the Town Council or the Town Marshal and, for this
purpose, the Town Marshal or other employees designated by the Town Council,
after reasonable notice to the occupant and at reasonable times, shall be
permitted to visit, enter into or upon any building, lot, grounds or premises,
within the limits of the town to investigate complaints of any such nuisance
and to make examination thereof.
(Prior Code, § 62.01)
§ 93.07 FEES TO BE CHARGED FOR WEEDS/VEGETATION REMOVAL.
   (A)   Fees to be charged and procedure for determining the same.
      (1)   If the landowner fails to remove such weeds and/or rank vegetation
within the time prescribed by the applicable ordinance as passed by the Town
Council, the town may remove such weeds and rank vegetation.
      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall make a certified statement of the actual
cost incurred by the city in such removal.
      (3)   Said certified statement shall be delivered to the owner of such
real estate by the Town Marshal and/or Town Deputy Marshal, or by registered
mail.
      (4)   Such owner shall have not more than ten days within which to pay
said amount to the Clerk-Treasurer of the town.
      (5)   For the costs incurred for town manpower and the use of town
equipment for the removal of noxious weeds and vegetation, the following fees
shall be established:
         (a)   Thirty dollars per hour per employee;
         (b)   For the use of town equipment the following:
 
Backhoe                      $60 per hour
Bobcat                       $60 per hour
Dump truck                   $60 per hour
Riding lawn mower            $30 per hour
Walking mower and weed eater $15 per hour
 
         (c)   There shall be a three-hour minimum charge for the use of each
employee and the use of equipment.
   (B)   Procedure for collection when there is non-payment.
      (1)   If such owner fails to pay said sum within the time prescribed, a
certified copy of the statement of costs shall be filed within the Office of
the County Auditor where said real estate is located.
      (2)   The Auditor shall place the amount so claimed on the tax duplicate
against the lands of the landowner affected by said work.
      (3)   The same shall be collected as taxes are collected, and when so
collected shall be disbursed to the General Fund of the town.
(Ord. 2016-006, passed 5-9-2016)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of §§
93.01 through
93.06 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount of $50 and may be
subject to other penalties provided in the town code. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues
after the notice to abate under §
93.06(A) is served. Any person, firm or corporation adjudged responsible for
violating any provision of §§
93.01 through
93.06 shall also be liable for payment of the costs of prosecution, including
reasonable attorney fees.
(Prior Code, § 62.01)
CHAPTER 94: OPEN BURNING
Section
   
94.01   Incorporation by reference of state laws regulating open burning
   
94.02   Additional restrictions on open burning
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE OF STATE LAWS REGULATING OPEN BURNING.
   I.C. 13-17-9, and all regulations of the State Air Pollution Control Board
promulgated thereunder, as the same may be amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted as part of this chapter and made a part hereof.
(Prior Code, § 68.01) (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-9-1998)
§ 94.02 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON OPEN BURNING.
   In addition to the restrictions imposed by state laws and regulations
incorporated by reference pursuant to §
94.01, the following restrictions shall be observed with respect to open
burning within the town.
   (A)   Materials which may be burned. The only materials which may be burned
in the town are clean wood products, including lumber (unpainted and
unvarnished), trees, logs, branches, twigs, wood pulp, paper and paper
products, and dry leaves. Leaves shall not be burned when wet. No trash (other
than paper and paper products) shall be burned in the town.
   (B)   No burning on pavement. Nothing shall be burned on the paved portion
of any street or alley.
   (C)   Time for burning. No fire permitted by this chapter shall be started
before the later of 8:00 a.m. or sunrise and all fires shall be extinguished
before the earlier of sunset or 6:00 p.m., except for fires celebrating school
pep rallies, scouting activities or campfires.
   (D)   Adult attending fire. An adult shall tend the fire until the fire is
completely extinguished by the expiration of the burning period set forth in
division (C) above.
   (E)   Location of fire. No fire shall be permitted within 15 feet of any
combustible object, natural or human-made, including, but not limited to,
trees, bushes, fences, poles or structures.
   (F)   Noxious odors or gases. No fires shall be permitted to smolder or emit
noxious odors, smoke or gases.
   (G)   Private residential burning. Private residential burning of clean wood
products and paper may occur where the building contains four or fewer dwelling
units. Burning shall be in a noncombustible container that is sufficiently
vented to induce adequate primary combustion and which has enclosed sides and a
bottom.
(Prior Code, § 68.01) (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-9-1998) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates the terms of this chapter shall be subject to a
penalty of $50 for each violation of this chapter. In addition, any person who
violates this chapter shall pay any and all reasonable fees assessed by the
Town Fire Department or other agency in extinguishing any fire which violates
the terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 68.01) (Ord. 98-2, passed 2-9-1998)
CHAPTER 95: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Excavations and Construction
   
95.01   [Reserved]
   
95.02   Application and cash deposit
   
95.03   Restoration of pavement
   
95.04   Barriers around excavations
   
95.05   Warning lights
   
95.06   Sidewalk construction
Obstructions
   
95.20   Unloading on street or sidewalk
   
95.21   Street and sidewalk obstruction
   
95.22   Materials on street or sidewalk
EXCAVATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 95.01 [RESERVED].
§ 95.02 APPLICATION AND CASH DEPOSIT.
   Each permit for making an opening shall be confined to a single project and
shall be issued by the authorized town official. Application shall be made on a
form prescribed by the Town Council, giving the exact location of the proposed
opening, the kind of paving, the area and depth to be excavated and other facts
as may be provided for. The permit shall be issued only after a cash deposit
sufficient to cover the cost of restoration has been posted with the authorized
town official, conditioned upon prompt and satisfactory refilling of
excavations and restoration of all surfaces disturbed.
§ 95.03 RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.
   (A)   The opening and restoration of a pavement or other surface shall be
performed under the direction and to the satisfaction of the authorized town
official, and in accordance with rules, regulations and specifications approved
by the Town Council.
   (B)   Upon failure or refusal of the permittee satisfactorily to fill the
excavation, restore the surface, and remove all excess materials within the
time specified in the permit or where not specified therein, within a
reasonable time after commencement of the work, the town may proceed without
notice to make the fill and restoration, and the deposit referred to in §
95.02 shall be forfeited. Thereupon the deposit shall be paid into the
appropriate town fund, except the part demanded and paid to the permittee as
the difference between the deposit and the charges of the town for restoration
services performed by it. If the amount of the services performed by the town
should exceed the amount of the deposit, the Clerk- Treasurer or other proper
administrative officer shall proceed to collect the remainder due from the
permittee.
§ 95.04 BARRIERS AROUND EXCAVATIONS.
   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or opening any
street, sidewalk, alley or other public way shall have the excavation or
opening fully barricaded at all times to prevent injury to persons or animals.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.05 WARNING LIGHTS.
   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or otherwise in any
manner obstructing a portion or all of any street, sidewalk, alley or other
public way, at all times during the night season shall install and maintain at
least two illuminated red lamps which shall be securely and conspicuously
posted on, at or near each end of the obstruction or excavation and, if the
space involved exceeds 50 feet in extent, at least one additional lamp for each
added 50 feet or portion thereof excavated or obstructed.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.06 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   It shall be the duty of the authorized town official to supervise
construction or repair of sidewalks within the town. He or she shall cause
specifications to be prepared for the construction of the various kinds of
pavements and transmit the specifications to the Town Council for approval.
When the specifications are approved, the Town Council shall advertise for
proposals to do all the work which may be ordered by the town in construction
and repair of sidewalks, and shall authorize the town executive to contract
therefor, for a period not exceeding one year, with the lowest responsible
bidder, who shall give bond for the faithful performance of the work. The town
executive, if authorized by Town Council, may make separate contracts for the
different kinds of work with different parties.
OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 95.20 UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the town by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public way, without first placing some sufficient protection
over the pavement.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.21 STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.
   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way
within the town by erecting thereon any fence or building, or permitting any
fence or building to remain thereon. Each day that any fence or building is
permitted to remain upon the public way shall constitute a separate offense.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.22 MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk. No owner, occupant or
person having the care of any building or lot of land, bordering on any street
or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered with barrels, boxes, cans,
articles or substances of any kind so as to interfere with the free and
unobstructed use thereof.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 96: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
   
96.01   Title
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Use of recreational vehicles
   
96.04   Use of tents
   
96.05   Utility
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the town Recreational Vehicle Ordinance.
(Ord. 2022-4, passed 9-12-2022)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is designed, manufactured, modified,
or re-manufactured, or occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping place and which
contains or is able to accept a sink, toilet, stove, refrigerator, faucet,
shower, or bathtub. The term also includes fifth wheel trailers, pop up
trailers or similar type camping trailers.
   TENT. Any portable shelter of skins, canvas, plastic or the like, supported
by one or more poles or a frame and often secured by ropes fastened to pegs in
the ground.
(Ord. 2022-4, passed 9-12-2022)
§ 96.03 USE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   No owner of a recreational vehicle shall use, or allow any other
person to use, the vehicle as a dwelling or place of abode for a period in
excess of seven days. No owner of a recreational vehicle shall park it, or
allow it to be parked on any street or alley in the town for a period of time
longer than three days.
   (B)   No landowner or renter of land shall allow any person to park a
recreational vehicle on their property and allow use as a dwelling or place of
abode for a period in excess of seven days.
(Ord. 2022-4, passed 9-12-2022)
§ 96.04 USE OF TENTS.
   (A)   No person shall use, or allow any other person to use, a tent as a
dwelling or place of abode for a period of excess of seven days.
   (B)   No landowner or renter of land shall allow any person to use or stay
in a tent on their property and allow use as a dwelling or place of abode for a
period in excess of seven days.
(Ord. 2022-4, passed 9-12-2022)
§ 96.05 UTILITY.
   No recreational vehicle shall be allowed to access or hook up to town water
or sewer utility services.
(Ord. 2022-4, passed 9-12-2022)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   This chapter may be enforced by the authorized agents of the Town
Council or by a law enforcement agency.
   (B)   Any person charged with violating the provisions of this chapter may,
in the discretion of the enforcement officer, be issued an official warning. If
an official warning is issued it shall be considered as affording the violator
one opportunity to comply with the provisions of this chapter. If any person
fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the chapter violation
shall be enforced in accordance with I.C. 34-28-5-1 in a manner similar to that
of infractions with complaint and summons described in I.C. 9-30-3-6 issued by
the Town Police Department or other enforcement agency.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a civil penalty of $50. Each day such violation continues or is
committed shall constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   Utilities to a recreational vehicle shall be terminated within seven
days after an official warning is issued under division (B). An enforcement
officer is authorized to take action to cut off utility services to a
recreational vehicle if deemed necessary by the town.
(Ord. 2022-4, passed 9-12-2022)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSING
      
111.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
      
112.   LIQUOR RETAILER'S PERMITS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING
Section
   
110.01   Licenses required to engage in certain trades, businesses or
professions
   
110.02   Application for license
   
110.03   Standards; issuance of license
   
110.04   Date and duration of license
   
110.05   License not transferable
   
110.06   License certificate to be displayed
   
110.07   Revocation or suspension
   
110.08   Appeal and review
   
110.09   Exemptions
§ 110.01 LICENSES REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN CERTAIN TRADES, BUSINESSES OR
PROFESSIONS.
   No person shall engage in any of the trades, businesses or professions for
which licenses are required by any provision of this code or any other
ordinance of the town without first applying for and obtaining a license from
the Clerk-Treasurer or other duly authorized issuing authority.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   All original applications for licenses, unless otherwise specifically
provided, shall be made to the Clerk-Treasurer in writing upon forms to be
furnished by him or her and shall contain:
      (1)   The name of the applicant and of each officer, partner or business
associate;
      (2)   His or her present occupation and place of business;
      (3)   His or her place of residence for five years next preceding the
date of application;
      (4)   The nature and location of the intended business or enterprise;
      (5)   The period of time for which the license is desired;
      (6)   A description of the merchandise to be sold, if for a vendor; and
      (7)   Other information concerning the applicant and his or her business
as may be reasonable and proper, having regard to the nature of the license
desired.
   (B)   Renewal of an annual license may be granted to a licensee in good
standing upon the original application, unless otherwise provided.
   (C)   With each original or renewal application, the applicant shall deposit
the fee required for the license requested.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to knowingly make any false statement or
representation in the license application.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.03 STANDARDS; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a license, accompanied by the
proper fee, if approval by another officer or department is not required, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall forthwith deposit the fee in the General Fund of the town
and issue to the applicant a proper license certificate signed by the Clerk-
Treasurer and any other appropriate town official. If for any reason the
license is not issued, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (C)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare.
Tangible evidence of any of the following will constitute valid reasons for
disapproval of an application:
      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   The applicant has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   The applicant has committed prior violations of ordinances
pertaining to itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors and the like;
      (4)   The applicant has committed prior fraudulent acts;
      (5)   The applicant has a record of continual breaches of solicited
contracts; or
      (6)   The applicant has an unsatisfactory moral character.
§ 110.04 DATE AND DURATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license shall not be valid beyond the expiration date therein
specified and, unless otherwise provided, shall not extend beyond December 31
of the year issued; however, at any time after December 14, licenses may be
issued for the ensuing calendar year. Unless otherwise specified, the full
annual fee will be required of licensees irrespective of the date of issue of
the license.
   (B)   In no event shall a license be granted to any business or any person
for a longer time than one year.
§ 110.05 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Every license shall be issued to a real party in interest in the enterprise
or business, and unless otherwise provided, no license shall be assigned or
transferred.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.06 LICENSE CERTIFICATE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Every licensee carrying on business at a fixed location shall keep posted in
a prominent place upon the licensed premises the license certificate. Other
licensees shall carry their license certificates at all times and whenever
requested by any officer or citizen, shall exhibit the license.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.07 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for any of
the following reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general welfare
of the public.
§ 110.08 APPEAL AND REVIEW.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
110.03 or
110.07 shall have the right to appeal to the Town Council. The appeal shall be
taken by filing with the Town Council, within 14 days after notice of the
decision has been mailed to the person’s last known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The Town Council shall set the
time and place for a hearing, and notice for the hearing shall be given to the
person by mail at his or her last known address, at least ten days prior to the
date set for the hearing.
   (B)   The order of the Town Council after the hearing shall be final.
§ 110.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any business, occupation
or profession which is exempt from municipal licensing or license taxes
pursuant to state or federal law.
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Declaration of nuisance
   
111.03   Exception
   
111.04   Violations
   
111.05   Hours of solicitation
   
111.06   Fees
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ORGANIZATION, CLUB. An affiliated group of individuals, including
unincorporated associations and not-for-profit entities. Examples: downtown
merchants; Fire Department; American Legion; Parent-Teacher Organization; Boy
and Girl Scouts.
   PEDDLER. A business, organization, club or individual who goes from house to
house, from place to place, or from street to street selling goods, wares or
merchandise, or services for any purpose whatsoever, including nonprofit
fundraisers. Examples: candy; cookies; housewares; raffle tickets; donations
for the sick.
   SOLICITATION. The act of a business, organization, club or individual to
sell, offer for sale, purchase, offer to purchase or exchange goods for
services whether for monetary consideration or as a donation.
   SOLICITOR. A business, organization, club or individual who goes from house
to house, from place to place or from street to street soliciting or taking
orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the performance of
services in the future.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person who engages in a temporary business of
selling, buying and/or delivering goods, wares and/or merchandise within the
town and who, in furtherance of such purpose leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure, motor vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad boxcar, hotel room
or other place within the town for the exhibition and sale or purchase of such
goods, wares and/or merchandise.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 111.02 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant within the town without first obtaining a license issued by
the town and paying the fee for such license.
   (B)   Obtaining such a license and otherwise complying with this chapter
does not relieve a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant of the duty to
comply with all other applicable laws and ordinances, including, but not
limited to, home improvement statutes, fire code, health codes and local
ordinances, some of which may limit the length of time that transient merchants
and others may do business at a fixed location within the town.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 5-9-2011) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 EXCEPTION.
   This chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Minor children who are residents of the town;
   (B)   Not-for-profit entities which are exempt from the state gross retail
tax under I.C. 6-2.5-5-25, as same may be amended from time to time;
   (C)   Any entity that is exempt from local licensing pursuant to state law,
regulation or ordinance;
   (D)   Any entity that, as of 6-1-2011 was registered with the town to do
business in the town; or
   (E)   Individuals running for an elected office.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 111.04 VIOLATIONS.
   Any business, organization, club or individual that engages in the business
of peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the town without first
obtaining a license issued by the town and paying the fee for such license
violates this chapter and commits a nuisance.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 5-9-2011) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.05 HOURS OF SOLICITATION.
   Soliciting may be done Monday through Friday from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 5-9-2011) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.06 FEES.
   Peddlers, solicitors and itinerant merchants shall obtain a permit from the
town in advance of solicitation and only after paying the following fee to the
Clerk-Treasurer at the Town Hall during its business hours:
   (A)   Town residents: no charge, but registration required; and
   (B)   Non-residents: $25 for consecutive seven-day permit and $50 for
consecutive 30-day permit.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 5-9-2011) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any business, organization, club or individual violating the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon violation, be fined the sum of $100. Each separate act
of solicitation shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 5-9-2011)
CHAPTER 112: LIQUOR RETAILER'S PERMITS
Section
   
112.01   Liquor retailer's permits
§ 112.01 LIQUOR RETAILER'S PERMITS.
   Pursuant to I.C. § 7.1-3-9-3, the Town of Hillsboro consents to the issuance
of liquor retailer's permits for the sale of spiritous beverages to applicants
otherwise qualified under the rules and regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage
Commission.
(Ord. 2019-1, passed 7-15-2019)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   WEAPONS AND FIREARMS
      
131.   CURFEW FOR MINORS
CHAPTER 130: WEAPONS AND FIREARMS
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Discharge of weapons
Firearms on Town Property
   
130.15   Prohibition
   
130.16   Signs required
   
130.17   Exemptions
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge any type firearm, pellet rifle, CO2 rifle
or BB gun within the limits of the civil town.
(Ord. 74-3, passed 11-11-1974) Penalty, see §
130.99
FIREARMS ON TOWN PROPERTY
§ 130.15 PROHIBITION.
   No person shall carry a concealed firearm in or on any property, park,
building or portion of a building now or hereafter owned, leased as lessee,
operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the town, as well as the
appurtenant premises to the buildings, upon which appropriate signage has been
placed indicating that concealed firearms are prohibited therein.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.16 SIGNS REQUIRED.
   Signs shall be visibly posted on the exterior of each entrance by which the
general public can access the building, appurtenant premises or park. The town
shall exercise discretion in determining the necessity and appropriate location
for other signs posted on the interior of the building, appurtenant premises or
park.
§ 130.17 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The prohibitions set forth in this subchapter shall not apply to
persons who are exempt from concealed weapons prohibitions under state or
federal law or to any duly authorized local, state or federal law enforcement
officer while on duty.
   (B)   The prohibitions set forth in this subchapter shall not apply to
highways or public highways owned or administered by the town.
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
130.01, the fine shall not be less than $50 or more than $100.
(Ord. 74-3, passed 11-11-1974)
CHAPTER 131: CURFEW FOR MINORS
Section
   
131.01   Curfew purpose
   
131.02   Definitions
   
131.03   Regulations
   
131.04   Enforcement
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 CURFEW PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Promote the general welfare and protect general public through the
reduction of juvenile violation and crime within the town; and
   (B)   Promote the safety and well-being of the town’s youngest citizens,
persons under the age of 18, whose inexperience renders them particularly
vulnerable to becoming participants in unlawful activities, particularly
unlawful drug activities, and to being victimized by older perpetrators of
crime.
(Ord. 05-04, passed 1-9-2006)
§ 131.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY. Unforeseen circumstances, or the status or condition resulting
therefrom, requiring immediate action to safeguard life, limb or property. The
term includes, but is not limited to, fires, natural disasters, automobile
accident or other similar circumstances.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business within the town,
operated for a profit, to which the public is invited, including, but not
limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. With respect to such
ESTABLISHMENT, the term “operator” shall mean any person, and any firm,
association, partnership (and the members or partners thereof) and/or any
corporation (and the officers thereof) conducting or managing that
ESTABLISHMENT.
   MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age who has not been emancipated by
court order.
   OFFICER. A police or other law enforcement officer charged with the duty of
enforcing the laws of the state and/or the ordinances of the town.
   PARENT. 
      (1)   A person who is a minor’s biological or adoptive parent and who has
legal custody of a minor (including either parent, if custody is shared under a
court order or agreement);
      (2)   A person who is the biological or adoptive parent with whom a minor
regularly resides;
      (3)   A person judicially appointed as a legal guardian of the minor;
and/or
      (4)   A person 18 years of age or older standing in loco parentis (as
indicated by the authorization of an individual listed in divisions (1), (2) or
(3) above, for the person to assume the care or physical custody of the child,
or as indicated by any other circumstances).
   PERSON. An individual, not to any association, corporation or any other
legal entity.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access, including, but not limited to streets, highways, roads,
sidewalks, alleys, avenues, parks and/or the common areas of schools,
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities and
shops.
   REMAIN. Refers to the following actions:
      (1)   To linger or stay at or upon a place; and/or
      (2)   To fail to leave a place when requested to do so by an officer or
by the owner, operator or other person in control of that place.
   TEMPORARY CARE FACILITY. Refers to a non-locked, non-restrictive shelter at
which minors may wait, under visual supervision to be retrieved by a parent. No
minors waiting in such facility shall be handcuffed and/or secured (by
handcuffs or otherwise) to any stationary object.
(Ord. 05-04, passed 1-9-2006)
§ 131.03 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a minor, during curfew hours, to remain in or
upon any public place within the town, to remain in any motor vehicle operating
or parked therein or to remain in or upon the premises of any establishment
within the town, unless:
      (1)   The minor is accompanied by a parent, adoptive parent, or legal
guardian;
      (2)   The minor is involved in an emergency;
      (3)   The minor is engaged in an employment activity or is going to or
returning home from such activity, without detour or stop;
      (4)   The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he or
she resides with a parent, adoptive parent, or legal guardian;
      (5)   The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious
or civic organization, by a public organization or agency or by another similar
organization or entity, which activity is supervised by adults, and/or the
minor is going to or returning from such an activity without detour or stop;
      (6)   The minor is on an errand at the direction of a parent, adoptive
parent, or legal guardian, and the minor has in his or her possession a writing
signed by the parent containing the following information: the name, signature,
address and telephone number of the parent authorizing the errand, the
telephone number where the parent may be reached during the errand, the name of
the minor, a brief description of the errand, the minor’s destination(s) and
the hours the minor is authorized to be engaged in the errand;
      (7)   The minor is involved in interstate travel through, or beginning or
terminating in, the town; or
      (8)   The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech or the right of assembly.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a minor’s parent to knowingly permit, allow
or encourage such minor to violate this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person who is the owner or operator of any
motor vehicle to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a violation of this
chapter.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any establishment or
for any person who is an employee thereof, to knowingly permit, allow or
encourage a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours.
      (2)   It shall be a defense to prosecution under this division (D) that
the operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police
Department that a minor was present at the establishment after curfew hours and
refused to leave.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person (including any minor) to give a
false name, address or telephone number to any officer investigating a possible
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-04, passed 1-9-2006) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Minors. Before taking any enforcement action hereunder, an officer
shall make an immediate investigation for the purpose of ascertaining whether
or not the presence of a minor in a public place, motor vehicle and/or
establishment within the town during curfew hours is in violation of this
chapter.
      (1)   If such investigation reveals that the presence of such minor is in
violation of this chapter, then:
         (a)   If the minor has not previously been issued a warning for any
such violation, then the officer shall issue a verbal warning to the minor,
which shall be followed by a written warning mailed by the Police Department to
the minor and his or her parent(s); or
         (b)   If the minor has previously been issued a warning for any such
violation, then the violation shall be considered a delinquent act as defined
by I.C. 31-37-1-2.
      (2)   As soon as practicable, the officer shall:
         (a)   Release the minor to his or her parent(s); and/or
         (b)   If a minor’s parent(s) cannot be located, place the minor in a
temporary care facility for a period not to exceed the remainder of the curfew
hours and/or take the minor to a judge or intake officer of the juvenile court
to be dealt with in the manner and pursuant to such procedures as required by
law.
   (B)   Others. 
      (1)   If an investigation by an officer reveals that a person has
violated this chapter, and if the person has not previously been issued a
warning with respect to any such violation, an officer shall issue a verbal
warning to the person, which shall be followed by a written warning mailed by
the Police Department to the person.
      (2)   However, if any such warning has previously been issued to that
person that the officer shall charge the person with a violation and shall
issue a summons directing the person to appear in court.
(Ord. 05-04, passed 1-9-2006)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   Any adult person violating this chapter shall be fined as follows: $50 for
the first offense; and $100 for any subsequent offense.
(Ord. 05-04, passed 1-9-2006)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
151.   BUILDING CODE
      
152.   MANUFACTURED HOUSING
      
153.   UNSAFE BUILDINGS
      
154.   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
150.01   Hazard Mitigation Plan
§ 150.01 HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN.
   (A)   The town adopts the Fountain County Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan for
the town.
   (B)   The County Emergency Management Agency will submit on behalf of all
county participating municipalities, the adopted County Multi-Hazard Mitigation
Plan to the State Department of Homeland Security and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for final review and approval.
(Res. 10-1, passed 2-8-2010)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING CODE
Section
   
151.01   State Building Code adopted
   
151.02   State enforcement statutes adopted by reference
§ 151.01 STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to the authority granted under I.C. 22-13-2-3, the town hereby
adopts by reference the State Building Code, contained in 675 I.A.C. 13-2.6-
1 et seq., including any future amendments.
(Prior Code, § 150.01)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to adopt future building code amendments by reference, see I.C.
22-13-2-3
§ 151.02 STATE ENFORCEMENT STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted under I.C. 36-7-9-3, the town hereby
adopts by reference I.C. 36-7-9, pertaining to enforcement of building
standards.
   (B)   The enforcement authority responsible for the administration of the
statutes adopted under this section shall be the town executive, or such other
executive department as may be established or designated by ordinance.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST shall have
the same meaning as set forth in I.C. 36-7-9-2.
(Prior Code, § 150.02)
CHAPTER 152: MANUFACTURED HOUSING
Section
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Comprehensive plans or other ordinances adopted under these provisions
may subject the dwelling units to other standards and requirements
   
152.03   Manufactured homes constructed prior to 1986 are not permitted
   
152.04   Manufactured homes constructed after 1986 are permitted in some
instances
   
152.05   Existing manufactured homes
   
152.06   Enforcement
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit, designed and built in a factory,
transported on wheels for the purpose of residential dwelling (which bears a
seal certifying that it was built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards of 1974, being 42 U.S.C. 5401 et
seq.).
   OCCUPIED SPACE. The total area of horizontal square footage within the
interior walls of the structure that may be subjected to use as an inhabited
dwelling area of one or more person(s), excluding any area of accessory
structures such as, pullouts, patios, porches, garages or other structures even
though they may be (or become) permanently attached.
   UNDER-FLOOR SPACE. The space between the bottom of the floor joists and the
earth.
(Ord. 04-09, passed 11-22-2004)
§ 152.02 COMPREHENSIVE PLANS OR OTHER ORDINANCES ADOPTED UNDER THESE PROVISIONS
MAY SUBJECT THE DWELLING UNITS TO OTHER STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   Comprehensive plans or other ordinances adopted under these provisions may
subject the dwelling units to other standards and requirements which may
include, but not limited to:
   (A)   Setback distance;
   (B)   Side and rear yard area;
   (C)   Vehicle parking space;
   (D)   Under-floor space enclosure requirements; and
   (E)   Minimum square footage of the dwelling unit.
(Ord. 04-09, passed 11-22-2004)
§ 152.03 MANUFACTURED HOMES CONSTRUCTED PRIOR TO 1986 ARE NOT PERMITTED.
   Manufactured homes, mobile homes or trailers (for the purpose of a dwelling
or the use of a business) constructed prior to January 1, 1986; shall not be
permitted to be located or installed within the corporate limits of the town,
and such structures shall not be connected to the town’s municipal water or
sewage systems.
(Ord. 04-09, passed 11-22-2004)
§ 152.04 MANUFACTURED HOMES CONSTRUCTED AFTER 1986 ARE PERMITTED IN SOME
INSTANCES.
   Manufactured homes constructed after 1986 are permitted in some instances
and are subjected to the following restrictions, rules or regulations.
   (A)   The “occupied space” must be over 950 square feet.
   (B)   Manufactured homes must have been constructed after January 1, 1986
and in accordance with the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Laws of
1974, being 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq..
   (C)   The structures must have at least 100 amperage electrical circuit
breaker service, the meter base must be affixed to a pole adjacent to the
structure and the interior wiring must be constructed of insulated copper of
size at least 12/2 with a ground to handle at least 20 amperes to the wall
outlets and 50 amperes to the hot water heater and or range. They must also
meet the electrical codes of the servicing electrical utility company.
   (D)   The structure must also meet all guidelines for manufactured (or
mobile) homes as set forth by the codes and standards of the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA), the National Underwriters Laboratories (UL), the
American Standards Institute (ANSI Electrical and Gas), NEMA (National
Electrical Manufactures Association) or the American Petroleum Institute (API),
and the State Building Codes as enforced by the Office of the State Fire
Marshal.
   (E)   All mobile homes must have one working smoke detector affixed to the
ceiling in the center of the hallway at the entrance of each bedroom, and one
working smoke detector near the center of the living room area.
   (F)   Must be placed on a permanent foundation with a minimum of under-floor
space of 24 inches constructed of either reinforced cement or masonry cement
block and this permanent foundation must set on a footer constructed of
concrete measuring not less than 12 inches wide and 12 inches deep completely
around the perimeter of the foundation. The axles, wheels and tongue shall be
removed after placed on the permanent foundation. The structure shall be placed
on the permanent foundation within 60 days of arriving on the premises.
   (G)   The manufactured home must be also affixed with tie down straps,
anchored into the earth sufficient enough to withstand 70 mile per hour winds.
   (H)   The setback from the outside edge of the structure to the property
line must be at least 20 feet on all sides.
(Ord. 04-09, passed 11-22-2004) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.05 EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   Existing manufactured homes that are presently occupied with residents
within the corporate limits of the town on the effective date of this chapter
may remain in their current locations, but may not be moved to another location
within the corporate limits of the town and if moved out or replaced by another
manufactured home, the replacement manufactured home must meet all of the
requirements set forth within this chapter. If an existing manufactured home
that is presently occupied at the time of this chapter, is vacant or unoccupied
for more than 60 days, it then shall be removed from its present location; as
to prevent a potential fire, safety or health hazard.
(Ord. 04-09, passed 11-22-2004)
§ 152.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   The town may seek injunctive relief against anyone found to have violated
this chapter. Any person found to have violated this chapter shall be liable
for court costs and all reasonable fees and or expenses incurred by the town,
including, and not limited to, attorney’s fees, in enforcing this chapter.
(Ord. 04-09, passed 11-22-2004)
CHAPTER 153: UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Section
   
153.01   Unsafe Building Law
§ 153.01 UNSAFE BUILDING LAW.
   (A)   Under the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9, there is hereby established the
“Hillsboro Unsafe Building Law.”
   (B)   I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28 (the “State Unsafe Building Law”) are
hereby incorporated by reference in the Town Unsafe Building Law. All
proceedings within the town for the inspection, repair and removal of unsafe
buildings shall be governed by the State Unsafe Building Law and the provisions
of this section. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this
section and the provisions of the State Unsafe Building Law, the provisions of
the state statute shall control.
   (C)   All buildings or portions thereof within the town which are determined
after inspection to be unsafe as defined in this section are hereby declared to
be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition
or removal.
   (D)   The position of Town Building Commissioner is hereby allowed to be
created. The Town Building Commissioner shall be entitled to such compensation
as shall from time to time be established by the Town Council. The Building
Commissioner shall be and is authorized to administer and to proceed under the
provisions of the State Unsafe Building Law in ordering the repair or removal
of any buildings found to be unsafe as specified therein or as specified
hereafter, as reviewed and authorized or ordered by the Town Council.
   (E)   Whenever in the town’s Unsafe Building Law it is provided that
anything must be done to the approval of or subject to the direction of the
Building Commissioner or any other officer of the town, this shall be construed
to give such officer only the discretion to determine whether the rules and
standards established by law or ordinance have been complied with; and no such
provisions shall be construed as giving any officer discretionary powers as to
what such regulations or standards shall be, power to require conditions not
prescribed by law or ordinance, or to enforce ordinance provisions in an
arbitrary or capricious manner.
   (F)   The description of an unsafe building contained in I.C. 36-7-9-4 is
hereby supplemented to provide minimum standards for building conditions or
maintenance in the town by adding the following definition: UNSAFE BUILDING
means any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or
defects hereinafter described, provided that such conditions or defects exist
to the extent that life, health, property or safety of the public or the
building’s occupants are endangered:
      (1)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway or other means of exit is not
of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and
adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;
      (2)   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, airway or
other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose or otherwise unsafe so as to not
provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;
      (3)   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof,
due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working
stress or stresses allowed for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or
location;
      (4)   Whenever any portion of the building or structure has been damaged
by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that
the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was
before the catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;
      (5)   Whenever any portion, member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fall, to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property;
      (6)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting wind pressure of one and one-half times that specified for
new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the
working stresses permitted for such buildings;
      (7)   Whenever any electrical wiring, fixtures or entrance box or outside
entrance wires have become damaged or deteriorated to a point of becoming a
hazard. The overcurrent device must correspond with the capacity of current
wiring;
      (8)   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or
settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have
materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case
of similar new construction;
      (9)   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof because
of:
         (a)   Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
         (b)   Faulty construction;
         (c)   The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the
ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;
         (d)   The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or
         (e)   Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
      (10)   Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any
portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being
used;
      (11)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base;
      (12)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation,
shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members,
or 50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, enclosing or
outside walls and coverings;
      (13)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire,
wind, earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated so as to
become:
         (a)   An attractive nuisance to children; or
         (b)   Freely accessible to persons for the purpose of committing
unlawful acts.
      (14)   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or
is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition
applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations
or laws of the state or the ordinances of the town relating to the condition,
location or structure of buildings;
      (15)   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected
in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations and ordinances, has in any
non-supporting part, member or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting
part, member or portion less than 66% of the strength; fire-resisting qualities
or characteristics; or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required
by law in the case of newly constructed buildings of like area, height and
occupancy in the same location;
      (16)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities or otherwise, is determined by the county health officer to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition that it is
likely to cause sickness or disease;
      (17)   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits or lack of
sufficient fire-resistive construction is determined by the Town Fire Chief or
the State Fire Marshal to be a fire hazard; or
      (18)   Whenever a portion of a building or structure remains on a site
after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever
any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so
as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or a
hazard to the public.
   (G)   The definition of “substantial property interest” set forth in I.C.
36-7-9-2 is hereby incorporated by reference herein as if copied in full.
   (H)   All work for the reconstruction, repair or demolition of buildings and
other structures shall be performed in a good workmanlike manner according to
the accepted standards and practices in the trade. The provisions of building
laws, as defined in I.C. 22-12-1-3, adopted as rules of the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission, shall be considered standard and acceptable
practices for all matters covered by this chapter or orders issued pursuant to
this chapter by the Building Commissioner of the town.
   (I)   An Unsafe Building Fund is hereby authorized to be established in the
operating budget of the town, in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-
14.
   (J)   The Town Attorney is hereby designated as the hearing authority to
conduct administrative hearings as provided in the State Unsafe Building Law.
   (K)   No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee,
licensee or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or
premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of any of the provisions of this section or any order issued by the Building
Commissioner.
(Ord. 00-3, passed 11-13-2000) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 154: FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Section
   
154.01   Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   General provisions
   
154.04   Administration
   
154.05   Provisions for flood hazard reduction
   
154.06   Variance procedures
 
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   Statutory authorization. The state legislature has in I.C. 36-7-4 and
I.C. 14-28-4 granted the power to local government units to control land use
within their jurisdictions. Therefore, the Town Council does hereby adopt the
following floodplain management regulations.
   (B)   Findings of fact.
      (1)   The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
      (2)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities,
and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
   (C)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage;
      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands; and
      (6)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for structures
and their contents in the town by fulfilling the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program.
   (D)   Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To protect human life and health;
      (2)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in floodplains;
      (6)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood
blight areas; and
      (7)   To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is
in a flood area.
(Prior Code, § 92.01)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A ZONE. Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding is
runoff from rainfall, snowmelt or a combination of both. In A ZONES,
floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant
threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE, Zones A1-A30,
Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM or FHBM. The definitions are
presented below.
      (1)   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no base
flood elevation or depths are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements apply.
      (2)   ZONE AE AND A1-A30. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood elevations are
shown within these zones. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements
apply. (Zone AE is on new and revised maps in place of Zones A1-A30.)
      (3)   ZONE AO.  Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance
purchase requirements apply.
      (4)   ZONE AH. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between one and
three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are
shown within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply.
      (5)   ZONE AR. Areas that result from the decertification of a previously
accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of
being restored to provide base flood protection. Mandatory flood insurance
purchase requirements apply.
      (6)   ZONE A99. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of an under
construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of special flood
hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction of a protection
system, such as dikes, dams and levees, to consider it complete for insurance
rating purposes. ZONE A99 may only be used when the flood protection system has
reached specified statutory progress toward completion. No base flood
elevations or depths are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements
apply.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure that is located on
the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should
constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation,
and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns and hay
sheds.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is
connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls, is new construction.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the community’s
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the 1% annual chance flood.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the regular
program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to
develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding
might be too great. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited to,
schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or
hazardous waste.
   DEVELOPMENT. (1) Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a structure or any
addition to a structure;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more than
180 days;
         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences, construction
of roads or similar projects;
         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes,
dams, channel improvements and the like;
         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling
operations;
         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
         (g)   Storage of materials; or
         (h)   Any other activity that might change the direction, height or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing
roads; or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation or the construction of permanent
structures.
   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter
walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls), pilings or
columns (posts and piers).
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A certified statement that verifies a structure’s
elevation information.
   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The first phase under which a community participates in
the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the community’s first floodplain
ordinance.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA.  The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (500-YEAR FLOOD). The flood that has a 0.2% chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any year.
   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA)
has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
FEMA, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
identified as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic report
provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FBFM
(where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory flood plus two
feet at any given location in the SFHA. See FREEBOARD.
   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory
flood. The FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the fringe districts.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances and other applications of police power which control development in
flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in
any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS are also referred to
as FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS, FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE, FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
ORDINANCE and FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   FLOODPRONE AREA. Any land area acknowledged by a community as being
susceptible to inundation by water from any source. See FLOOD.
   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING). A method of protecting a structure that
ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with walls that
are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated debris impact
forces.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for non-
residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or above
the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional engineer or
architect.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently
carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood.
   FRINGE. The portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood
processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacture, sales or service facilities.
   HARDSHIP (AS RELATED TO VARIANCES OF THIS CHAPTER). The exceptional hardship
that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Town
Council requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the
property involved. Mere economic or financial HARDSHIP alone is not
exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps,
personal preferences or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as
a rule, qualify as an exceptional HARDSHIP. All of these problems can be
resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Register of Historic Sites and
Structures.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially
damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to
bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local flood
damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation,
relocation, demolition or any combination thereof. All renewal and new business
flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after June 1, 1997, will
include ICC coverage.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment to the currently effective FEMA
map that establishes that a property is not located in a SFHA. A LOMA is only
issued by FEMA.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the currently
effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones, delineations
and elevations.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An official revision by
letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA’s determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the
BFE and excluded from the SFHA.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support or basement entryway
immediately next to the structure.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest of the following:
      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure;
      (2)   The top of the basement floor;
      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of
the structure;
      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or
pillars; and
      (5)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement,
below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure provide any
resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:
         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic
flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters by
providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows) in a
minimum of two exterior walls having a total net area of one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area. The bottom of all such openings shall
be no higher than one foot above the exterior grade or the interior grade
immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher; and
         (b)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parking of
vehicles and building access.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MAP AMENDMENT. A change to an effective NFIP map that results in the
exclusion from the SFHA of an individual structure or a legally described
parcel of land that has been inadvertently included in the SFHA (i.e., no
alterations of topography have occurred since the date of the first NFIP map
that showed the structure or parcel to be within the SFHA).
   MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four-digit number followed by a letter suffix assigned
by FEMA on a flood map. The first four digits represent the map panel, and the
letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been revised.
(The letter “A” is not used by FEMA, the letter “B” is the first revision.)
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a
willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market
will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent certified appraisal,
replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value), or
adjusted assessed values.
   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to
people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of MITIGATION
is twofold: to protect people and structures; and to minimize the cost of
disaster response and recovery.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF 1929 AS CORRECTED IN 1929. A
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within
the floodplain.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced after the effective date of the community’s first floodplain
ordinance.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88) AS ADOPTED IN 1993. A
vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, canalization,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its propensity to snare
or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being
carried downstream.
   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). The flood that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with
the letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See REGULATORY FLOOD.
   ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the
letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See REGULATORY FLOOD.
   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. Any community that voluntarily elects to
participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management
regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.
   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a community’s FEMA
map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood elevations, floodplain
boundary delineations, regulatory floodways and planimetric features. These
changes typically occur as a result of structural works or improvements,
annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas, or correction to base
flood elevations or SFHAs.
   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that started
on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later.
   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement, which
started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the
initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
   PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating communities of
violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local
floodplain management regulations.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is: built on a single chassis; 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as quarters for
recreational camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community’s participation in the NFIP
where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and
higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations
determined in a FIS.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is acceptable
to and approved by the State Department of Natural Resources and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at any location is
as defined in §
154.03(B). The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known by the term BASE FLOOD, 1% ANNUAL
CHANCE FLOOD and 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event for
which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood
damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of the
structure at the time of each such flood event.
   SECTION 1316. The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, being
42 U.S.C. 4001 et seq., as amended, which states that no new flood insurance
coverage shall be provided for any property that the Administrator finds has
been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other
authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations
or ordinances that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land
development or occupancy in flood-prone areas.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdictions of
the town subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the town
are generally identified as such on the county and incorporated areas flood
insurance rate map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, dated
February 6, 2013. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated county that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town or that may be annexed
into the town are generally identified as such on the county and incorporated
areas flood insurance rate map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated February 6, 2013. (These areas are shown on a FHBM or FIRM as
Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AR, A99 or AO.)
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual START means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage
of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to it’s before damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred “repetitive loss”
or “substantial damage” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not include improvements of structures to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code requirements or any
alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structures continued designation as a “historic structure.”
   SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP because
the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain management
regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) or National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929
(NGVD) (other datum where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.
   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
Shaded X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood). Unshaded X ZONES (C ZONES on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.
   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FHBM or FIRM that reflects the severity
or type of flooding in the area.
   ZONE A. See definition for A ZONE.
   ZONE B, C and X.  
      (1)   Areas identified in the community as areas of moderate or minimal
hazard from the principal source of flood in the area; however, buildings in
these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated rainfall coupled with
inadequate local drainage systems.
      (2)   Flood insurance is available in participating communities but is
not required by regulation in these zones. (ZONE X is used on new and revised
maps in place of ZONES B and C.)
(Prior Code, § 92.02)
§ 154.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all
SFHAs and known floodprone areas within the jurisdiction of the town.
   (B)   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data. This chapter’s
protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best available regulatory
flood data is listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party submitting the detailed engineering study needs to replace
existing data with better data and submit it to the State Department of Natural
Resources for review and approval.
      (1)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe limits for the
studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the town shall be as delineated on the
1% annual chance flood profiles in the flood insurance study of the county and
incorporated areas dated February 6, 2013 and the corresponding flood insurance
rate map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated February
6, 2013.
      (2)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe limits for each
of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of town, delineated as an “A Zone” on the
county and incorporated areas flood insurance rate map prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated February 6, 2013, shall be according to
the best data available as provided by the State Department of Natural
Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater
than one square mile.
      (3)   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of
identification on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway and
fringe limits of any watercourse in the community’s known floodprone areas
shall be according to the best data available as provided by the State
Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the
subject site is greater than one square mile.
   (C)   Establishment of floodplain development permit. A floodplain
development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities in areas of
special flood hazard.
   (D)   Compliance. No structure shall hereafter be located, extended,
converted or structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance with
the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. No land or stream
within the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
   (E)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions; however, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   (F)   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground elevations.
      (1)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped floodplain
(SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation provided on
the profiles shall govern.
      (2)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood
elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated accordingly.
      (3)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is above
the base flood elevation, that site shall be considered outside the SFHA and
the floodplain regulations will not be applied. The property owner should be
advised to apply for a LOMA.
   (G)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   (H)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.
Therefore, this chapter does not create any liability on the part of the town,
the State Department of Natural Resources or the state for any flood damage
that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder.
   (I)   Increased cost of compliance (ICC). In order for buildings to qualify
for a claim payment under ICC coverage as a “repetitive loss structure,” the
National Reform Act of 1994, being 42 U.S.C. 4001 et seq. requires that the
building be covered by a contract for flood insurance and incur flood-related
damages on two occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the
event for which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the
flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of
the building at the time of each such flood event.
(Prior Code, § 92.03)
§ 154.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Designation of Administrator. The Town Council hereby appoints the
Sewer and Water Superintendent, or his or her designee, to administer and
implement the provisions of this chapter and is herein referred to as the
Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   Permit procedures. 
      (1)   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to
the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following:
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen
fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities and the location
of the foregoing.
      (2)   Specifically, the following information is required:
         (a)   Application stage.
            1.   A description of the proposed development;
            2.   Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately
locate property and structure in relation to existing roads and streams;
            3.   A legal description of the property site;
            4.   A site development plan showing existing and proposed
development locations and existing and proposed land grades;
            5.   Elevation of the top of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD 88 or NGVD;
            6.   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any non-residential
structure will be floodproofed; and
            7.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
         (b)   Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor; or
floodproofing, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of
the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, as built.
            1.   Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and
certified by the same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular
structure said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any
work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit
holders’ risk. (The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and
floodproofing elevation survey data submitted.) The permit holder shall correct
deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is allowed to
proceed.
            2.   Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said
corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the
project.
   (C)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter,
which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.
      (2)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that the
permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
         (b)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and
complete substantial damage determinations;
         (c)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the
State Department of Natural Resources for all development projects subject to §
154.05(E) and (G)(1), and maintain a record of such authorization (either copy
of actual permit or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment);
         (d)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have been
received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit. Copies
of such permits are to be maintained on file with the floodplain development
permit;
         (e)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain Coordinator
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of
such notifications to FEMA;
         (f)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local
permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, letters of map amendment
(LOMA), letters of map revision (LOMR), copies of DNR permits and floodplain
analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal permit
documents and “as-built” elevation and floodproofing data for all buildings
constructed subject to this chapter;
         (g)   Utilize and enforce all letters of map revision (LOMR) or
physical map revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA
maps of the community;
         (h)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished;
         (i)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in
accordance with division (B) above;
         (j)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new or
substantially improved structures have been floodproofed in accordance with
division (B) above;
         (k)   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance;
         (l)   Stop-work orders:
            1.   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator, work on any
building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall immediately cease.
            2.   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the
owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work,
and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
         (m)   Revocation of permits.
            1.   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit or approval,
issued under the provisions of the ordinance, in cases where there has been any
false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application
or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
            2.   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit upon
determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the
structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in
conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.
         (n)   Inspect sites for compliance. For all new and/or substantially
improved buildings constructed in the SFHA, inspect before, during and after
construction. Authorized town officials shall have the right to enter and
inspect properties located in the SFHA.
(Prior Code, § 92.04)
§ 154.05 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   (A)   General standards. In all SFHAs and known floodprone areas, the
following provisions are required.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces.
      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage below the FPG.
      (4)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      (5)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, utility meters and other service facilities shall be located at/
above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and
telephone lines, submersible pumps and other waterproofed service facilities
may be located below the FPG.
      (6)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
      (7)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
      (8)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      (9)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet
the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter.
      (10)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall
be undertaken only if said nonconformity is not further extended or replaced.
      (11)   Whenever any portion of the SFHA is authorized for use, the volume
of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the
BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by an equivalent volume of excavation
taken below the BFE. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to the
volume of storage lost (replacement ratio of one to one) due to the fill or
structure.
         (a)   The excavation shall take place in the floodplain and in the
same property in which the authorized fill or structure is located.
         (b)   Under certain circumstances, the excavation may be allowed to
take place outside of but adjacent to the floodplain provided that the
excavated volume will be below the regulatory flood elevation, will be in the
same property in which the authorized fill or structure is located, will be
accessible to the regulatory floodwater, will not be subject to ponding when
not inundated by floodwater, and that it shall not be refilled.
         (c)   The excavation shall provide for true storage of floodwater but
shall not be subject to ponding when not inundated by floodwater.
         (d)   The fill or structure shall not obstruct a drainage way leading
to the floodplain.
         (e)   The grading around the excavation shall be such that the
excavated area is accessible to the regulatory floodwater.
         (f)   The fill or structure shall be of a material deemed stable
enough to remain firm and in place during periods of flooding and shall include
provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any increased runoff or
drainage resulting from its placement.
         (g)   Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and filled shall be
submitted prior to the actual start of construction or any site work; once site
work is complete, but before the actual start of construction, the applicant
shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a certified survey of the
excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and excavation comply with
this section.
   (B)   Specific standards. In all SFHAs, the following provisions are
required.
      (1)   Generally. In addition to the requirements of division (A) above,
all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage
below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:
         (a)   Construction or placement of any new structure having a floor
area greater than 400 square feet;
         (b)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure:
            1.   Where the cost of the addition or improvement equals or
exceeds 50% of the value of the existing structure (excluding the value of the
land); or
            2.   With a previous addition or improvement constructed since the
community’s first floodplain ordinance.
         (c)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure where the
costs of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the value of the
land) before damage occurred;
         (d)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site
for more than 180 days;
         (e)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to returning
the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage; and
         (f)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss structure.
      (2)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the
lowest floor; including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the base
flood elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of division (B)
(4) below.
      (3)   Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or nonresidential structure (or
manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation) or be
floodproofed to or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be
used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of
division (B)(4) below. Structures located in all A Zones may be floodproofed in
lieu of being elevated if done in accordance with the following:
         (a)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account
flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures and impacts
from debris or ice. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in §
154.04(C)(2)(k).
         (b)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.
      (4)   Elevated structures. 
         (a)   New construction or substantial improvements of elevated
structures shall have the lowest floor at or above the FPG.
         (b)   Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be
designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry
and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls.
         (c)   Designs must meet the following minimum criteria.
            1.   Provide a minimum of two openings located in a minimum of two
exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area).
            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one foot
above the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each
opening, whichever is higher.
            3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwaters in both directions.
            4.   Openings are to be not less than three inches in any direction
in the plane of the wall. This requirement applies to the hole in the wall,
excluding any device that may be inserted such as typical foundation air vent
device.
            5.   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
            6.   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
            7.   The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be at an
elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.
            8.   Where elevation requirements exceed six feet above the highest
adjacent grade, a copy of the legally recorded deed restriction prohibiting the
conversion of the area below the lowest floor to a use or dimension contrary to
the structure’s originally approved design, shall be presented as a condition
of issuance of the final certificate of occupancy.
      (5)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or nonresidential
structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in accordance with the
following.
         (a)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep
before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with either the
Standard or Modified Proctor Test method.
         (b)   The fill should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation
of the structure before sloping below the FPG.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or bulk heading. If vegetative cover is
used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
         (d)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
         (e)   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be at or
above the FPG.
      (6)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following
requirements:
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement. This requirement applies to all manufactured
homes to be placed on a site;
            1.   Outside a manufactured home park or subdivision;
            2.   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
            3.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
            4.   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which
a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood.
         (b)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the lowest floor
of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. This requirement applies to all
manufactured homes to be placed on a site in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision that has not been substantially damaged by a flood.
         (c)   Manufactured homes with fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be
designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry
and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls as required for elevated structures in division (B)(4) above.
         (d)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame
or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
         (e)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:
            1.   Be on site for less than 180 days; and
            2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (defined as being
on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions); or
            3.   Meet the requirements for “manufactured homes” as stated
earlier in this section.
   (C)   Standards for subdivision proposals.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
      (4)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.
      (5)   All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the SFHA
and/or limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.
      (6)   All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of SFHA
for pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency responders).
   (D)   Critical facility. Construction of new critical facilities shall be,
to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of
new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical facilities to
the extent possible.
   (E)   Standards for identified floodways.
      (1)   Located within SFHAs, established in §
154.03(B), are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris,
potential projectiles and has erosion potential. If the site is in an
identified floodway, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant
to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications,
to the State Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1, a permit for
construction in a floodway from the State Department of Natural Resources is
required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any excavation,
deposit, construction or obstruction activity located in the floodway. This
includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading, clearing and
paving and the like undertaken before the actual start of construction of the
structure; however, it does exclude non-substantial additions/improvements to
existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26
allows construction of non-substantial additions/improvements to residences in
a non-boundary river floodway without obtaining a permit for construction in
the floodway from the State Department of Natural Resources. Please note that
if fill is needed to elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior
approval (construction in a floodway permit) for the fill is required from the
State Department of Natural Resources.)
      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until a
permit (when applicable) has been issued by the State Department of Natural
Resources granting approval for construction in the floodway. Once a permit for
construction in a floodway has been issued by the State Department of Natural
Resources, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local floodplain
development permit, provided the provisions contained in this section have been
met. The floodplain development permit cannot be less restrictive than the
permit for construction in a floodway issued by the State Department of Natural
Resources; however, a community’s more restrictive regulations (if any) shall
take precedence.
      (3)   No development shall be allowed which acting alone or in
combination with existing or future development, will increase the regulatory
flood more than 0.14 of one foot.
      (4)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including
levees) the town shall submit the data and request that the Federal Emergency
Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data.
   (F)   Standards for identified fringe. If the site is located in an
identified fringe, then the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
floodplain development permit provided the provisions contained in §
154.05 have been met. The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of
any new or substantially improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.
   (G)   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood elevation and/or
floodways/fringes.
      (1)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile.
         (a)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of
the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the drainage area
upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along
with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the State Department of Natural
Resources for review and comment.
         (b)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
either a permit for construction in a floodway or a floodplain analysis/
regulatory assessment citing the 1% annual chance flood elevation and the
recommended flood protection grade has been received from the State Department
of Natural Resources.
         (c)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper permit
for construction in a floodway or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment
approving the proposed development, a floodplain development permit may be
issued provided the conditions of the floodplain development permit are not
less restrictive than the conditions received from the State Department of
Natural Resources and the provisions contained in this section have been met.
      (2)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile.
         (a)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of
the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the drainage area
upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the Floodplain Administrator
shall require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the
limits of the floodplain and 1% annual chance flood elevation for the site.
         (b)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
Floodplain Development Permit, provided the provisions contained in this
section have been met.
      (3)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and will not increase flood
damages or potential flood damages.
   (H)   Standards for floodprone areas. All development in known floodprone
areas not identified on FEMA maps, or where no FEMA published map is available,
shall meet applicable standards as required per §
154.05.
(Prior Code, § 92.05)
§ 154.06 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board. The Town Council shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board. The Board shall hear and decide
appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision or
determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Board may appeal such decision to the County Circuit Court.
   (C)   Variance procedures. In passing upon such applications, the Town
Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (4)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (5)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      (6)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (7)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (8)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (9)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
of transport of the floodwaters at the site; and
      (10)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (D)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
      (2)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to §
154.05(E) or (G)(1) may be granted.
      (3)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §
154.05(E) or (G)(1) will require a permit from the State Department of Natural
Resources.
      (4)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of §
154.05(B), may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot
of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (6)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration of
any structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
      (7)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the
elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of
the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation. See division (E) below.
      (8)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or
the State Department of Natural Resources upon request. See division (E) below.
   (E)   Variance notification. 
      (1)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance
up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
         (b)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain
Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a
manner so that it. appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of
land.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances
issued in the community’s biennial report submission to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
   (F)   Historic structure. Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of “historic structures” upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as an “historic structure” and the variance is the minimum to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
   (G)   Special conditions. Upon the consideration of the factors listed in
this section, and the purposes of this chapter, the Town Council may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 92.06)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or
failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit or
conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. All
violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such in
accordance with the provisions of the town code.
   (B)   All violations shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100 per
day for each separate day of violation.
      (1)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the
violation continues to exist.
      (2)   The Town Council shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Prior Code, § 92.03)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   FRANCHISES
      
III.   VACATIONS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
             Territory east of Hobson Street, beginning at a point located 209.5 feet north
93-01 - -    and 925 feet west of the southeast corner of the west half of the northeast
             quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 12
             Territory west of the A.J. Williams Addition, commencing at a point 22.23
96-01 - -    chains (1,467.18 feet) south of the northeast corner of the west half of the
             northwest quarter of Section 12
Res.  6-27-  Tract of ground bordered on the north by U.S. Highway #136, on the east by
83-9  1983   Robert Beisecker’s west property line, on the south by Coal Creek and on the
             west by the town limits
94-03 5-23-  Territory east of Coal Creek Avenue, beginning at a point on the south
      1994   boundary of U.S. Highway 136
95-03 2-12-  Territory east of Coal Creek Drive, commencing at a point on the south
      1996   boundary line of State Highway 34 (now U.S. Highway 136)
            
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
81-8          8-10-1981   Grants franchise to Quality C.A.T.V. for community
                          antenna television (Revoked)
88-7          6-27-1988   Grants franchise to County Cable Systems, Inc. for
                          cable television system (Revoked)
                         
 
TABLE III: VACATIONS
Ord./Res. No Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No Date Passed Description
-            - -         Beginning at the southeast corner of Lot 197 in Hayes
1-87         5-11-1987   All that portion of an alley that is bounded on the
                         west by Water Street
92-8         8-10-1992   That portion of Boggs Street in the A.J. Williams
                         Addition bounded on the west line
96-02        10-14-1996  A 16-1/2 foot wide alley running east and west and
                         bordered on the north by Lots 17, 24, 25 and 32
97-05        6-9-1997    Portion of Murphy Street, beginning at the northwest
                         corner of Lot 33
98-04        7-13-1998   Portion of Barton Street, beginning at the southwest
                         corner of Lot 96
2010-3       3-8-2010    Portions of Walnut Street, Boggs Street and certain
                         alleys
2021-6       12-13-2021  Certain alleyways located at 702 North Park Avenue
2024-1       3-11-2024   Certain alley located at 407 North Water Street
                        
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Reference Code Section
I.C. Reference       Code Section
1-1-1-5              10.04
1-1-1-7              10.12
1-1-1-8              10.06
1-1-4-5              10.04
1-1-5-1              10.11
1-1-6-1              10.08
3-10-6               32.16
3-10-7               32.16
3-10-7-2.9           31.001,
                     32.16
3-10-7-2.9(d)        31.001,
                     32.16
5-2-1-9              32.36
5-2-1-9(f)           36.01
5-3-1                31.072,
                     73.11
5-11                 33.41
5-11-10-1.6          33.02
5-11-10-2            33.01
5-14                 31.019
5-14-1.5             31.015,
                     31.052
5-14-1.5-3.5         31.019
5-14-3-4(b)(12)      31.016
5-16-9               72.04
6-1.1-17             33.21,
                     33.22
6-1.1-17-3           33.20
6-2.5-5-25           111.03
6-3.6-6-8            33.38
6-3.6-10             33.39
7.1-3-9-3            112.01
8-1                  52.01
8-1.5-2              52.03
8-1.5-3-8            52.03
8-1.5-3-11           33.35
8-14-1               33.04
8-14-2               33.04
8-23-30-2            33.40
9                    73.08
9-8.5-8              72.04
9-13-2-6             70.01
9-13-2-47            70.01
9-13-2-49.3          70.01
9-13-2-73            70.01
9-13-2-84            70.01
9-13-2-105(a)        70.01
9-13-2-105(b)        70.01
9-13-2-108           70.01
9-13-2-118(a)        70.01
9-13-2-121           70.01
9-13-2-155           70.01
9-13-2-157           70.01
9-13-2-178           70.01
9-13-2-196(a)        70.01
9-19                 70.01
9-21-1-3             Ch. 71,
                     Ch. 72
9-21-5-6             Ch. 71
9-21-5-6(e)          Ch. 74
9-21-5-13            Ch. 74, Schd. III
9-21-12-13           70.01
9-21-20-1            70.01
9-21-20-2            70.01
9-21-20-3            70.01
9-30-3-6             96.99
13-17-9              94.01
14                   73.08
14-16-1-1 et seq.    73.06
14-28-1              154.05
14-28-1-26           154.05
14-28-4              154.01
16-18-2-110          70.01
16-22-8              70.01
22-9-1-4 et seq.     91.02
22-9.5-1 et seq.     91.01
22-9.5-2-2           91.02
22-9.5-2-3           91.02
22-9.5-2-4           91.02
22-9.5-2-8           91.02
22-9.5-2-9           91.02
22-9.5-2-11          91.02
22-9.5-2-13          91.02
22-9.5-3 et seq.     91.10
22-9.5-3             91.03
22-9.5-4-8           91.11
22-9.5-5             91.02
22-9.5-5-1           91.03
22-9.5-6             91.02,
                     91.11
22-12-1-3            153.01
22-13-2-3            151.01
25                   31.016
31-37-1-2            131.04
33-36-2-1            34.01
33-36-2-3            34.02
33-36-3              34.02
34-13-3-1 et seq.    35.15,
                     35.16
34-13-3-12           35.16
34-28-5-1            96.99
35-31.5-2-85         36.03
35-31.5-2-138        36.03
35-44.1-3-1(a)(3)    36.02
36-1-3-8(a)(10)      10.99
36-1-5               31.072
36-1-5-6             Adopting Ordinance
36-1-6-9             34.04
36-1-20.2            35.01
36-1-21              35.01
36-4-6-11            35.01
36-5-2-2             10.15
36-5-2-3(b)          31.001
36-5-2-3(c)          31.001
36-5-2-3(d)          31.001
36-5-2-3(e)          31.001
36-5-2-4.2           31.071
36-5-2-6             31.002
36-5-2-9.4           35.01
36-5-2-10            31.072
36-5-6-3(c)          32.16
36-5-6-3(d)          32.16
36-7                 31.071,
                     31.072
36-7-4               154.01
36-7-9               153.01
36-7-9-1 — 36-7-9-2153.01
36-7-9-2             151.02,
                     153.01
36-7-9-3             151.02
36-7-9-4             153.01
36-7-9-14            153.01
36-9-30-5            51.01
36-10-3-4 et seq.    92.01
                     
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Reference Code Section
Prior Code Reference Code Section
10.02                10.17
20.01                30.01
21.01                31.001
21.02                31.002
21.03                31.003
21.04                31.004
21.10                31.015
21.11                31.016
21.12                31.017
21.13                31.018
21.14                31.019
21.15                31.020
21.16                31.021
21.20                31.035
21.21                31.036
21.22                31.037
21.23                31.038
21.24                31.039
21.25                31.040
21.26                31.041
21.27                31.042
21.28                31.043
21.29                31.044
21.30                31.045
21.31                31.046
21.32                31.047
21.33                31.048
21.34                31.049
21.35                31.050
21.36                31.051
21.38                31.053
21.39                31.054
21.40                31.055
21.50                31.070
21.51                31.071
21.52                31.072
21.53                31.073
21.54                31.074
22.01                32.15
22.02                32.16
22.03                32.17
22.04                32.18
22.05                32.19
22.10                32.35
22.11                32.36
22.12                32.37
22.20                32.50
22.30                32.65
23.03                33.01
23.04                33.02
23.05                33.03
23.06                33.04
23.30                33.20
23.31                33.21
23.32                33.22
24.01                34.01
24.02                34.02
24.03                34.03
24.04                34.04
24.05                34.05
24.06                34.06
25.01                35.15
25.02                35.16
25.03                35.17
26.01                36.01
26.02                36.02
26.03                36.03
                     90.01 —
                     90.10,
62.01                90.99,
                     93.01 —
                     93.06,
                     93.99
66.01                92.02
66.01                92.99
                     94.01,
68.01                94.02,
                     94.99
92.01                154.01
92.02                154.02
92.03                154.03
92.04                154.04
92.05                154.05
92.06                154.06
92.03                154.99
150.01               151.01
150.02               151.02
                     
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        - -         32.20
-        - -         Ch. 74, Schd. III
-        8-21-1969   Ch. 75, Schd. II
-        12-31-1980  Ch. 75, Schd. II
83-9     6-27-1983   TSO, Table I
95-02    11-13-1995  30.04
95-03    12-11-1995  30.03
10-1     2-8-2010    150.01
001-2016 3-14-2016   33.50
2017-001 6-12-2017   33.65 —
                     33.68
2018-02  5-7-2018    31.052
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
93-01    - -         TSO, Table I
96-01    - -         TSO, Table I
-        - -         TSO, Table III
04-06    - -         Ch. 75, Schd. I
83-12    - -         52.01
84-16    - -         Ch. 75, Schd. II
90-1     - -         Ch. 74, Schd. I
99-04    - -         36.03
-        8-21-1969   Ch. 75, Schd. II
74-2     1-14-1974   72.06
74-3     11-11-1974  130.01,
                     130.99
80-16    9-13-1980   32.01
-        12-31-1980  Ch. 75, Schd. II
81-8     8-10-1981   TSO, Table II
81-9     11-9-1981   33.35
81-13    12-14-1981  30.02
-        8-12-1985   Ch. 74, Schd. III
1-87     5-11-1987   TSO, Table III
88-7     6-27-1988   TSO, Table II
88-9     8-8-1988    92.01
92-8     8-10-1992   TSO, Table III
-        9-13-1993   Ch. 75, Schd. II
94-05    - -1994     Ch. 74, Schd. II
94-03    5-23-1994   TSO, Table I
94-4     7-11-1994   Ch. 74, Schd. III
                     53.15 —
94-07    9-26-1994   53.24,
                     53.99
95-02    6-12-1995   53.03
95-03    2-12-1996   TSO, Table I
96-02    10-14-1996  TSO, Table III
97-05    6-9-1997    TSO, Table III
                     94.01,
98-2     2-9-1998    94.02,
                     94.99
98-03    6-8-1998    36.01
98-04    7-13-1998   TSO, Table III
98-05    9-14-1998   51.01 —
                     51.03
99-03    6-14-1999   36.02
00-02    2-14-2000   Ch. 75, Schd. II
00-3     11-13-2000  153.01
01-10    11-5-2001   Ch. 75, Schd. III
03-01    2-10-2003   Ch. 75, Schd. IV
03-02    2-10-2003   Ch. 75, Schd. II
03-04    2-10-2003   Ch. 75, Schd. II
03-05    2-10-2003   Ch. 75, Schd. II
04-02    3-8-2004    33.36
04-05    7-12-2004   Ch. 75, Schd. II
04-08    11-8-2004   34.01 —
                     34.06
04-09    11-22-2004  152.01 —
                     152.06
                     131.01 —
05-04    1-9-2006    131.04,
                     131.99
06-01    4-10-2006   72.05,
                     72.99
08-10    10-13-2008  51.02
09-1     4-13-2009   92.02,
                     92.99
2010-3   3-8-2010    TSO, Table III
                     111.01 —
2011-01  5-9-2011    111.06,
                     111.99
2011-02  12-12-2011  50.01
2012-3   4-9-2012    53.01
2012-2   2-11-2013   53.02
2013-01  3-11-2013   52.02,
                     52.99
2014-6   6-9-2014    92.02
                     73.01 —
2014-7   8-11-2014   73.11,
                     73.99
2015-02  11-11-2015  35.01
2016-001 1-11-2016   33.05
2016-002 2-16-2016   52.03
2016-003 3-14-2016   35.02
2016-005 4-11-2016   35.03
2016-006 5-9-2016    93.07
2016-007 6-13-2016   33.37
2016-009 8-8-2016    33.38
2016-010 8-8-2016    33.39
2016-012 10-10-2016  33.06
2016-013 11-14-2016  35.04
2018-002 6-18-2018   33.40
2018-5   7-9-2018    91.01 —
                     91.12
2018-6   10-8-2018   31.001,
                     32.16
2018-8   11-12-2018  Adopting Ordinance
2019-1   7-15-2019   112.01
2020-3   3-9-2020    36.01
2020-9   12-14-2020  52.03
2021-1   6-14-2021   33.41
2021-3   9-13-2021   36.01
2021-5   10-11-2021  Ch. 74, Schd. III
2021-6   12-13-2021  TSO, Table III
2022-2   8-15-2022   52.03
                     96.01 —
2022-4   9-12-2022   96.05,
                     96.99
2023-1   7-10-2023   73.06
2024-1   3-11-2024   TSO, Table III
2024-3   10-14-2024  52.03
2024-4   10-14-2024  53.02
                    
 
 
