CITY OF LIGONIER, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains 2026 S-9 Supplement, current through:
Ordinance 1037-2025, passed 12-8-2025; and
State law through Indiana Legislative Service, 2023 Acts, Pamphlet No. 3
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 775-2010
AN ORDINANCE OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LIGONIER INDIANA ADOPTING THE
2010 CITY OF LIGONIER CODE OF ORDINANCES PREPARED BY AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
CORPORATION
   WHEREAS, the City of Ligonier Indiana has heretofore contracted with
American Legal Publishing Corporation to re-codify it ordinances; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has submitted a proposed re-
codification of the City of Ligonier Code of Ordinances; and
   WHEREAS, the Common Council of the Civil City of Ligonier Indiana approves
of said re-codification as provided herein.
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED AS FOLLOWS:
   1.   That Titles 1 through 14 of said re-codification are hereby approved
and adopted.
   2.   That Chapter 150,151,152,153, and 154 of Title 15 of said re-
codification are hereby approved and adopted.
      ALL OF WHICH IS ORDAINED this 22nd day of November, 2010.
                                                                                 
                                       Ken Schuman
                                       Gary Bishop /s/
                                       Gary Bishop
                                       John Lutton /s/
                                       John Lutton
                                       John Pettit /s/
                                       John Pettit
ORDINANCE NUMBER 798-2011
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCE FOR
THE CITY OF LIGONIER INDIANA, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation, Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2011 supplement to the Code of Ordinances for the City of
Ligonier Indiana, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinance of
the City of Ligonier Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Indiana Code; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Common Council of the City of Ligonier
Indiana to accept these updated sections in accordance with the changes of the
law of the State of Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LIGONIER
INDIANA:
Section 1:   That the 2011 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Ligonier Indiana as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2:   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Common Council of the City of Ligonier Indiana and
the Clerk of the City of Ligonier Indiana is hereby authorized and ordered to
insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in
the Office of the Clerk.
Section 3:   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
   ALL OF WHICH IS ORDAINED THIS 12th DAY OF September 2011.
LIGONIER CITY COUNCIL
                                        /s/
                                        Ken Schuman
                                        /s/
                                       Gary Bishop
                                                                                                      
                                       Karen Richendollar
                                        /s/
                                       John Lutton
                                        /s/
                                       John Pettit
ATTEST:
/s/
Barbara Hawn, Clerk-Treasurer
APPROVED:
/s/
Patty Fisel, Mayor
ORDINANCE NUMBER 828-2013
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCE FOR
THE CITY OF LIGONIER INDIANA, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation, Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2012 supplement to the Code of Ordinances for the City of
Ligonier Indiana, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinance of
the City of Ligonier Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Indiana Code; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Common Council of the City of Ligonier
Indiana to accept these updated sections in accordance with the changes of the
law of the State of Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LIGONIER
INDIANA:
Section 1:   That the 2012 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Ligonier Indiana as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2:   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Common Council of the City of Ligonier Indiana and
the Clerk of the City of Ligonier Indiana is hereby authorized and ordered to
insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in
the Office of the Clerk.
Section 3:   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
   ALL OF WHICH IS ORDAINED THIS 28th DAY OF JANUARY, 2013
                                       LIGONIER CITY COUNCIL
                                                                                                     
                                        Ken Schuman
                                        /s/
                                       Chris Fought
                                        /s/
                                        Julia Bell
                                        /s/
                                       Becky Gray
                                        /s/
                                       Kelly Ware
ATTEST:
/s/
Barbara Hawn, Clerk-Treasurer
APPROVED:
/s/
Patty Fisel, Mayor
ORDINANCE NUMBER 861-2015
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCE FOR
THE CITY OF LIGONIER INDIANA, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation, Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2014 supplement to the Code of Ordinances for the City of
Ligonier Indiana, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinance of
the City of Ligonier Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Indiana Code; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Common Council of the City of Ligonier
Indiana to accept these updated sections in accordance with the changes of the
law of the State of Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LIGONIER
INDIANA:
Section 1:   That the 2014 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Ligonier Indiana as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2:   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Common Council of the City of Ligonier Indiana and
the Clerk of the City of Ligonier Indiana is hereby authorized and ordered to
insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in
the Office of the Clerk.
Section 3:   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
   ALL OF WHICH IS ORDAINED THIS 9th DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2015
                                       LIGONIER COMMON COUNCIL
                                                                                                     
                                        Ken Schuman
                                        /s/
                                       Chris Fought
                                        /s/
                                        Julia Bell
                                        /s/
                                       Becky Gray
                                        /s/
                                       Kelly Ware
ATTEST:
/s/
Barbara Hawn, Clerk-Treasurer
APPROVED:
/s/
Patty Fisel, Mayor
ORDINANCE NUMBER 879-2016
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCE FOR
THE CITY OF LIGONIER INDIANA, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation, Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2015 supplement to the Code of Ordinances for the City of
Ligonier, Indiana, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Ligonier, Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Indiana code; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Common Council of the City of Ligonier,
Indiana to accept these updated sections in accordance with the changes of the
law of the State of Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LIGONIER,
INDIANA:
Section 1:   That the 2015 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Ligonier, Indiana as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2:   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Common Council of the City of Ligonier, Indiana
and the Clerk of the City of Ligonier, Indiana is hereby authorized and ordered
to insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file
in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 3:   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
   ALL OF WHICH IS ORDAINED THIS 25TH DAY OF APRIL, 2016
                                       LIGONIER COMMON COUNCIL
                                                                                                     
                                        Ken Schuman
                                        /s/
                                       Chris Fought
                                        /s/
                                        Julia Bell
                                        /s/
                                       Becky Gray
                                        /s/
                                       Kelly Ware
ATTEST:
/s/
Barbara Hawn, Clerk-Treasurer
APPROVED:
/s/
Patty Fisel, Mayor
ORDINANCE NUMBER 915-2017
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCE FOR
THE CITY OF LIGONIER INDIANA, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation, Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2017 supplement to the Code of Ordinances for the City of
Ligonier Indiana, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinance of
the City of Ligonier Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Indiana code; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Common Council of the City of Ligonier
Indiana to accept these updated sections in accordance with the changes of the
law of the State of Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LIGONIER
INDIANA:
Section 1:   That the 2017 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Ligonier Indiana as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2:   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Common Council of the City of Ligonier Indiana and
the Clerk of the City of Ligonier Indiana is hereby authorized and ordered to
insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in
the Office of the Clerk.
Section 3:   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
   ALL OF WHICH IS ORDAINED THIS 13TH DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2017
                                    LIGONIER COMMON COUNCIL
                                     /s/
                                    Ken Schuman
                                     /s/
                                    Chris Fought
                                     /s/
                                    Julia Bell
                                     /s/
                                    Becky Gray
                                                                                                          
                                     Kelly Ware
ATTEST:
/s/
Barbara Hawn, Clerk-Treasurer
APPROVED:
/s/
Patricia Fisel, Mayor
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles,
chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the "Ligonier City
Code," for which designation "Code of Ordinances," "Codified Ordinances" or
"Code" may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto, and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters, or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application
or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in
law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY. The City of Ligonier, Indiana, or the area within the territorial
limits of the city, and the territory outside of the city over which the city
has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory
provision.
      CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the City Council.
      COUNCIL. The City Council.
      COUNTY. Noble County, Indiana.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      OATH. Includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases, the
words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      TOWNSHIP. The township or townships in which the city is located.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing or other modes of
representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or the person's
mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
Statutory reference:
   For similar definitions under state law, see I.C. 1-1-4-5
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
non-severability provision, each division or part of every section is
severable. If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
   (D)   The repeal of a provision of this code stating that the provisions of
an ordinance are severable as provided in division (B) above does not affect
the operation of division (B) with respect to that ordinance.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; or at the time of the effective date of that ordinance or
subsequent thereto, the rights, powers, duties or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers and rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   (A)   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former
section or law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section
or law is not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any
section shall not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability
incurred under the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides.
   (B)   The section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the
purposes of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of
the penalty, forfeiture or liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(I.C. 36-5-2-2)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
   Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1998 and subsequently amended, the previous
code section number shall be indicated in the history by "(1998 Code, §
     )."
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent violations,
except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and parking.
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
         
31.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
         
32.   OFFICERS; CITY ORGANIZATIONS
         
33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
         
34.   TAX AND FINANCE
         
35.   PURCHASING POLICY
         
36.   ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
         
37.   EMPLOYMENT POLICIES
         
38.   PUBLIC RECORDS
CHAPTER 30: LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Councilmanic districts and wards
   
30.02   Map of councilmanic districts
   
30.03   Regular Council meetings
   
30.04   Special Council meetings
   
30.05   Order of business/Presiding Officer
   
30.06   Quorum
   
30.07   Voting
   
30.08   Official action
   
30.09   Open meetings
   
30.10   Conflict of interest
Specific Provisions
   
30.25   Citizen comment procedure
   
30.26   Public hearing procedure
   
30.27   Extensions of time
   
30.28   Public record
   
30.29   Agenda
   
30.30   Resolutions
   
30.31   Ordinances
   
30.32   Suspension of rules
   
30.33   Compensation of the Common Council
   
30.34   Youth Advisor
   
30.35   Legislative organizational chart
Statutory reference:
   Councilmanic districts, see I.C. 36-4-6-1 et seq.
   Indiana Open Door Law commonly known as the "Sunshine Law," see I.C. 5-14-
1.5-1 et seq.
   Power to expel members, see I.C. 36-4-6-6
   Quorum, see I.C. 36-4-6-10
   Quorum of the Council, see I.C. 36-4-6-10
   Regular and special meetings of the Common Council, see I.C. 36-4-6-7
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS AND WARDS.
   Councilmanic districts for the city are established as follows.
   (A)   First Councilmanic District. All that portion of the city described as
follows: Commencing at the intersection of Fifth Street with Martin Street,
thence east following the city boundary line, thence north to Third Street,
thence east to the city boundary line, thence south following the city boundary
line to Union Street, then west to the city boundary line, thence south
following the city boundary line, thence east following the city boundary line,
thence north following the city boundary line, thence east on Union Street to
the city boundary line, then south following the city boundary line, thence
west following the city boundary line, thence south following the city boundary
line, thence west following the city boundary line, thence south following the
city boundary line, thence west following the city boundary line to Lincolnway,
thence south on Lincolnway to US 6, thence west following the city boundary
line, thence north following the city boundary line, thence east following the
city boundary line, thence north following the city boundary line, thence east
following the city boundary line, thence north to US 6, thence east to Monroe
Street, thence north to Sroufe Street, thence east to Martin Street, thence
north to the city boundary line, then west following the city boundary line,
thence north following the city boundary line, thence east following the city
boundary line to Martin Street, thence north to Cadillac Street, thence west to
Olds Avenue, thence north on Olds Avenue continuing north on Sunnyside Street
to Union Street, thence west to the city boundary line, thence north following
the city boundary line, thence west following the city boundary line, thence
north following the city boundary line, thence west following the city boundary
line, thence north following the city boundary line, thence east on Second
Street, thence south on the city boundary line to Third Street, thence east
following the city boundary line to Grand Street, thence south to Fourth
Street, thence east to Martin Street, thence south to the point of beginning.
   (B)   Second Councilmanic District. All that portion of the city described
as follows: Commencing at the intersection of Third Street and Center Street,
thence east following the city boundary line to Grant Street, thence south to
Fourth Street, thence east to Martin Street, thence north to Gerber Street,
thence west following the city boundary line, thence south following the city
boundary line, thence west following the city boundary line to River Road,
thence south following the city boundary line, thence west following the city
boundary line, thence south following the city boundary line, thence west
following the city boundary line, thence south following the city boundary
line, thence east following the city boundary line, thence south following the
city boundary line, thence west following the city boundary line, thence south
following the city boundary line, thence east following the city boundary line,
thence north following the city boundary line, thence east following the city
boundary line to Townline Road, thence south to US 6, thence east following the
city boundary line, thence north following the city boundary line, thence east
to Martin Street, thence north following the city boundary line, thence west
following the city boundary line, thence north following the city boundary
line, thence east to Martin Street, thence north following the city boundary
line, thence west following the city boundary line, thence north to Union
Street, thence west following the city boundary line, thence north following
the city boundary line, thence west following the city boundary line, thence
north following the city boundary line, thence west following the city boundary
line, thence north to Second Street, thence east following the city boundary
line, thence south following the city boundary line, thence east to the point
of beginning.
   (C)   Third Councilmanic District. All that portion of the city described as
follows: Commencing at the intersection of Fifth Street with Martin Street,
thence east following the city boundary line, thence north to Third Street,
thence east following the city boundary line, thence north following the city
boundary line, thence east following the city boundary line, thence north
following the city boundary line, thence east following the city boundary line,
thence north following the city boundary line, thence west following the city
boundary line, thence north following the city boundary line, thence west
following the city boundary line, thence north following the city boundary
line, thence east following the city boundary line, thence north to State Road
5, thence west following the city boundary line, thence south following the
city boundary line, thence west following the city boundary line to State Road
5, thence north following the city boundary line, thence west following the
city boundary line, thence south following the city boundary line to State Road
5, thence west following the city boundary line, thence north following the
city boundary line, thence west following the city boundary line to Main
Street, thence north to Perry Road, thence west following the city boundary
line, thence south following the city boundary line, thence west following the
city boundary line, thence north following the city boundary line, thence west
following the city boundary line, thence north to Perry Road, thence west
following the city boundary line, thence south following the city boundary
line, thence continuing in a generally southernly and easterly fashion along
the city boundary line, thence north following the city boundary line to Gerber
Street, thence east to Martin Street, thence south to the point of beginning.
(1998 Code, § 3-1) (Ord. 530, passed 12-18-1992; Ord. 826-2012, passed 12-10-
2012; Ord. 1022-2025, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 30.02 MAP OF COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS.
   The map below depicts the Council Districts described in §
30.01 above.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/657f5231589e4e9d72860ce82f8ac4b2aa23298e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1879.png]
 
(1998 Code, § 3-2) (Ord. 1022-2025, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 30.03 REGULAR COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The regular meeting date and time for the Common Council shall be at 7:00
p.m. on the second and fourth Mondays of each month, and are held at the
Ligonier City Council Chambers located at 301 South Cavin Street, Ligonier,
Indiana.
(1998 Code, § 3-3) (Ord. 894-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 30.04 SPECIAL COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The Mayor shall have the power to call a special meeting, to be held at such
time and place as he or she shall designate by causing written notice to be
served on each Council member by a city police officer; the written notice
shall be served upon each Council member, either in person or by leaving a copy
at the last place of residence at least three days prior to the date of the
special meeting.
(1998 Code, § 3-4)
§ 30.05 ORDER OF BUSINESS/PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Mayor, or in his or her absence the Council President, shall be
the Presiding Officer of the Council pursuant to I.C. 36-4-6-8, and meetings
shall be conducted pursuant to the applicable statutes, I.C. 36-4-6-10 through
36-4-6-17, and in accordance with the following rules which are adopted.
   (B)   Order of business:
      (1)   Call to order;
      (2)   Minutes;
      (3)   Citizen comments;
      (4)   Unfinished business;
      (5)   New business;
      (6)   Comments by Council members and members of administration; and
      (7)   Adjournment.
(1998 Code, § 3-5)
§ 30.06 QUORUM.
   A majority of the membership of the Council shall constitute a quorum.
(1998 Code, § 3-6)
§ 30.07 VOTING.
   A record of votes on a particular issue shall be kept as a part of the
minutes of the Council, particularly noting any votes against any proposal or
proposition, ordinance or resolution.
(1998 Code, § 3-7)
§ 30.08 OFFICIAL ACTION.
   No action of the Council is official unless authorized by a majority of the
membership.
(1998 Code, § 3-8)
§ 30.09 OPEN MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Council shall be open to the general public unless an
executive session is called for the purposes identified under state statute.
(1998 Code, § 3-9)
§ 30.10 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   No member of the Council shall participate in a hearing or decision in
which he or she has a direct or indirect financial interest.
   (B)   The Council shall enter into its records the fact that its member has
such a disqualification.
(1998 Code, § 3-10)
SPECIFIC PROVISIONS
§ 30.25 CITIZEN COMMENT PROCEDURE.
   The portion of the public meeting devoted to citizen comments shall be
conducted as follows.
   (A)   The Presiding Officer shall ask for citizen comment.
   (B)   Those persons appearing on each side of an issue sought to be
presented to the Council or to the Mayor shall have a total of 15 minutes for
the presentation of evidence, statements and arguments in support or in
opposition to a matter.
   (C)   The Presiding Officer shall then declare that public comment upon the
issue shall be terminated.
   (D)   The Council shall then turn to consideration of the issue.
(1998 Code, § 3-11)
§ 30.26 PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURE.
   Public hearings shall proceed as follows.
   (A)   The Presiding Officer shall open the public meeting.
   (B)   Petitioners and persons appearing in support of a petition before the
Council shall have a total of 15 minutes for the presentation of evidence,
statements and arguments in support of a petition before the Council.
   (C)   Remonstrators and/or persons in opposition to the petition shall then
have a total of 15 minutes for the presentation of their evidence, statements
and arguments in opposition to the petition before the Council.
   (D)   The petitioners shall then have a total of five minutes for rebuttal
of evidence, statements and arguments made. No new information or evidence may
be introduced in this portion of the hearing process.
   (E)   The Presiding Officer shall then declare the public hearing closed.
(1998 Code, § 3-12)
§ 30.27 EXTENSIONS OF TIME.
   The Presiding Officer shall have the authority to cut off repetitious and
irrelevant testimony with respect to citizen comments and in public hearings
and shall furthermore have the authority to extend the 15-minute time period
specified in each of those matters where appropriate in the interest of
affording a fair hearing.
(1998 Code, § 3-13)
§ 30.28 PUBLIC RECORD.
   All evidence presented at the public hearing shall be retained by the
Council and shall be part of the public record.
(1998 Code, § 3-14)
§ 30.29 AGENDA.
   (A)   In order to be eligible for consideration at a meeting of the Common
Council, the matter shall be placed upon the agenda no later than the Thursday
noon preceding the meeting date. If the matter is not placed on the agenda
prior to the cutoff time, then that matter will be placed upon the following
meeting's agenda for consideration at the following meeting.
   (B)   This agenda requirement shall not apply to citizen comments. In
addition, the Mayor, the Clerk-Treasurer, or the President of City Council may
place matters upon the agenda at any time notwithstanding the provisions of
division (A) of this section.
(1998 Code, § 3-15) (Ord. 772-2010, passed 11-8-2010)
§ 30.30 RESOLUTIONS.
   A resolution may be passed upon one reading by title only by a majority vote
of the Council.
(1998 Code, § 3-16)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of the Clerk, see I.C. 36-4-6-9
§ 30.31 ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Vote. A majority vote of the Council is required to pass an ordinance
unless a greater vote is required by statute, or these rules.
   (B)   Passage of ordinance at same meeting at which it is introduced. A two-
thirds vote of all the elected members, after unanimous consent of the members
present to consider the ordinance, is required to pass an ordinance of the
Council on the same day or at the same meeting at which it is introduced.
   (C)   Number of reading. All ordinances shall be read three times; all
ordinances shall be read three times by title only.
   (D)   Signing; approval. After an ordinance or resolution is passed by the
Council, it shall be signed by the Presiding Officer and the Clerk-Treasurer
shall then present it to the Mayor who shall either, within ten days
thereafter, approve the ordinance, order or resolution by entering his or her
approval on it, signing it and informing the Council of his or her approval; or
to veto the ordinance, order or resolution by returning it to the Council and
informing the Council of his or her veto and his or her reasons for the veto.
The Mayor may, pursuant to I.C. 36-4-6-16, approve or veto separate items of an
ordinance appropriating money or levying a tax.
   (E)   Veto. After veto, an ordinance or resolution shall be considered
defeated unless the Council at its first regular special meeting after the ten-
day period prescribed hereinabove passes the ordinance, order, or resolution
over the Mayor’s veto by a two-thirds vote.
(Ord. 880-2016, passed 5-23-2016) (1998 Code, § 3-17)
§ 30.32 SUSPENSION OF RULES.
   These rules may be suspended by unanimous vote of the members of the Council
present at a meeting, provided, however, that the members present constitute a
quorum.
(1998 Code, § 3-18)
§ 30.33 COMPENSATION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL.
   The Common Council shall by ordinance fix the compensation of its members.
(1998 Code, § 3-19)
Statutory reference:
   Fixing annual compensation, see I.C. 36-4-7-2
§ 30.34 YOUTH ADVISOR.
   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint a Youth Advisor to the
Common Council of the city.
   (B)   The Youth Advisor's function shall be to serve as an advisor to the
Common Council on matters affecting youth in the community.
   (C)   The Youth Advisor shall not be treated as a member of the legislative
body for any purpose, including for determining if a quorum is present, and
shall not be allowed to vote on issues before the Council.
(Ord. 876-2015, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 30.35 LEGISLATIVE ORGANIZATIONAL CHART.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/657f5231589e4e9d72860ce82f8ac4b2aa23298e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1622.jpg]
 
(1998 Code, § 3-31)
CHAPTER 31: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
Section
Establishment of Branches
   
31.01   Organization
Mayor
   
31.15   The Mayor as city executive
   
31.16   Election of the Mayor
   
31.17   Term of office
   
31.18   Deputy Mayor
   
31.19   Powers and duties of the Mayor
   
31.20   Mayor's monthly meetings with department heads
   
31.21   Salary of the Mayor
   
31.22   Access to financial data
City Clerk-Treasurer
   
31.35   Election and term of office
   
31.36   Powers and duties
   
31.37   Duties as Fiscal Officer
   
31.38   Compensation
   
31.39   Deputies and employees
   
31.40   Office space
   
31.41   Right to legal counsel
   
31.42   Authorization to obtain credit cards
   
31.43   Authorization to contract with payment processing companies
   
31.44   Authorization to deposit, invest and reinvest in local financial
institutions
Board of Public Works and Safety
   
31.55   Established
   
31.56   Clerk of the Board
   
31.57   Meetings of the Board
   
31.58   Duties and powers of the Board
Statutory reference:
   General powers of Mayor, see I.C. 36-4-5-1 through 36-4-5-9
   Mayor's authority, see I.C. 36-4-9-8
ESTABLISHMENT OF BRANCHES
§ 31.01 ORGANIZATION.
   The government of the city shall consist of three branches, those being:
   (A)   Executive branch (I.C. 36-4-5);
   (B)   Legislative branch (I.C. 36-4-6); and
   (C)   Fiscal branch (I.C. 36-4-10).
(1998 Code, § 2-1)
MAYOR
§ 31.15 THE MAYOR AS CITY EXECUTIVE.
   (A)   The Mayor is the city executive and head of the executive branch.
   (B)   The Mayor shall faithfully perform the duties and responsibilities
contained in I.C. 36-4-5 and other statutes of the state.
(1998 Code, § 2-6)
§ 31.16 ELECTION OF THE MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be elected pursuant to I.C. 3-2-7-1, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (B)   Eligibility requirements are set forth in I.C. 36-4-5-2.
(1998 Code, § 2-7)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 3-2 was repealed by P.L. 5-1986, Sec. 61. Current state law provisions
concerning elections are codified in I.C. 3-5.
§ 31.17 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor shall take office at 12:00 p.m. on the first day of January
following his or her election and shall serve for four years and until a
successor is elected and qualified pursuant to I.C. 3-5.
(1998 Code, § 2-8)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 3-2 was repealed by P.L. 5-1986, Sec. 61. Current state law provisions
concerning elections are codified in I.C. 3-5.
§ 31.18 DEPUTY MAYOR.
   A position of Deputy Mayor may be established by prior ordinance of the
Common Council pursuant to I.C. 36-4-9-7. He or she shall have all the powers
of the Mayor in the absence of the Mayor.
(1998 Code, § 2-9)
§ 31.19 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer and as such makes all
appointments to all offices and positions of employment authorized by the laws
of the state or by ordinances of Council and except as may be otherwise
provided by Council or the General Assembly.
   (B)   All officers and employees of the city, unless otherwise provided by
the laws of the state, shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
(1998 Code, § 2-10)
§ 31.20 MAYOR'S MONTHLY MEETINGS WITH DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-5-6, the Mayor must meet with officers in charge of
city departments.
(1998 Code, § 2-11)
§ 31.21 SALARY OF THE MAYOR.
   (A)   The Common Council shall, by ordinance, fix the annual compensation of
the Mayor in accordance with state statutes.
   (B)   The Mayor’s salary may not be changed in the year for which it is
fixed, nor may it be reduced below the amount fixed for the previous year.
(1998 Code, § 2-12) (Ord. 894-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 31.22 ACCESS TO FINANCIAL DATA.
   (A)   The Mayor of the city shall be authorized, on behalf of the city, to
have unrestricted to all financial information pertinent to the city, including
but not limited to any information in the hands of any financial institution or
other entity regarding accounts, certificates of deposit, and/or any other
investment vehicle of the city, as the Mayor should request.
   (B)   Be it further ordained that nothing contained herein shall authorize
the Mayor to withdraw or transfer any of the funds, but that this section is
designed to insure unrestricted access to information pertaining to the
accounts, certificates of deposit, and/or any other investment vehicle of the
city.
(Ord. 751, passed 4-27-2009)
CITY CLERK-TREASURER
§ 31.35 ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall be elected pursuant to I.C. 3-10-6.
   (B)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall take office at 12:00 p.m. on the first
day of January following his or her election, and shall serve for four years
and until a successor is elected and qualified.
(1998 Code, § 2-20)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment of officers and employees, see I.C. 36-4-11-2
   City Clerk's powers and duties, see I.C. 36-4-10-4
   Election of the City Clerk, see I.C. 36-4-10-2
   Residency requirements of the City Clerk, see I.C. 36-4-10-3
§ 31.36 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Clerk-Treasurer may administer oaths, takes depositions and
takes acknowledgments of instruments as required by law.
   (B)   The City Clerk-Treasurer may perform all duties prescribed by law,
which include but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Serve as Clerk of the Common Council pursuant to I.C. 36-4-6-9 and
maintain custody of its records;
      (2)   Maintain all records required by law;
      (3)   Keep the city seal;
      (4)   Upon the Clerk-Treasurer's successor being elected and qualified
deliver all the records and property of the Clerk-Treasurer's office;
      (5)   Administer oaths when necessary on the discharge of the Clerk-
Treasurer's duties, without charging a fee;
      (6)   Take depositions, without charging a fee;
      (7)   Take acknowledgment of instruments that are required by statute to
be acknowledged without charging a fee; and
      (8)   Perform all other duties prescribed by law.
(1998 Code, § 2-21)
§ 31.37 DUTIES AS FISCAL OFFICER.
   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall perform all duties under I.C. 36-4-10-4.5, as
the fiscal officer and head of the City Department of Finance.
(1998 Code, § 2-22)
§ 31.38 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The compensation for the services of the person holding the office of
City Clerk-Treasurer shall be fixed by the Common Council.
   (B)   The compensation may not be changed in the year for which it is fixed,
nor may it be reduced below the amount fixed if in the previous year.
(1998 Code, § 2-23) (Ord. 894-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 31.39 DEPUTIES AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall appoint the number of deputies and employees
needed for the effective operation of the office, with the approval of the
Common Council.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer is directly responsible for billing and collection
of city-owned utilities and shall appoint employees who are responsible for
that billing and collection.
   (C)   Employees and deputies serve at the pleasure of the Clerk-Treasurer.
(1998 Code, § 2-24)
§ 31.40 OFFICE SPACE.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-10-2.5, office space for the City Clerk-Treasurer and
his or her staff and records is to be provided in city-owned or leased
buildings.
(1998 Code, § 2-25)
§ 31.41 RIGHT TO LEGAL COUNSEL.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-10-5.5, the City Clerk-Treasurer may hire or contract
with competent attorneys or legal research assistants.
(1998 Code, § 2-26)
§ 31.42 AUTHORIZATION TO OBTAIN CREDIT CARDS.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized, on behalf of the city, to obtain
credit card(s) for use by city employees and department heads pursuant to the
terms of this section, the city code, the City Employee Handbook (Ord. 616),
and state law.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to pay any required annual
membership fee, service charge or renewal charge levied by the card issuer, or
any third party credit card servicing company.
   (C)   Each department may receive two or more cards: one issued in the name
of the city and department head, and the other issued in the name of the city
and individuals selected by the department head. The department head shall
distribute them to the named employee(s) for purchasing.
   (D)   A city credit card shall be used only for authorized city business,
and shall not be used for personal purposes. Examples of valid uses of a city
credit card include, but are not limited to, payment of properly authorized
hotel expenses, gas for city vehicles, food, parking and tuition/registration
expenses.
   (E)   Supporting documentation such as paid invoices and receipts which have
been received by the department head or employee as the result of their use of
a city credit card shall be promptly presented by the department head or
employee to the Clerk-Treasurer. Any interest or late payment penalty incurred
due to the late filing or furnishing of the documentation by a department head
or employee, or any charges (including the city’s reasonable attorney fees)
incurred due to the department head or employee’s unauthorized or improper use
of the city’s credit card, shall be paid by the department head or employee to
the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (F)   All claims filed in connection with the use of the city’s credit card
must be itemized as set forth in I.C. 5-11-10 before approval and payment by
the Clerk-Treasurer. All claims which are properly itemized or documented and
approved shall be paid by the Clerk-Treasurer out of the appropriate fund from
which such expense relates. Any claim which is not properly itemized or
documented and approved shall be the responsibility of the city employee or
department head who incurred it, who shall pay the undocumented or unapproved
portion of the claim including any penalty or interest associated with the
city’s failure to pay the undocumented or unapproved charges.
   (G)   The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized to make payment for approved
credit card claims and shall make a record of all the payments.
   (H)   A department head or employee shall not use a city credit card to
bypass the city’s prior authorization procedure or the city’s accounting
system.
(Ord. 683, passed 9-22-2003; Ord. 791-2011, passed 6-27-2011; Ord. 839-2013,
passed 6-24-2013; Ord. 974-2022, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 31.43 AUTHORIZATION TO CONTRACT WITH PAYMENT PROCESSING COMPANIES.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to contract with payment processing
companies to receive payment of city obligations and fees, provided they
collect any transaction fees from the person utilizing a bank card or credit
card to pay a city obligation. This transaction fee is to be an additional
charge to the money the Clerk-Treasurer is required to collect.
   (B)   If payment is made by a bank card or credit card, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall collect and deposit in the appropriate fund an amount not less than the
amount the Clerk-Treasurer would collect and deposit if the Clerk-Treasurer
received payments by a means other than a bank card or credit card.
(Ord. 793-2011, passed 7-25-2011)
§ 31.44 AUTHORIZATION TO DEPOSIT, INVEST AND REINVEST IN LOCAL FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS.
   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to deposit, invest, and reinvest monies as
determined and identified by the Clerk-Treasurer in any financial institutions
identified as eligible by the Indiana Board of Depositories and located within
the City of Ligonier corporate limits.
(Ord. 806-2012, passed 4-9-2012)
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY
§ 31.55 ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety is established by I.C. 36-4-9-5.
   (B)   The Board shall consist of three persons, namely the Mayor and two
persons appointed by the Mayor.
(1998 Code, § 2-30)
§ 31.56 CLERK OF THE BOARD.
   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall serve as Clerk of the Board of Public Works
and Safety pursuant to I.C. 36-4-10-4.5.
(1998 Code, § 2-31)
§ 31.57 MEETINGS OF THE BOARD.
   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall make rules governing the time and
place for holding regular meetings and the procedure to be used for calling and
giving notice thereof.
(1998 Code, § 2-32)
§ 31.58 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BOARD.
   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall have any and all powers given to
it by ordinance and as set forth in the applicable Indiana Code.
(1998 Code, § 2-33)
CHAPTER 32: OFFICERS; CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
32.01   Mayoral duties regarding employees, boards and the like
   
32.02   Ligonier Parks
   
32.03   Department of Redevelopment
   
32.04   Economic Development Department
   
32.05   Plan Commission
   
32.06   Building and Zoning Administrator
   
32.07   City governmental organizational chart
Statutory reference:
   City Attorney, see I.C. 36-4-9-11
   Firefighting systems, see I.C. 36-8-2-3
   Police systems, see I.C. 36-8-2-2
§ 32.01 MAYORAL DUTIES REGARDING EMPLOYEES, BOARDS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Mayoral appointments. Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-9-8, the Mayor shall
appoint:
      (1)   A City Civil Engineer;
      (2)   A City Attorney;
      (3)   A Chief of the Fire Department;
      (4)   A Chief of the Police Department; and
      (5)   Other officers, employees, boards and commissions required by
statute.
(1998 Code, § 2-38)
   (B)   Compensation to be set by Mayor.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-7-3, the Mayor shall fix the compensation of
each appointive officer, deputy and other employees of the city excluding the
Police and Fire Departments.
      (2)   Compensation must be fixed before August 2.
(1998 Code, § 2-39)
   (C)   Suspension and removal procedures. Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-11-2, the
Mayor may suspend or remove from office any officers, deputies or other
employees by notifying the affected person and sending a written statement of
the reasons for the suspension or removal to the city legislative body.
(1998 Code, § 2-40)
§ 32.02 LIGONIER PARKS.
   (A)   There is hereby created a new executive department, which shall be
known as the Ligonier Parks.
   (B)   The city Board of Works is hereby designated as the Park Authority,
and charged with the management of all city parks, including approaches (I.C.
36-10-5-2(b)(2)(C));
   (C)   The Board of Works, as the Park Authority, may adopt rules concerning
the laying out, improvement, preservation, ornamentation, and management of the
parks;
   (D)   The executive of the city shall appoint a person to serve as the
Director of the Ligonier Parks, and said Director shall have discretion to hire
employees to carry out the day to day functions of managing and maintaining the
parks and recreation facilities of the city, subject to the approval of the
Park Authority;
   (E)   The Director of the Ligonier Parks shall report regularly to the Park
Authority when it meets as the Board of Works;
   (F)   All books, papers, documents, and other property of the former Board
of Parks and Recreation shall be transferred to the city and owned, held, and
maintained as all other municipally owned property, subject to the governance
of the Park Authority; and
   (G)   All employees of the former Department of Parks and Recreation, except
for the Superintendent of Parks and Recreation, shall become employees of the
newly created executive department known as Ligonier Parks, and subject to the
governing authority of the Park Authority.
(Ord. 931-2019, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 32.03 DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   Purpose of Department. The Common Council of the city deems it to
be in the best interest of the city and its citizens to afford a maximum
opportunity for rehabilitation, redevelopment or economic development of areas
by private enterprise by establishing a department of redevelopment.
(1998 Code, § 2-55)
      (2)   Department of Redevelopment and Commission established. The Common
Council establishes the Department of Redevelopment of the city. The Department
will be controlled by a board of five members known as the City Redevelopment
Commission.
(1998 Code, § 2-56)
      (3)   Redevelopment District designated.
         (a)   Pursuant to the Act, all of the territory within the corporate
boundaries of the city will be a taxing district to be known as the
Redevelopment District of the city for the purpose of levying and collecting
special benefit taxes for redevelopment purposes as provided in the Act.
         (b)   The Common Council finds and determines that all of the taxable
property within this special taxing district will be considered to be
benefitted by the redevelopment projects and economic development projects
carried out under the Act to the extent of the special taxes levied under the
Act.
(1998 Code, § 2-57)
      (4)   Commission memberships.
         (a)   The Common Council appoints two members of the City
Redevelopment Commission.
         (b)   The remaining three members shall be appointed by the Mayor as
the municipal executive.
(1998 Code, § 2-58)
   (B)   Redevelopment authority.
      (1)   The city hereby creates a redevelopment authority under the Act to
be known as the City Redevelopment Authority ("Authority") as a separate body
corporate and politic and as an instrumentality of the city.
      (2)   The Authority is organized for the following purposes:
         (a)   Financing, constructing and leasing local public improvements to
the Commission;
         (b)   Financing and constructing additional improvements to local
public improvements owned by the Authority and leasing them to the Commission;
         (c)   Acquiring all or a portion of one or more local public
improvements from the Commission by purchase or lease, and leasing these local
public improvements back to the Commission, with any additional improvements
that may be made to them;
         (d)   Acquiring all or a portion of one or more local public
improvements from the Commission by purchase or lease to fund or refund
indebtedness incurred on account of those local public improvements to enable
the Commission to make a savings in debt service or lease rental obligations or
to obtain relief from covenants that the Commission considers to be unduly
burdensome; and
         (e)   Any other purposes by the Act, including the issuance of bonds
to finance local public improvements.
      (3)   The Board of Directors of the Authority shall be composed of three
members, who are residents of the city, and shall be appointed by the Mayor for
three-year terms, from January 1 following their appointment.
(Ord. 682, passed 9-22-2003)
§ 32.04 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Department of Economic Development established. Development to the
existing executive departments of the city.
(1998 Code, § 2-62)
   (B)   City Economic Development Commissions. The Department of Economic
Development shall be under the control of a Board of three members to be known
as "City Economic Development Commission".
(1998 Code, § 2-63)
   (C)   Commission members. The Commission members shall be appointed as
follows:
      (1)   One of the members so appointed shall be selected by the Mayor;
      (2)   One member shall be nominated by the County Council of the county;
and
      (3)   One shall be nominated by the Common Council of the city.
(1998 Code, § 2-64)
   (D)   Terms of Commission members. The Commissioners so appointed shall take
office upon their appointment and their terms shall run the following number of
years from February 1, following the original appointment:
      (1)   Mayor's appointee: three years;
      (2)   Common Council appointee: two years;
      (3)   County Council appointee: one year.
(1998 Code, § 2-65)
§ 32.05 PLAN COMMISSION.
   (A)   Plan Commission established. There is established a City Plan
Commission in order to promote the orderly development of the city.
(1998 Code, § 2-70)
   (B)   Plan Commission memberships. The Plan Commission shall consist of the
following members:
      (1)   Common Council shall appoint three persons, who must be elected or
appointed officials or employees from within the city government, as members.
      (2)   The Mayor shall appoint four citizen members, of whom no more than
two persons shall be of the same political party.
      (3)   Two members shall be appointed from the unincorporated area, over
which the Ligonier Plan Commission exercises jurisdiction, by the Noble County
Commissioners. The members shall be residences of the unincorporated area or
the county and must also be owners of real property located in whole or part
within the unincorporated area and not be of the same political party. In
addition, at least one of the members shall be a resident of the unincorporated
area.
(1998 Code, § 2-71)
   (C)   Terms of members. The term of office of the Plan Commission members
shall initially be as follows:
      (1)   For the members appointed from the unincorporated area, one member
shall be appointed for a term of one year and the other for a term of four
years. Thereafter each appointment is for a term of four years.
      (2)   The term of office of a member who is appointed from the membership
of the Council, Board of Works, or the Park Board, is coextensive with member’s
term of office on that Council or Board, unless that Board or the Council
appoints, at its first regular meeting in any year, another to serve as its
representative.
      (3)   The citizen members shall initially be appointed for the following
terms of office:
         (a)   One member for a term of two years;
         (b)   Two members for a term of three years; and
         (c)   Two members for a term of four years.
      (4)   After their initial term, citizen members shall serve for a term of
four years.
(1998 Code, § 2-72) (Ord. 830-2013, passed 3-25-2013; Ord. 959-2021, passed 4-
26-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Establishment and membership of the Commission, see I.C. 36-7-4-200
§ 32.06 BUILDING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Office of Building and Zoning Administrator established. There is
established the office of Building and Zoning Administrator who shall act
pursuant to the powers and duties as set forth in Acts 1935, Ch. 196, as
amended, of the State General Assembly.
(1998 Code, § 2-75)
   (B)   Appointment and removal. The Building and Zoning Administrator shall
be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Common Council. The
Building and Zoning Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor, and
shall be an at will employee with no fixed term of office.
(1998 Code, § 2-76)
   (C)   Term of office. The Mayor and Common Council of the city shall on the
last meeting in December of each year, appoint a Building and Zoning
Administrator to serve beginning at 12:00 p.m. on January 1, and ending 12:00
a.m. on December 31.
(1998 Code, § 2-77) (Ord. 785-2011, passed 4-11-2011)
§ 32.07 CITY GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONAL CHART.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/657f5231589e4e9d72860ce82f8ac4b2aa23298e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1845.png]
 
(1998 Code, § 2-124) (Ord. 937-2019, passed 9-9-2019)
CHAPTER 33: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
Police Reserves
   
33.01   Police reserves established
   
33.02   Appointments
   
33.03   Powers
   
33.04   Accountability
   
33.05   Compensation
   
33.06   Pensions
   
33.07   Training and probationary periods
Regular Police Department
   
33.20   Compensation for injured full-time officers
POLICE RESERVES
§ 33.01 POLICE RESERVES ESTABLISHED.
   There is established the city police reserves (hereinafter referred to as
the "police reserves").
(1998 Code, § 2-80) (Ord. 512, passed 12-23-1991)
§ 33.02 APPOINTMENTS.
   Individuals may be appointed, after a satisfactory background check, to the
city police reserves upon recommendation by the Chief of Police to the City
Board of Public Works and Safety, and upon a vote of the majority of the
members of the City Board of Public Works and Safety.
(1998 Code, § 2-81) (Ord. 512, passed 12-23-1991)
§ 33.03 POWERS.
   The members of the police reserve may not be members of the regular Police
Department, but that they shall have all of the same police powers as regular
members except as limited by the rules of the Police Department.
(1998 Code, § 2-82) (Ord. 512, passed 12-23-1991)
Statutory reference:
   Police reserves, see I.C. 36-8-3-20
   Powers and duties of public officer, see I.C. 36-8-3-6 and 36-8-3-10
§ 33.04 ACCOUNTABILITY.
   The members of the police reserves shall be subject to the authority of the
City Board of Public Works and Safety, the Mayor of the city, the Police Chief
of the City Police Department, and to the officers of the City Police
Department, including any probationary or part-time officers.
(1998 Code, § 2-83) (Ord. 512, passed 12-23-1991)
§ 33.05 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the police reserves may, subject to the approval of the Board of
Public Works, and to the extent that sums are appropriated therefor, receive
compensation and/or expenses.
(1998 Code, § 2-84) (Ord. 512, passed 12-23-1991)
§ 33.06 PENSIONS.
   Members of the police reserves shall not be eligible to participate in any
pension program provided for regular members of the Department.
(1998 Code, § 2-85) (Ord. 512, passed 12-23-1991)
§ 33.07 TRAINING AND PROBATIONARY PERIODS.
   A member of the police reserves may not be appointed until he or she has
completed the training and probationary period as specified by the rules of the
City Police Department; this provision may, however, be waived by a majority
vote of the City Board of Public Works and Safety.
(1998 Code, § 2-86)
REGULAR POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.20 COMPENSATION FOR INJURED FULL-TIME OFFICERS.
   Any full-time police officer of full-time firefighter who meets the criteria
to be considered a “full-time regular employee” under the Ligonier Personnel
Policies, who may be hurt or injured on the job, and who would otherwise be
qualified to receive worker’s compensation pay benefits under the laws of the
State of Indiana, shall receive full pay and benefits during the period they
would otherwise receive pay benefits under worker’s compensation in Indiana,
for a period of up to, but not more than one year, from the city.
(Ord. 797-2011, passed 9-12-2011)
CHAPTER 34: TAX AND FINANCE
Section
Fiscal Procedures and Funds
   
34.01   Pre-approved payment of claims
   
34.02   Funds established
   
34.03   Advance payment of goods/services for public works projects
Tax Abatement Procedures
   
34.15   Economic Revitalization Areas
City's Authority; License Fees
   
34.25   Authority to license
   
34.26   Issuance and inspections
   
34.27   Complaints, revocations and suspensions
Administrative Fees
   
34.40   Fee for vehicle identification number inspection
   
34.41   Fees for traffic accident reports
   
34.42   Copying of public records
   
34.43   Charge for presentment of a returned check or draft
   
34.44   Fee for fingerprinting for immigration forms
   
34.45   Comprehensive Plan Book; fee
Fixed Asset Inventory and Capitalization Policy
   
34.60   Established; definitions
   
34.61   Specific capitalization provisions
Internal Control Standards
   
34.70   Mission
   
34.71   Objectives
   
34.72   Standards
   
34.73   Principles
   
34.74   Adoption
   
34.75   Standards uses
   
34.76   Authorization
   
34.77   Personnel
   
34.78   Training
   
34.79   Position
   
34.80   Internal control systems activities
   
34.81   Implementation
   
34.82   Violation
   
34.83   Action allowed by law
   
34.84   Notice of chapter
Materiality Threshold
   
34.90   General
FISCAL PROCEDURES AND FUNDS
§ 34.01 PRE-APPROVED PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer may make claim payments in advance of Council
allowance for the following kind of expenses, provided that the procedures
contained in this section are followed:
      (1)   License or permit fees;
      (2)   Insurance premiums;
      (3)   Utility payments or utility connection charges;
      (4)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute;
      (5)   Maintenance or service agreements;
      (6)   Leases or rental agreements;
      (7)   Bond or coupon payments;
      (8)   Payroll;
      (9)   State, federal or county taxes; and
      (10)   Expenses that must be paid because of emergency circumstances.
   (B)   Each payment out of this section must be supported by a fully itemized
invoice or bill and certified by the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (C)   The Board having jurisdiction over the allowance of the claim, shall
review and allow the claim at its next regular or special meeting following the
pre-approved payment of the expense.
(1998 Code, § 2-155) (Ord. 746-2008, passed 12- -2008)
Statutory reference:
   Pre-approved payments of claims, see I.C. 36-4-8-14
§ 34.02 FUNDS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Law Enforcement Continuing Education and Equipment Fund.
      (1)   A fund is established entitled the City Law Enforcement Continuing
Education and Equipment Fund.
      (2)   The fund shall receive and deposit all fees to be collected for
finger printing required for immigration forms, contributions and money from
other sources of income, with the necessary funds to be appropriated for the
purchase of necessary supplies, equipment, uniforms, schooling and the like as
submitted by claim.
      (3)   A fee in the sum of $10 shall be charged and collected for finger-
printing required for immigration forms. The fees collected shall be deposited
in the City Law Enforcement Continuing Education and Equipment Fund.
      (4)   The Police Chief will approve and submit all claims for payments
and Council authorizes the Clerk-Treasurer to make payments from the
aforementioned fund and shall make a record of all the disbursements and
receipts.
(1998 Code, § 2-165)
   (B)   City Fire Department Gift Fund.
      (1)   There is established a special fund to be known as the "City Fire
Department Gift Fund".
      (2)   At the end of each fiscal year, this fund shall not revert to any
other fund, but all monies held therein shall be carried forward from one year
to another.
      (3)   This fund shall be funded from monies donated to the City Fire
Department.
      (4)   The funds accumulated in the City Fire Department Gift Fund shall
be used as follows:
         (a)   To provide the City Fire Department with necessary equipment;
         (b)   To repair equipment used by the City Fire Department; and
         (c)   For any other firefighting purpose.
      (5)   This section shall be liberally construed to allow the city to use
the accumulated funds as the city deems fit for the benefit of the City Fire
Department and the firefighting needs of the city. If money is donated to the
City Fire Department and the donation is given for a specific purpose or need,
the city shall honor the purpose for which the donation was made to the extent
practical and reasonable.
      (6)   Expenditures may be made from the fund upon recommendation by the
City Board of Public Works and Safety and approval by the City Common Council.
(1998 Code, § 2-166)
   (C)   Industrial Loan Payback Fund.
      (1)   There is established a special non-reverting perpetual fund which
shall be known as the Industrial Loan Payback Fund.
      (2)   The Industrial Loan Payback Fund shall be funded from monies
received by the city from the repayment of loans made by the city to businesses
and industries where the source of the funds loaned by the city was a grant to
the city from or administered by the State Department of Commerce.
      (3)   Disbursements from the Industrial Loan Payback Fund shall be made
by claims approved by the City Common Council.
      (4)   Monies within the Industrial Loan Payback Fund may be used for the
following purposes:
         (a)   Infrastructure improvements within the City Industrial Park;
         (b)   Infrastructure improvements outside of the City Industrial Park
if the improvement, or portion thereof, is found by the City Common Council to
be necessary as a result of activities within the City Industrial Park;
         (c)   Infrastructure improvements outside of the City Industrial Park
if the improvement is found to be necessary by the City Common Council in order
to secure or retain an industry or business located outside of the City
Industrial Park; or
         (d)   Any other economic development, infrastructure or capital
improvement project approved by the City Common Council.
      (5)   For purposes of this ordinance, the City Industrial Park shall be
considered to be the same as City Tax Incremental Financing (TIF) District No.
2.
(1998 Code, § 2-167)
   (D)   Cumulative Capital Development Fund.
      (1)   There is reestablished the City Cumulative Capital Development
Fund.
      (2)   An ad valorem property tax levy shall be imposed and the revenues
from the levy shall be retained in the City Cumulative Capital Development
Fund.
      (3)   The maximum rate of levy under division (D)(2) above shall not
exceed$0.0500 per $100 of assessed valuation, and unless reduced or rescinded
the rate of levy under division (D)(2) above shall be $0.0500 per $100 of
assessed valuation.
      (4)   The City Cumulative Capital Development Fund is reestablished for
the years 1994 payable 1995, 1995 payable 1996, and 1996 payable 1997.
      (5)   The funds accumulated in the City Cumulative Capital Development
Fund shall be used for general improvements to the city of the nature and type
as permitted by I.C. 36-9-15.5-2 and 36-9-16-3.
      (6)   Notwithstanding division (D)(2) above, funds accumulated in the
City Cumulative Capital Development Fund may be spent for purposes other than
the purposes stated in division (D)(2) above if the purpose is to protect the
public health, welfare or safety in an emergency situation which demands
immediate action. Money may be spent under the authority of this division (D)
only after the Mayor issues a declaration that the public health, welfare or
safety is in immediate danger that requires the expenditure of money in the
fund.
      (7)   This division (D) shall take effect upon approval by the State
Board of Tax Commissioners.
      (8)   In the event any provisions of this division (D) conflict with any
present or future statutes or regulations of the state or the United States,
that provision so in conflict shall yield to the federal or state statute or
regulation.
(1998 Code, § 2-168)
   (E)   City Cumulative Building and Equipment Fund.
      (1)   There is established the City Cumulative Building and Equipment
Fund as authorized by I.C. 36-8-14-1 et seq.
      (2)   An ad valorem property tax levy of $0.05 on each $100 of assessed
valuation on all taxable property within the city shall be imposed and the
revenues from the levy shall be retained in the City Cumulative Building and
Equipment Fund which also may be known as the "Building or Remodeling,
Firefighting and Police Radio Equipment Fund". The property tax levied herein
shall be levied in 1994, payable in 1995, and annually thereafter unless
reduced, rescinded or modified.
      (3)   The funds accumulated in the City Cumulative Building and Equipment
Fund shall be used for those purposes specified in I.C. 36-8-14-1 et seq.
      (4)   This section shall take effect upon approval by the State Board of
Tax Commissioners.
      (5)   In the event any provisions of this division (E) conflict with any
present or future statutes or regulations of the state or the United States,
that provision so in conflict shall yield to the federal or state statute or
regulation.
(1998 Code, § 2-169)
   (F)   Sewage Works Revenue Fund. All revenues derived from the operation of
the sewage works and from the collection of sewer rates and charges shall be
deposited in the Revenue Fund, created, and segregated and deposited as set
forth in this division (F). Of these revenues, the proper and reasonable
expenses of operation, repair and maintenance of the works shall be paid, the
principal and interest of all bonds and fiscal agency charges of registrars or
paying agents shall be paid, the reserve for bonds shall be maintained, and the
costs of replacements, extensions, additions and improvements shall be paid.
(1998 Code, § 2-170)
   (G)   Allocation Fund. Immediately upon distribution by the County Auditor,
tax increment and, immediately upon receipt, investment earnings thereon, shall
be set aside by the Clerk-Treasurer in the Allocation Fund created by I.C. 36-
7-14 and maintained as an account separate and apart from all other accounts of
the city and the Redevelopment Commission. All monies deposited in the
Allocation Fund shall be invested in accordance with I.C. 5-13-5 as amended
from time to time. Tax increment deposited in the Allocation Fund, and the
earnings thereon, shall be used as provided in division (J) below.
(1998 Code, § 2-171)
   (H)   Operation and Maintenance Fund. Monies heretofore accumulated pursuant
to the ordinance authorizing the refunded bonds in an amount equal to the
expenses of operation, repair and maintenance of the sewage works for a two-
month period, as calculated by the Clerk-Treasurer with the advice of the
city's financial advisor, shall be credited to and become a part of the
Operation and Maintenance Fund created as of the date of the advance refunding
of the refunded bonds. On the last day of each calendar month, revenues of the
sewage works shall thereafter be transferred from the Revenue Fund to the
Operation and Maintenance Fund so that the balance maintained in this Fund
shall be sufficient to pay the expenses of operation, repair and maintenance
for the then next succeeding two calendar months. The monies credited to this
Fund shall be used for the payment of the reasonable and proper operation,
repair and maintenance expenses of the sewage works on a day-to-day basis. Any
monies in the Fund may be transferred to the Sewage Works Sinking Fund if
necessary to prevent a default in the payment of principal of or interest on
the outstanding bonds of the sewage works.
(1998 Code, § 2-172)
   (I)   Sewage Works Sinking Fund. There is created a sinking fund for the
payment of the principal of and interest on revenue bonds which by their terms
are payable from tax increment and the net revenues of the sewage works and the
payment of any fiscal agency charges in connection with the payment of bonds,
which fund shall be designated the "Sewage Works Sinking Fund" (herein, "Sewage
Works Sinking Fund" or "Sinking Fund"). There shall be set aside and deposited
in the Sinking Fund, as available, and as hereinafter provided, a sufficient
amount of Tax Increment and, to the extent tax increment is not sufficient, the
net revenues of the sewage works to meet the requirements of the Bond and
Interest Account and Reserve Account created in the Sinking Fund. The payments
shall continue until the balances in the Bond and Interest Account and the
Reserve Account, equal the amount needed to redeem all of the then outstanding
bonds of the sewage works.
(1998 Code, § 2-173)
   (J)   Bond and Interest Account.
      (1)   Any monies heretofore accumulated to pay principal and interest on
the refunded bonds shall be credited to and become a part of the Trust Account
under the escrow agreement and used for the first payments made from the Trust
Account.
      (2)   On each June 30 and December 31 following the date of issuance of
the refunding bonds, there shall be transferred from the Allocation Fund and
credited to the Bond and Interest Account all tax increment, up to an amount
which will be sufficient to pay the principal and interest on the refunding
bonds due and payable within the next 13 calendar months and any bank fiscal
agency charges as they become payable.
      (3)   Beginning as of the date of issuance of the refunding bonds, there
shall be credited on the last day of each calendar month from the Revenue Fund
to the Bond and Interest Account an amount of the net revenues equal to at
least one-sixth of the principal of and at least one-sixth of the interest on
all then outstanding bonds payable during the next succeeding six-month period
minus the amount of tax increment on deposit in the Bond and Interest Account,
until the amount of interest and principal payable on the then next succeeding
interest and principal payment date shall have been so credited. There shall
similarly be credited to the account any amount necessary to pay the bank
fiscal agency charges for paying interest on outstanding bonds as the same
become payable. The city shall, from the sums deposited in the Sinking Fund and
credited to the Bond and Interest Account, remit promptly to the registered
owner or to the bank fiscal agency sufficient monies to pay the interest and
principal on the due dates thereof together with the amount of bank fiscal
agency charges.
(1998 Code, § 2-174)
   (K)   Reserve Account.
      (1)   On the date of delivery of the refunding bonds, funds on hand of
the sewage works, Refunding Bond proceeds or a combination thereof shall be
deposited into the Reserve Account. The deposit into the Reserve Account shall
equal but not exceed the least of:
         (a)   Maximum annual debt service on the refunding bonds;
         (b)   One hundred twenty-five percent of average annual debt service
on the refunding bonds; or
         (c)   Ten percent of the proceeds of the refunding bonds (the "reserve
requirement").
      (2)   The balance in the Reserve Account shall be maintained to equal the
reserve requirement.
      (3)   The Reserve Account shall constitute the margin for safety and
protection against default in the payment of principal of and interest on the
refunding bonds, and the monies in the Reserve Account shall be used to pay
current principal and interest on the refunding bonds to the extent that monies
in the Bond and Interest Account are insufficient for that purpose. Any
deficiency in the balance maintained in the Reserve Account shall be made up
from the next available tax increment or net revenues remaining after credits
into the Bond and Interest Account. If monies in the Reserve Account are
transferred to the Bond and Interest Account to pay principal of and interest
on outstanding refunding bonds, then the depletion of the balance in the
Reserve Account shall be made up from the next available tax increment or net
revenues after the credits into the Bond and Interest Account. Any monies
(except monies attributable to tax increment or investment earnings on tax
increment which shall be transferred to the Bond and Interest Account) in the
Reserve Account in excess of the reserve requirement shall either be
transferred to the Sewage Works Improvement Fund or be used for the purchase of
outstanding bonds including accrued interest.
(1998 Code, § 2-175)
   (L)   Sewage Works Improvement Fund.
      (1)   After meeting the requirements of the Operation and Maintenance
Fund and the Sinking Fund, any excess net revenues may be transferred or
credited from the Revenue Fund to a fund designated the "Sewage Works
Improvement Fund", and the fund shall be used for improvements, replacements,
additions and extensions of the sewage works or for any other lawful purpose.
As of the date of the delivery of the refunding bonds, any other available and
unrestricted moneys of the sewage works not otherwise deposited pursuant to the
terms of this division (L) shall be transferred to the Improvement Fund. Monies
in the Sewage Works Improvement Fund shall be transferred to the Sewage Works
Sinking Fund if necessary to prevent a default in the payment of principal and
interest on the then outstanding bonds or, if necessary, to eliminate any
deficiencies in credits to or minimum balance in the Reserve Account of the
Sewage Works Sinking Fund or may be transferred to the Operation and
Maintenance Fund to meet unforeseen contingencies in the operation, repair and
maintenance of the sewage works.
      (2)   After meeting the requirements of the Bond and Interest Account and
the Reserve Account, any remaining tax increment shall be held in the
Allocation Fund by the Clerk-Treasurer and used for any purposes permitted by
I.C. 36-7-14 or 36-7-25.
(1998 Code, § 2-176)
   (M)   Special Non-Reverting Capital and Operating Funds for the Park and
Recreation Department.
      (1)   There is established a special non-reverting capital fund created
for the purpose of acquiring land or making improvements for parks and
recreation purposes from which expenditures may be made by appropriation by the
Council.
      (2)   The non-reverting capital fund shall be funded from monies and fees
procured from the operation of the City Sports and Recreation Center (the
"Center") to the extent that the monies and fees annually exceed the annual
budgeted expenses of the Center.
      (3)   Disbursements shall be made from the special non-reverting capital
fund on approved claims allowed and signed by the President and Secretary of
the Board.
      (4)   There is also established a special non-reverting operation fund
created from monies and fees procured from park and recreation activities other
than the regular day to day monies and fees generated by the Center.
      (5)   That portion of the annual monies and fees (membership fees,
rentals and daily non-member fees) from the Center not exceeding the annual
budgeted expenses of the Center shall be deposited by the Clerk-Treasurer in
the general park fund. All other monies and fees from concessions and any other
recreational activities procured from the Center or otherwise shall be
deposited by the Clerk-Treasurer in the special non-reverting operating fund.
      (6)   The Board may from time to time direct the transfer of funds from
the special non-reverting operating fund to the non-reverting capital fund.
      (7)   Expenditures may be made from the special non-reverting operating
fund by the Board upon approved claims allowed and signed by the President and
the Secretary of the Board.
(1998 Code, § 2-177)
   (N)   Firemen's Pension Fund.
      (1)   The city elects to establish a Firemen's Pension Fund and a Board
of Trustees of the Firemen's Pension Fund all as provided by Chapter 31 of the
Acts of the General Assembly of Indiana of 1937 and all acts supplemental
thereto and amendatory thereof.
      (2)   The Board of Trustees of the Firemen's Pension Fund shall consists
of three members, namely, the Chief of the Fire Department, the Mayor, and one
member of the fire force elected therefrom at a meeting to be held on the
second Monday of February of each year all as provided by the above-mentioned
Act.
      (3)   The Board of Trustees of the Firemen's Pension Fund shall have all
the powers and exercise all the duties as set out and provided in the Act.
      (4)   The membership of the fire force shall consist of members of the
fire companies, telephone and signal service, inspectors, mechanics, [warn]
service, all such persons as are by the terms of the Act deemed to be members
of the fire force, and shall include any drivers consistently working 40 hours
or more per week, and the membership shall not include volunteer firemen.
      (5)   The election of the members of the Board of Trustees of the
Firemen's Pension Fund shall in all things be conducted as provided by the Act.
      (6)   The Chief of the Fire Force shall be president of the Board of
Trustees of the Firemen's Pension Fund and such Board shall elect a secretary
and shall carry out the duties all as provided as set out in the Act.
      (7)   The Firemen's Pension Fund of the city shall consist of all the
funds therefor as provided in the Act and specifically in § 8 of the Act.
      (8)   The Firemen's Pension Fund of the city shall be to and for the
benefit of the fund exclusively for the payment of retired members and for
death benefits and otherwise all as provided in the Act and the record of the
funds and the investment thereof shall be all in accordance with the provisions
of the Act.
      (9)   Payments from the funds shall be made all as directed and provided
in the Act.
      (10)   It shall be the duty of the Board of Trustees of the Firemen's
Pension Fund to meet annually and prepare an itemized estimate as prescribed by
the State Board of Accounts and in all respects to conduct the business and
affairs as provided by the Act.
      (11)   The qualifications for becoming a member of the fire force of the
city shall be in all respects as provided and required by the Act.
      (12)   The Firemen's Pension Fund shall consist of all sums as provided
in the Act and shall be public fund and payment therefrom shall be made in all
respects as provided by the Act and fund payment shall not be subject to
attachment and the City Treasurer, or County Treasurer acting as City
Treasurer, shall be made the custodian of all money belonging to the pension
fund and all funds belonging thereto shall be paid over to the Treasurer.
(1998 Code, § 2-178)
   (O)   Policemen's Pension Fund.
      (1)   The city elects to establish a Police Pension Fund and a Board of
Trustees of the Police Pension Fund all as provided by I.C. 36-8-6-1 et seq.,
all acts supplemental thereto and amendatory thereof.
      (2)   The Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall consist of
three members, namely, the Mayor, the City Clerk-Treasurer and Chief of Police.
      (3)   The Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall have all the
powers and exercise all the duties as set out and provided in the Act.
      (4)   The membership of the Police Force shall consist of members of the
police force that are on active duty and retired members. Membership shall not
include part-time police officers.
      (5)   The election of the members of the Board of Trustees of the Police
Pension Fund shall in all things be conducted as provided by the Act.
      (6)   The Mayor of the city shall be President of the Board of Trustees
of the Police Pension Fund and such Board shall elect a Secretary and shall
carry out the duties all as provided as set out in the Act.
      (7)   The Police Pension Fund of the city shall consist of all the funds
therefor as provided in the Act and specifically in § 2 of the Act.
      (8)   The Police Pension Fund of the city shall be to and for the benefit
of the fund exclusively for the payment of retired members and for death
benefits and otherwise all as provided in the Act and the record of the funds
and the investment thereof shall be all in accordance with the provisions of
the Act.
      (9)   Payments from the funds shall be made all as directed and provided
in the Act.
      (10)   It shall be the duty of the Board of Trustees of the Police
Pension Fund to meet annually and prepare an itemized estimate as prescribed by
the State Board of Accounts and in all respects to conduct their business and
affairs as provided by the Act.
      (11)   The qualifications for becoming a member of the Police Force of
the city shall be in all respects as provided and required by the Act.
      (12)   The Police Pension Fund shall consist of all sums as provided in
the Act and shall be a public fund and payment therefrom shall be made in all
respects as provided by the Act and fund payment shall not be subject to
attachment and the City Clerk-Treasurer or County Treasurer acting as City
Clerk-Treasurer, shall be made the custodian of all money belonging to the
Pension Fund and all funds belonging thereto shall be paid over to the
Treasurer.
      (13)   In all other respects the organization, administration, payment,
receipt of all money, handling of all business, shall in all respects be
governed and controlled by the Act and all Acts amendatory thereof and
supplemental thereto.
(1998 Code, § 2-179)
   (P)   General Improvement Fund.
      (1)   There is created a fund to be known as the General Improvement Fund
pursuant to Acts 1953, Ch. 40, as amended, of the State General Assembly.
      (2)   The fund shall be used to pay for the construction, repair or
improvement of streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters and sewers.
      (3)   The fund shall consist of monies realized from the collection of
special assessments for the benefits to property, for the aforesaid
construction, repair or improvement, together with any appropriations made from
the General Fund of the city or from taxes levied by the Common Council of the
city for those purposes.
(1998 Code, § 2-180)
   (Q)   Local Road and Street Fund (LRS). The Local Road and Street Fund (LRS)
is established for the purpose of receiving applicable state funds and for
expenditures permitted by statute.
(1998 Code, § 2-182)
   (R)   Motor Vehicle Highway Fund (MVH). This fund shall receive state funds
and be used for expenditures authorized by I.C. 8-14-1-1 et seq.
(1998 Code, § 2-183)
   (S)   Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund.
      (1)   There is established a Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund to
provide monies for any or all purposes prescribed pursuant to I.C. 36-9-16-6,
as amended, of the State General Assembly.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (S), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         BUILDING, FACILITIES, IMPROVEMENTS. Include the site therefor, the
equipment thereof, heating and air-conditioning facilities, sewage disposal
facilities, landscaping, walks, drives, parking facilities, and/or other
structures, facilities, appurtenances, materials and supplies which may be
deemed necessary to render the building, facility, improvement or any other
property owned by the city suitable for the use and occupancy for the purposes
which constructed.
         CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. Any building or buildings, facilities or
improvements, which will be of general public benefit or welfare and will
promote the cultural, recreational, public or civic well-being of the
community; it shall not include salaries of any public office or employees
except those which are directly chargeable to a capital improvement.
      (3)   Taxes shall be levied to provide funds for the Cumulative Fund
pursuant to §§ 3 and 4 of aforesaid Acts 1967.
(1998 Code, § 2-184)
   (T)   Funds identified by fund number and title.
      (1)   The following funds are continued in full force and effect:
Fund Title
Fund Title
101  General Fund
021  MVH
202  Local Rd and Street
204  Park/Rec
205  Spts/Rec
211  Pk N-Rev Oper
217  Rex Hagen Family Foun
231  Downtown Re-Development
233  Law Enforce Cont Ed
258  Local Road and Bridge Matching
270   
316  Ind Loan Payback
331  Grant -95 CM-WC-0093
332   
401  Cum Cap Improvement
402  Cum Capital Devel Fund
403  Parks Non-Rev Capital
426  Cumulative Fire Fund
443  Gen/Imp Revolving
445  City Gift
446  Park Gift
447  Fire Gift
471  Land Purchase
472  City Police K-9
473  City Block Grant 89-012
474  Jen/Thomp
475  Lig. Marshmallow Festival
475  Strawberry Valley Trails
476  Petty Cash
477  Parks and Sports Change
505  Indiana Employment
601  Waterworks Cash
602  Waterworks Sink Bond and Int
603  Waterworks Dep and Const
604  Water Meter Fund
605  Waterworks Imp and Op. Maim
606  Sewage Operational
607  Sewage Bond and Int. Sinking
608  Sewage Depreciation
609  Sewage Construction
610  Sewage Sinking Debt Serv
701  Payroll Fund
702  Fireman Pension Fund
703  Police Pension Fund
 
      (2)   Police grant co 3200 2137 grant pr 86051.
   (U)   River Boat Gambling Money Fund. The Common Council of the city
establishes Fund No. 243, the River Boat Gambling Money Fund.
   (V)   Rainy Day Fund.
      (1)   Creation of Rainy Day Fund. There is hereby established a "Rainy
Day Fund" to receive transfers of unused and unencumbered funds raised by
general or special tax levies on taxable property within the city whenever it
is determined that the purpose of the tax levy has been fulfilled and an unused
and unencumbered balance remains.
      (2)   Purposes of the fund. The funds on deposit in the Rainy Day Fund
may be used for the operation of the city and its various departments when the
city does not have sufficient levies or funds to pay costs, including, but not
limited to, salaries and wages, costs of services, supplies, equipment, capital
improvements, repairs and similar expenditures.
      (3)   Sources of funding. The sources of funding for the Rainy Day Fund
shall include any source not otherwise prohibited by law including, but not
limited to, those sources specified in I.C. 36-1-8-5.1(b)(2).
      (4)   Transfer to fund. On or before December 31 of each year, the Common
Council shall determine the amount, if any, of unused and unencumbered funds
available to be transferred to the Rainy Day Fund, which transfer may not
exceed more than 10% of the city's total budget for that fiscal year.
      (5)   Appropriations. The Common Council of the city may authorize the
expenditure of funds from the Rainy Day Fund by appropriations made in the same
manner as other funds are appropriated that receive tax monies, upon making a
finding that the proposed use of the funds is consistent with the intent of the
fund.
   (W)   Ligonier Forfeiture Fund. A new budget account is hereby created which
shall be known as the Ligonier Forfeiture Fund, and which the fund and revenue
received from the proceeds of the property seizures shall be held and utilized
to fund the needs of the Police Department.
   (X)   Police Equipment Fund.
      (1)   There is hereby established a non-reverting fund named the Police
Equipment Fund.
      (2)   The fund should receive monies from the Ordinance Violations
bureau, as determined by ordinance.
      (3)   The fund should be non-reverting, and should be perpetual until
terminated by the terms of a future ordinance.
      (4)   Any future ordinance terminating the fund should provide guidance
as to the disposition of the fund balance.
   (Y)   Reimbursement Grant Fund.
      (1)   It is hereby established a non-reverting fund named the Ligonier
Reimbursement Grant Fund.
      (2)   The fund should receive money from the state or federal government
in reimbursement of expenses paid through "reimbursement" grants and short term
loans to cover initial expenditures therefor.
      (3)   The duration of the fund should be indefinite until terminated by
the terms of an ordinance.
      (4)   Since the fund will contain only reimbursements for previously made
expenditures it is anticipated that there would be no fund balance on the
termination of the fund.
   (Z)   Proceeds of monies received by Ordinance Violations Bureau.
      (1)   Twenty-five percent of all fines collected by the Ordinance
Violations Bureau should be paid to the Police Equipment Fund.
      (2)   Seventy-five percent of all fines collected by the Ordinance
Violations Bureau should be paid to the General Fund.
   (AA)   Guardian Economic Development Area Revenue Fund.
      (1)   There is established the Guardian Economic Development Area Revenue
Fund.
      (2)   Tax increment financing revenue received from the Guardian Economic
Development Area shall be deposited into the Fund.
      (3)   Monies shall be transferred from the Fund to the Sewage Debt Fund
for purposes of paying any outstanding bonds relating to the Guardian Economic
Development Area.
   (BB)   Local Road and Bridge Matching Grant Fund.
      (1)   There is hereby established a Local Road and Bridge Matching Grant
Fund for money received from the state through the Community Crossing Grant and
for the city’s matching portion as required by the grant.
      (2)   Appropriations from the Local Road and Bridge Matching Grant Fund
shall be made only for the purpose of expenditures authorized or provided for
by the guidelines established and approved by the Community Crossings Grant
program and must be approved by the Department of Local Government Finance.
   (CC)   Strawberry Valley Trails Fund.
      (1)   There is established a city Strawberry Valley Trails Fund #475.
      (2)   The funds contained in the Strawberry Valley Trails Fund shall be
received and deposited therein from all lawful sources in accordance with
applicable law.
      (3)   The funds in the Strawberry Valley Trails Fund shall only be used
for the development, operation, and maintenance of the Strawberry Valley
Trails.
   (DD)   Stormwater Grant Fund.
      (1)   There is hereby established Fund No. 636, Stormwater Grant Fund for
money received from the state through the Indiana Office of Community and Rural
Affairs/Stormwater Improvement Program and for the city's matching portion as
required by the grant.
      (2)   Appropriations from the Stormwater Grant Fund shall be made only
for the purpose of expenditures authorized or provided for by the guidelines
established and approved by the Stormwater Improvement Program and must be
approved by the Department of Local Government Finance.
   (EE)   COVID/CARES Provider Relief Fund. There is hereby established Fund
150 titled COVID/CARES Provider Relief Fund.
   (FF)   Local American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) of 2021 Coronavirus Local
Fiscal Recovery Fund.
      (1)   Fund No. 176 is hereby created, which shall be a special, non-
reverting fund designated to receive allocations to the City of Ligonier,
Indiana from the ARPA.
      (2)   Any monies deposited into said Fund may only be utilized for costs
incurred by the city for the following purposes by December 31, 2024:
         (a)   To respond to the public health emergency with respect to the
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (Covid-19) or its negative economic impacts, including
assistance to households, small businesses, and nonprofits, or aid impacted
industries such as tourism, travel, and hospitality;
         (b)   To respond to workers performing essential work during the
Covid-19 public health emergency by providing premium pay to eligible workers
of the city, that are performing such essential work, or by providing grant to
eligible employers that have eligible workers or who perform essential work;
         (c)   For the provision of government services to the extent of the
reduction in revenue of the city, due to the Covid-19 public health emergency
relative to revenues collected in the most recent full fiscal year of the city,
prior to the health emergency; and/or
         (d)   To make necessary investments in water, sewer, or broadband
infrastructure.
      (3)   The Common Council shall adopt a plan which provides details for
the use of funds.
      (4)   This division may be amended from time to time if additional
guidance is received from any federal or state agency.
   (GG)   Unclaimed Property Fund.
      (1)   There is established a City of Ligonier Unclaimed Property Fund
#2510.
      (2)   The funds contained in the Unclaimed Property Fund shall be
received and deposited therein from such funds as may come into the possession
of the Police Department and whose ownership is then unknown or from funds
which are held as evidence.
      (3)   The funds in the Unclaimed Property Fund shall only be disbursed
upon a determination by the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, that
sufficient evidence has been presented to allow a reasonable determination of
ownership and then disbursed to the owner of such funds or in the case of funds
held as evidence, as directed by appropriate authorities.
   (HH)   Wastewater Grant Fund (Fund No. 2410).
      (1)   There is hereby established Fund No. 2410, Wastewater Grant Fund
for money received from the state through the Indiana Office of Community and
Rural Affairs/Wastewater Improvement Program and for the city’s matching
portion as required by the grant.
      (2)   Appropriations from the Wastewater Grant Fund shall be made only
for the purpose of expenditures authorized or provided for by the guidelines
established and approved by the Wastewater Improvement Program.
(1998 Code, § 2-185) (Ord. 169, passed 2-22-1971; Ord. 562, passed 4-22-1996;
Res. passed 10-27-2003; Ord. 716, passed 8-14-2006; Ord. 747-2009, passed 1- -
2009; Ord. 748-2009, passed 2- -2009; Ord. 749-2009, passed 2-9-2009; Ord. 753,
passed 5-11-2009; Ord. 809-2012, passed 4-26-2012; Ord. 917-2018, passed 4-9-
2018; Ord. 921-2018, passed 7-23-2018; Ord. 939-2020, passed 5-11-2020; Ord.
950-2020, passed 10-12-2020; Ord. 960-2021, passed 4-26-2021; Ord. 962-2021,
passed 6-28-2021; Ord. 977-2022, passed 9-12-2022; Ord. 987-2023, passed 3-27-
2023; Ord. 989-2023, passed 5-22-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Special non-reverting operating funds, see I.C. 36-10-3-20 and 36-10-3-22
§ 34.03 ADVANCE PAYMENT OF GOODS/SERVICES FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to make an advance payment for the
purchase of goods and/or services either directly or part of a public works
project consistent with and to the fullest extent permitted by law, and as
further limited by the contracting entity for the city.
   (B)   The solicitation for a public works contract providing for advance
payments for contractors to purchase materials for public works projects must
include the following information:
      (1)   That the city will make advance payments to contractors to allow
the contractors to purchase materials to be used in the construction of the
public works project;
      (2)   No advance payment will be made in an amount that exceeds the
amount specified in the contractor’s bid for the purchase of materials. If a
change order requires the purchases of additional materials, no advance payment
will be made for materials if the change order changes the scope of the public
works project;
      (3)   An advance payment may be made only if the solicitation for the
public works project includes all of the following information:
         (a)   The city will make advance payments to a contractor to enable
the contractor to purchase materials to be used in the construction of the
public works project.
         (b)   No advance payment will be made in an amount that exceeds the
amount specified in the contractor’s bid for the purchase of materials. If a
change order requires the purchase of additional materials, no advance payment
will be made for materials if the change order changes the scope of the public
works project.
         (c)   Each request for an advance payment must include:
            1.   Documentation containing the amount specified in the
contractor’s bid or the purchase of materials;
            2.   Any purchase contract or purchase order executed by the
contractor for the purchase of materials;
            3.   All invoices or receipts for material purchases for which the
contractor seeks advance payment;
            4.   A certified statement that the request for advance payment is
true and accurate, is not for materials not specified in the contractor’s bid
and not for an amount exceeding the amount specified in the contractor’s bid
for the purchase of materials;
            5.   The certified statement must be signed by:
               A.   The contractor for the public works project;
               B.   Any subcontractor for the project if the materials to be
purchased are for work to be completed by the subcontractor; and
               C.   The architect or engineer that the city has retained with
respect to the public works project, if any; and
               D.   An employee of the city, including any consultants
responsible for the completion of the public works project.
   (C)   The Clerk/Treasurer or the Clerk/Treasurer’s designee must do all the
following when advance payments are made for goods or services prior to
delivery of goods or completion of services:
      (1)   Track pre-payments by defining the pre-payment on a purchase order;
      (2)   Create a pre-payment invoice that is associated with the purchase
order; and
      (3)   Require insurance or a surety bond in the amount of the pre-payment
if the amount of the pre-payment is more than $150,000.
   (D)   Advance payment made under the authority herein must be lessor of the
following:
      (1)   Fifty percent of the entire cost of the contract; or
      (2)   Two million dollars.
   (E)   All other requirements for payment of public works projects, goods,
and services by the City of Ligonier remain in effect and ordinances not
directly contradicted by the provisions of this section remain in full force
and effect.
(Ord. 999-2023, passed 11-13-2023)
TAX ABATEMENT PROCEDURES
§ 34.15 ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREAS.
   (A)   I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-1 through 6-1.1-12.1-5.6 address real and personal
property tax abatement procedures.
   (B)   The Council may establish those areas pursuant to local regulations
which may be on file in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer and applicable
state law.
(1998 Code, § 4-90)
CITY'S AUTHORITY; LICENSE FEES
§ 34.25 AUTHORITY TO LICENSE.
   The city has the authority to impose a license fee reasonably related to the
administrative cost of exercising those powers.
(1998 Code, § 4-1)
§ 34.26 ISSUANCE AND INSPECTIONS.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue licenses upon payment of the license fees
and compliance with the applicable provisions of this code. The Police
Department shall inspect all places of business under license or required to
have a license.
(1998 Code, § 4-2)
§ 34.27 COMPLAINTS, REVOCATIONS AND SUSPENSIONS.
   The Mayor shall hear any complaint against a person to whom the city has
issued a license. The Mayor may revoke or suspend any license if he or she
finds, after proper notice and hearing, that the person has willfully violated
a term or condition of his or her license, or has willfully done or permitted
to be done an act in violation of a statute or provisions of this code. The
Mayor shall file a copy of his or her findings and determination with the
Clerk-Treasurer within 24 hours after it is made.
(1998 Code, § 4-3)
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
§ 34.40 FEE FOR VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER INSPECTION.
   (A)   The fee for each such vehicle identification number inspection shall
be the maximum fee authorized at the time of the inspection by I.C. 9-29-4-2 as
amended from time to time.
   (B)   The money collected from vehicle identification number inspections
shall be deposited in the Special Vehicle Inspection Fund and shall be
appropriated only for law enforcement purposes for the city.
(1998 Code, § 4-10)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 9-29 was repealed by P.L.86-2018, Sec. 149.
§ 34.41 FEES FOR TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The city establishes a service charge for accident reports provided by
the Police Department of the city.
   (B)   The city police shall charge a fee of $5 for each accident report,
except when criminal proceedings are involved. The fee shall be deposited in
the Local Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund.
(1998 Code, § 4-11) (Ord. 441, passed 11-28-1983; Ord. 726, passed 9- -2007)
§ 34.42 COPYING OF PUBLIC RECORDS.
   (A)   A fee of $0.25 per page shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer's office
for copies of public records on letter size, legal size and 11-inch by 17-inch
paper that are requested by a person entitled to a copy of a public record
under I.C. 5-14-3, and the public agency which is in possession of the record
has reasonable access to a machine capable of mechanically reproducing the
public record.
   (B)   Copies of all other documents that are permitted to be copied under
I.C. 5-14-3 or applicable state law shall be set at the rate that provides
reimbursement to the city for the costs of the copying charges.
(1998 Code, § 4-12) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 633, passed 4-24-2000)
§ 34.43 CHARGE FOR PRESENTMENT OF A RETURNED CHECK OR DRAFT.
   Any person or firm presenting a check or draft which is returned to the city
marked "unpaid" or "NSF" or a similar designation shall be assessed an
additional sum of $20 in addition to the face amount of the returned check.
(1998 Code, § 4-13)
§ 34.44 FEE FOR FINGERPRINTING FOR IMMIGRATION FORMS.
   (A)   A fee in the sum of $10 shall be charged and collected for
fingerprinting required for immigration forms. The fees collected shall be
deposited in the City Law Enforcement Continuing Education and Equipment Fund.
   (B)   The Law Enforcement Continuing Education and Equipment Fund is
addressed in §
34.02(A) above.
(1998 Code, § 4-14)
§ 34.45 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN BOOK; FEE.
   This section is hereby established to set a fee for the purchase of a
Comprehensive Plan Book.
   (A)   Each section: Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Subdivision: $25.
   (B)   The Comprehensive Plan Book: $50.
(Ord. 626, passed 11-22-1999)
FIXED ASSET INVENTORY AND CAPITALIZATION POLICY
§ 34.60 ESTABLISHED; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Established. There is hereby established a fixed asset capitalization
policy for the city which policy shall read and provide as follows.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CAPITAL ASSETS.
         (a)   Land, infrastructure, buildings, improvements other than
buildings, machinery and equipment, construction in progress. All land will be
capitalized but not depreciated. All items with a useful life of more than one
year, and having a unit cost of $5,000 or more shall be capitalized (including
acquisitions by lease-purchase agreements or donated items). A capital asset
meeting the criteria will be reported and depreciated in the government-wide
financial statements.
         (b)   Assets that are not capitalized (items having a unit cost of
less than $5,000) are expensed in the year of acquisition. Exceptions are:
            1.   Items costing less than the above-described limits which are
permanently installed as a part of the cost of original construction or
installation of a larger building or equipment unit will be included in the
cost of the larger unit;
            2.   Modular equipment added subsequent to original equipment
construction of a larger building or equipment unit which may be put together
to form larger units costing more than the prescribed limits will be charged to
capital assets even though the cost of individual items are less than such
limits; and
            3.   Cabinets, shelving bookcases, and similar items added
subsequent to original construction, which are custom-made for a specific place
and adaptable elsewhere will be capitalized.
         (c)   Note: purchases made using grant funds must comply with grant
requirements or the above procedures, whichever is most restrictive.
      CAPITAL OUTLAYS. Expenditures which benefit both the current and future
fiscal periods. This includes costs of acquiring land or structures,
construction or improvement of buildings, structures or other fixed assets;
infrastructure, machinery and equipment having an appreciable and calculable
period of usefulness. These are expenditures resulting in the acquisition of or
addition to the city’s general fixed assets. Accounting for costs of city-owned
land, infrastructures, buildings, machinery and equipment, as well as
construction in progress; acquiring land, and infrastructures as well as
installings or structures construction or improvement of buildings, adding
improvements other than buildings, other capital assets; and machinery and
equipment purchases having an appreciable and calculable period of usefulness.
These are expenditures resulting in the acquisition of or addition to the
city’s capital assets. To meet the Indiana State Board of Accounts requirements
as of fixed asset reports for 2021 all items will have life expectancies
established with depreciated values on an annual basis with the exception of
land which is never depreciated. Documentation of costing sources: architects,
engineering firms, project managers, and construction companies, life
expectancy tables, cost indexes and other means for establishing known or
estimated historical costs will be provided.
      ENTERPRISE FUNDS. Those funds used to account for operations that:
         (a)   Are financed and operated in a manner similar to private
business enterprise where the intent of the City Council is that the costs
(expenses, including depreciation) of providing goods or services to the
general public on a continuing basis be financed or recovered primarily through
user charges; or
         (b)   Where the City Council has decided that periodic determination
of revenues earned, expenses incurred, and/or income is appropriate for capital
maintenance, public policy, management control, accountability and other
purposes.
         (c)   The Enterprise Fund of the city shall include the municipally-
owned water and wastewater utilities. Operation of the utilities shall require
Enterprise Fund accounting and reporting.
      FIXED ASSETS. Tangible assets of a durable nature employed in the
operating of activities of the city and are relatively permanent and are needed
for the production and sale of goods or services are termed property, plant and
equipment or fixed assets.
      HISTORICAL COST. The cash equivalent price exchanged for goods or
services at the date of acquisition. Land, buildings, equipment and most
inventories are common examples of items recognized under the historical cost
attribute.
      TANGIBLE ASSETS. Assets that can be observed by one or more of the
physical senses. These assets may be seen and touched and, in some
environments, heard and smelled.
(Ord. 829-2013, passed 2-11-2013; Ord. 988-2023, passed 4-24-2023)
§ 34.61 SPECIFIC CAPITALIZATION PROVISIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Land.
         (a)   LAND is defined as specified land, lots, parcels, or acreage.
The city will capitalize all land purchases, regardless of cost including
donated land. Exceptions to land capitalization are land purchased outright, as
easements, or right-of-way for infrastructure. Examples of infrastructure
include roads and streets, street lighting systems, curbs, parking meters,
street signs, viaducts, wharfs and storm water collection.
         (b)   Original cost of land will include the full value given to the
seller, including relocation, legal services incidental to the purchase
(including title work and legal opinion), appraisal and negotiation fees,
surveying and costs for preparing the land for its intended purpose (including
contractors and/or city employees (salary and benefits)), such as demolishing
buildings, excavating, clean up and/or inspection. Land is not depreciated
under generally accepted accounting principles.
      (2)   Infrastructure. INFRASTRUCTURE is defined: streets, bike/jogging
paths, storm sewers, water/sewer lines, parking lots, streetlights and
retention/detention ponds. The city will capitalize infrastructure that has a
life expectancy of greater than two years. Including donated infrastructure
from developers. Exceptions to infrastructure sidewalks are not owned by the
city.
         (a)   New infrastructure will only be capitalized only if it meets the
following conditions:
            1.   The total cost exceeds $5,000; and
            2.   The useful life is greater than two years.
            3.   Meters will be expensed rather than capitalized.
            4.   Only streets and curb constructed on or after 2024 as required
ISBOA will be included.
         (b)   Improvements or renovations to existing infrastructure will be
capitalized only if the results meet the following conditions:
            1.   The total cost exceeds $5,000; and
            2.   The useful life is extended by two or more years.
      (3)   Unless maintenance/repairs exceed $50,000 they will be considered
as expensed items will not be capitalized such as: water/sewer/storm line
repairs. Milling and paving is always maintenance regardless of cost.
      (4)   The donated infrastructure will be recorded at fair market value on
the date of transfer with any associated costs.
      (5)   Infrastructure purchases using federal, or state funding will
follow the above provisions.
   (B)   MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT.
      (1)   The definition of MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT. Examples include trucks,
cars, machinery, furniture, computer equipment and other similar items that
have a known or estimated historical cost of $5,000 or greater.
      (2)   The city will capitalize items with an individual value equal to or
greater than $5,000. Machinery combined with other machinery to form one unit
with a total value greater than the above-mentioned limit will be one unit with
a total value greater than the above-mentioned limit will be one unit.
      (3)   Improvement or renovations to existing machinery and equipment will
be capitalized only if the result of the change meets all of the following
conditions:
         (a)   Total costs exceed $5,000;
         (b)   The useful life is extended two or more years;
         (c)   Capitalization of machinery and equipment costs will include
shipping charges, consultant fees and any other cost directly associated with
the purchase, delivery or set up, which makes such machinery or equipment
operable for its intended purpose. Cost of attachments for machinery and
equipment shall be included since they are necessary for using the asset for
its intended purpose.
         (d)   Repairs and maintenance will not be capitalized such as:
collisions, engine replacements, maintenance, and the like. They will be
charged even if they meet the threshold of $5,000 or greater.
         (e)   Salvage value of machinery or equipment will be determined on an
asset-by-asset basis.
Depreciation will be calculated at year-end.
      (3)   Buildings.
         (a)   A department will capitalize building as full cost with no
subcategories for tracking the cost of attachments. Examples of attachments are
roofs, heating, cooling, lighting or sprinkler systems, or any part of the
basic building. The department will include the cost of items designed or
purchased exclusively for the building.
         (b)   A department’s new building will be capitalized only if it meets
the following conditions:
            1.   The total cost exceeds $5,000; and
            2.   The useful life is greater than two years.
         (c)   A department improving or renovating an existing building will
capitalize only if the result meets all of the following conditions:
            1.   The total cost exceeds $5,000; and
            2.   The useful life is extended two years or more; and
            3.   Replacement of roofs or other building components such as HVAC
systems will be expensed unless the project total is greater than $100,000.
            4.   Donated buildings will be recorded at fair market value on the
date of transfer with any associated costs.
   (D)   Improvements other than buildings. These assets are defined as
improvements to land for better enjoyment, attached or not easily removed, and
which will have a life expectancy of greater than two years. Examples are
sidewalks, parking areas and drives, golf cart paths, fencing, retaining walls,
pools, outside fountains, planters, and underground sprinkler systems. A
sidewalk down the road for public enjoyment is an infrastructure improvement
and is not capitalized. However, sidewalks installed upon the city-owned land
for use by the public and for the support of the City facilities are capital
assets.
      (1)   Improvements or renovations to existing improvements other than
buildings will be capitalized only if the result meets the following
conditions:
         (a)   The total cost exceeds $5,000; and
         (b)   The useful life is greater than two years.
      (2)   Donated improvements will be recorded at fair market value on the
date of transfer with any associated costs.
      (3)   Improvements other than building purchases using federal or state
funding will follow provisions in divisions (D)(1) and (D)(2) above.
   (E)   Recording and accounting. The city and its various departments shall
classify capital expenditures as capital outlays within the fund from which the
expenditure was made in accordance with the Chart of Accounts of the Cities and
City’s Accounting Manual. The cost of the property, plant and equipment
includes all expenditures necessary to put the asset into position and ready
for use. For the purpose of recording fixed assets of the city and its
departments, the valuation of assets shall be based on historical costs, or
where the historical cost is indeterminable, by estimation for those assets in
existence.
   (F)   Construction work in progress capitalization provisions. Where
construction work has not been completed in the current calendar year, the cost
of the project shall be recorded as “construction work in progress.” When the
project is complete, the project will be recorded to the applicable capital
asset item type account and only if the capital asset meets the required
conditions.
   (G)   Life expectancy and depreciation methods.
      (1)   The city will indicate life expectancy for each asset and by using
a national table and our generally accepted life expectancy for specific items.
Depreciation of capital assets will be calculated using the straight-line
method. There will be no salvage value used. Depreciation will be calculated at
year-end. The asset current life year and ensuing depreciation shall begin the
year after the year purchased (example: the asset purchased in 2012; the 2013
current life and depreciation year is one). Land is not depreciated according
to general accepted accounting principles.
      (2)   Straight-line depreciation. All assets accounted for under the
capital asset policy will be depreciated using the straight-line method of
depreciation. A gain or loss on disposal will be recorded. Following is a list
of the most city useful lives:
 
ASSET                             USEFUL LIFE (years)
Land                              Not depreciation
Infrastructure                    20-50
Buildings                         15-50
Improvements other than buildings 10-50
Machinery and equipment           3-20
Construction in progress          Not depreciated
 
(Ord. 829-2013, passed 2-11-2013; Ord. 988-2023, passed 4-24-2023)
INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS
§ 34.70 MISSION.
   The city finds that its mission as related to an internal control system is
as follows:
   (A)   Provision of a democratic governmental structure at the grassroots
level;
   (B)   Provision of services as determined through the political process
including but not limited to the major services of the city such as police,
fire, the water, the sewer, and the storm water utilities, economic
development, and parks.
   (C)   Promotion of government efficiency, accountability, reliability and
transparency; and
   (D)   Promotion of safeguards to reduce the risk of loss due to fraud,
waste, abuse, mismanagement or errors.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 34.71 OBJECTIVES.
   The city finds that its interrelated and often overlapping objectives as
related to an internal control system are as follows:
   (A)   Operations objectives which involve the ways governmental services are
performed and the performance of those providing governmental services
including by way of example budgeting, purchasing, permitting, cash management
and planning among others.
   (B)   Reporting objectives which involve the filing of financial and non-
financial information to those inside the government and those outside of the
government including by way of example filing the annual report, audit and
examination cooperation, filing uniform conflict of interest forms and the
other filings with any governmental agency or official or information required
to be kept such as an OSHA log and responding to a public records request among
others.
   (C)   Compliance objectives involve the adherence to law and regulations
including by way of example following guidance documents such as the State
Board of Accounts' manuals, bulletins, directives and the Department of Local
Government Finance's forms and directions and including other outside of
government trainings and documents such as IACT among others.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 34.72 STANDARDS.
   The city adopts and directs the minimum level of internal control standards
and internal control procedures for an internal control system that includes
the following five standards to promote government accountability and
transparency as described in the Uniform Internal Control Standards for Indiana
Political Subdivisions guidance document from the State Board of Accounts dated
September 2015 and as thereafter modified:
   (A)   Control Environment;
   (B)   Risk Assessment;
   (C)   Control Activities;
   (D)   Information and Communication; and
   (E)   Monitoring.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 34.73 PRINCIPLES.
   The city adopts and directs the following principles in explanation of the
pertinent standards above be followed at all levels of the city government:
   (A)   Control environment.
      (1)   The oversight body and management demonstrate a commitment to
integrity and ethical values.
      (2)   The oversight body oversees the city's internal control system.
      (3)   Management establishes an organizational structure, assigns
responsibility and delegates authority to achieve the city's objectives.
      (4)   Management demonstrates a commitment to attract, develop and retain
competent individuals.
      (5)   Management evaluates performance and holds individuals accountable
for their internal control responsibilities.
   (B)   Risk assessment.
      (1)   Management defines objectives clearly to enable the identification
of risks and defines risk tolerances.
      (2)   Management identifies, analyzes and responds to risk related to
achieving the defined objectives.
      (3)   Management considers the potential for fraud when identifying,
analyzing and responding to risks.
      (4)   Management identifies, analyzes and responds to significant changes
that could impact the internal control system.
   (C)   Control activities.
      (1)   Management designs control activities to achieve objectives and
respond to risks.
      (2)   Management designs the city's information system and related
control activities to achieve objectives and respond to risks.
      (3)   Management implements control activities through policies.
   (D)   Information and communication.
      (1)   Management uses quality information to achieve the city's
objectives.
      (2)   Management internally communicates the necessary quality
information to achieve the city's objectives.
      (3)   Management externally communicates the necessary quality
information to achieve the city's objectives.
   (E)   Monitoring.
      (1)   Management establishes and operates monitoring activities to
monitor the internal control system and evaluate the results.
      (2)   Management remediates identified internal control deficiencies on a
timely basis.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 34.74 ADOPTION.
   The city adopts the internal control standards above so as to establish an
effective internal control system for the city through its design,
implementation and operation.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 34.75 STANDARDS USES.
   The city directs that the above standards be used to design, implement,
operate and modify current operations, reporting and compliance objectives that
will safeguard the assets of the city, promote reliability, accountability and
transparency of financial and non-financial information and to assure
compliance with laws and regulations for each office, department and personnel
(as defined below) for an effective and reasonable internal control system of
the city.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 34.76 AUTHORIZATION.
   The city authorizes the Ligonier City Council to review the current internal
control system of the city and adopt a policy for the future internal control
system to be effective after June 30, 2016 and perform a periodic review, or
more if determined necessary for compliance with this subchapter.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016; Ord. 998-2023, passed 10-23-2023)
§ 34.77 PERSONNEL.
   The personnel, whether an official or employee, of the city whose official
duties include receiving, processing, depositing, disbursing, or otherwise
having access to funds that belong to the federal government, state government,
a political subdivision, or another governmental entity shall comply with these
minimum internal control standards and procedures and any other policy
regarding standards and procedures determined necessary by the city now and as
modified in the future.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 34.78 TRAINING.
   The personnel of the city whose official duties include receiving,
processing, depositing, disbursing, or otherwise having access to funds that
belong to the federal government, state government, a political subdivision, or
another governmental entity shall be trained at least once upon hire on the
minimum internal control standards and procedures and any other standards and
procedures determined necessary by the city and shall cooperate with the city
fiscal officer or designee so that the fiscal officer can timely certify to the
State Board of Accounts that the training was received annually by the
personnel as provided by law.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016; Ord. 998-2023, passed 10-23-2023)
§ 34.79 POSITION.
   The city authorizes the City Council to determine the position and person
who are the personnel referred to in §§
34.77 and
34.78 above and notify such personnel.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 34.80 INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEMS ACTIVITIES.
   The City Council will perform all the internal controls system activities.
The City Council may delegate a portion of their authority or duties, including
the creation of the internal control policies to the Clerk-Treasurer. The City
Council and the Clerk-Treasurer shall constitute "management" for purposes of
internal controls.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 34.81 IMPLEMENTATION.
   All elected and appointed officials and employees of the city are hereby
directed to abide by and to cooperate fully in the implementation of the
internal control system of the city.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 34.82 VIOLATION.
   An employee who fails to abide by or cooperate with the implementation,
compliance and certifications connected with the internal control system
commits a violation of and may result in the discipline, including termination,
of the employee.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 34.83 ACTION ALLOWED BY LAW.
   An elected or appointed official of the city who fails to abide by or
cooperate with the implementation and the mandated certifications of the
internal control system may be subject to any action allowed by law.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 34.84 NOTICE OF CHAPTER.
This subchapter may be implemented by any and all of the following actions or
such others as authorized by this Council:
   (A)   Posting a copy of this subchapter in its entirety in at least one of
the locations in the city where it posts employer posters or other notices to
its employees;
   (B)   Providing a copy of this subchapter to its employees and elected and
appointed officials;
   (C)   Providing or posting a notice of the adoption of this chapter; or
   (D)   Any such other action or actions that would communicate the polices
established by this subchapter to its employees and elected and appointed
officials.
(Ord. 895-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
MATERIALITY THRESHOLD
§ 34.90 GENERAL.
   (A)   The materiality threshold at which point the city reports incidents of
material variances, losses, shortages, or thefts to the State Board of Accounts
is:
      (1)   A one-time cash loss of at least $500;
      (2)   A recurring cash loss of at least $500 average per month;
      (3)   A value of $500 for a one-time loss of assets; or
      (4)   A creation of additional liabilities of at least $500 average per
month.
   (B)   All items not reported to the State Board of Accounts shall be
resolved at the City Council level with appropriate documentation retained by
the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (C)   The City Council will also consider I.C. 5-11-1-27(l), which requires
public officials who have actual knowledge of or reasonable cause to believe
that there has been a misappropriation of public funds to immediately send
written notice of misappropriation to the State Board of Accounts and the
prosecuting attorney.
   (D)   When irregular variance, loss, shortage, or theft is determined
material pursuant to the city’s policy on materiality the Clerk-Treasurer must
report the incident to the State Board of Accounts' website, where there is a
notification link, which allows public officials to report via e-mail material
irregular variances, losses, shortages, or thefts. Telephone and in person
reporting is also acceptable.
   (E)   Reports will be followed up with a return e-mail or call to gather
additional information as necessary. All reports of irregular variances,
losses, shortages, or thefts are maintained by the State Board of Accounts.
(Ord. 896-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
CHAPTER 35: PURCHASING POLICY
Section
Purchasing Agency
   
35.01   Establishment
Purchasing Rules
   
35.15   Protection of offers; status of documents as public records
   
35.16   Discussions with offerors responding to a request for proposals
   
35.17   Delay of openings of offers
   
35.18   Evidence of financial responsibility
   
35.19   Use of RFP for purchases of designated types of supplies
   
35.20   Modification and termination of contracts
   
35.21   Authorization; department heads
Required Purchasing Rules
   
35.35   Purchase of supplies manufactured in the country
Purchasing Policies
   
35.50   Publication of notices
   
35.51   Receiving offers
   
35.52   Small purchases
PURCHASING AGENCY
§ 35.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Works is designated as the purchasing agency for the
city.
   (B)   The Purchasing Agency shall have all the powers and duties authorized
under I.C. 5-22-4-1 et seq., as may be supplemented from time to time by
ordinances adopted by the Council and policies adopted by the Purchasing
Agency.
   (C)   The Purchasing Agency shall act as the purchasing agency for every
agency, board, office, branch, bureau, commission, council and department of
the city.
   (D)   The Purchasing Agency may designate in writing any employee of city as
a purchasing agent.
(Ord. 604, passed 6-22-1998)
PURCHASING RULES
§ 35.15 PROTECTION OF OFFERS; STATUS OF DOCUMENTS AS PUBLIC RECORDS.
   (A)   Protection of offers prior to opening. The Clerk-Treasurer of the
city, as purchasing agent under the Act, shall retain all offers received in a
secure location prior to the date and time at which offers will be opened in
order to prevent disclosure of the contents prior to the opening of the offers.
   (B)   Unobstructed evaluation of offers. After offers have been opened, the
purchasing agent shall be responsible for maintaining the offers in such a
manner as to permit, evaluation of the offers by the persons responsible for
evaluating the offers.
   (C)   Public records status of bids. Bids submitted in response to an
invitation for bids must be made available for public inspection and copying
after the time of the bid opening, unless the bid opening is delayed, as
authorized in this subchapter or any other statute or ordinance.
   (D)   Register of proposals. The purchasing agent shall prepare a register
of proposals for each request for proposals issued which shall contain
information concerning the proposals available for public inspection and
copying. Proposals may not be disclosed.
(Ord. 605, passed 6-22-1998)
§ 35.16 DISCUSSIONS WITH OFFERORS RESPONDING TO A REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS.
   The purchasing agent may conduct discussions with, and best and final offers
may be obtained from responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be
reasonably susceptible of being selected for a contract award.
(Ord. 605, passed 6-22-1998)
§ 35.17 DELAY OF OPENINGS OF OFFERS.
   (A)   When the Board of Works makes a written determination that it is in
the city's best interest, offers may be opened after the time stated in the
solicitation.
   (B)   The date, time and place of the rescheduled opening must be announced
at the time and place of the originally scheduled opening.
(Ord. 605, passed 6-22-1998)
§ 35.18 EVIDENCE OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Purchases less than $25,000. The purchasing agent may not require
evidence of financial responsibility when the estimated cost of a purchase is
less than $25,000.
   (B)   Purchases between $25,000 and $100,000. The solicitation may include a
requirement that an offeror provide evidence of financial responsibility. If
evidence of financial responsibility is required, the solicitation must
indicate the kind of evidence that will be acceptable. If a bond or certified
check is required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated cost of the purchase.
   (C)   Purchases over $100,000. The solicitation shall include a requirement
that an offeror provide evidence of financial responsibility and must indicate
the kind of evidence that will be acceptable. If a bond or certified check is
required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated cost of the purchase.
   (D)   Small business set-asides. The purchasing agent may determine that no
evidence of financial responsibility shall be required for a small business
set-aside purchase.
(Ord. 605, passed 6-22-1998)
§ 35.19 USE OF RFP FOR PURCHASES OF DESIGNATED TYPES OF SUPPLIES.
   The Board of Works determines that it is either not practicable or not
advantageous to purchase certain types of supplies by sealed competitive
bidding; and receiving proposals is the preferred method for purchasing the
following types of supplies: see §
35.21 below.
(Ord. 605, passed 6-22-1998)
§ 35.20 MODIFICATION AND TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS.
   (A)   Price adjustments.
      (1)   The Board of Works, as purchasing agent, may include provisions to
permit price adjustments in a purchase contract.
      (2)   The following, provisions for price adjustments may be included:
         (a)   Price adjustments must be computed by agreement on a fixed price
adjustment before the beginning of the pertinent performance or as soon after
the beginning of performance as possible;
         (b)   Price adjustments must be computed by unit prices specified in
the contract or subsequently agreed upon;
         (c)   Price adjustments must be computed by costs attributable to the
events or situations under clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all as
specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;
         (d)   Price adjustments must be computed in such other manner as the
contracting parties may mutually agree upon; or
         (e)   In the absence of agreement by the parties, price adjustments
must be computed by a unilateral determination by the city of the costs
attributable to the events or situations under such clauses with adjustment of
profit or fee, all as computed by the city in accordance with applicable
ordinances adopted by the city.
   (B)   Adjustments in time of performance. The purchasing agent may include
provisions in a purchase contract concerning adjustments for time of
performance under the contract.
   (C)   Unilateral rights of city. The purchasing agent may include in a
purchase contract provisions dealing with the unilateral right of the city or
the purchasing agent, to order changes in the work within the scope of the
contract or to order temporary work stoppage or delays in time of performance.
   (D)   Quantity variations. The purchasing agent may include in a purchase
contract provisions dealing with variations between the estimated quantities of
work in a contract and the actual quantity delivered.
(Ord. 605, passed 6-22-1998)
§ 35.21 AUTHORIZATION; DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   The department heads are authorized to purchase items for construction,
maintenance, repairs, replacement or necessary for the operation of their
respective department if the item is $1,000 or less.
(Ord. 605, passed 6-22-1998; Ord. 894-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
REQUIRED PURCHASING RULES
§ 35.35 PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES MANUFACTURED IN THE COUNTRY.
   Supplies manufactured in the United States shall be specified for all city
purchases and shall be purchased unless the city determines that:
   (A)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United Stages in reasonably
available quantities;
   (B)   The prices of the supplies manufactured in the United States exceeds
by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable supplies
manufactured elsewhere;
   (C)   The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United States is
substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available supplies
manufactured elsewhere; or
   (D)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is not in
the public interest.
(Ord. 606, passed 6-22-1998)
PURCHASING POLICIES
§ 35.50 PUBLICATION OF NOTICES.
   (A)   Invitation for bids.
      (1)   All notices of invitation for bids shall be published in accordance
with I.C. 5-3-1 in the Advance Leader.
      (2)   The purchasing agent shall schedule the publication of notice to
provide a reasonable amount of time for preparation and submission of bids.
      (3)   The notice will be published two times, at least one week apart.
The second publication must occur at least ten days prior to the date the bids
will be opened.
   (B)   Request for proposals. All notices of request for proposals shall be
published in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in the Advance Leader.
      (1)   The purchasing agent shall schedule the publication of notice to
provide a reasonable amount of time for preparation and submission of
proposals.
      (2)   The notice will be published two times, at least one week apart.
The second publication must occur at least seven days prior to the date the
proposals will be opened.
   (C)   Request for specifications. All notices of request for specifications
shall be published in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in the Advance Leader.
      (1)   The purchasing agent shall schedule the publication of notice to
provide a reasonable amount of time for preparation and submission of
proposals.
      (2)   The notice will be published two times, at least one week apart.
The second publication must occur at least seven days prior to the date the
proposals will be opened.
   (D)   Electronic notices. Whenever a notice or other material, including
specifications, an invitation for bids, request for proposals or request for
specifications, is sent by mail, the purchasing agent may also send the notice
or other material by electronic means, provided that the transmission of the
information is at least as efficient as mailing the information.
(Ord. 607, passed 6-22-1998)
§ 35.51 RECEIVING OFFERS.
   (A)   Opening of offers. Bids received in response to an invitation for bids
must be opened publicly in the presence of at least one or more witnesses at
the time and place designated in the invitation for bids.
      (1)   Proposals received in response to a request: for proposals must be
opened so as to avoid disclosure of the contents to competing offerors during
the process of negotiation.
      (2)   Proposals received in response to a request for specifications may
be opened as specified in the request for specifications.
   (B)   Electronic receipt of offers.
      (1)   The purchasing agency may receive electronic offers in response to
an invitation to bid, request for proposals or request for specifications.
      (2)   An electronic offer may only receive an electronic offer if:
         (a)   The solicitation includes the procedure for the electronic
transmission of the offer; and
         (b)   The purchasing agency receives the offer on a fax machine or
other system with a security feature that protects the contents of an
electronic offer with the same degree of protection as provided to an offer not
transmitted electronically.
   (C)   Correction and withdrawal of bids.
      (1)   An offeror may correct inadvertent errors in a bid up to the time
at which bids will be opened by supplementing the erroneous bid and submitting
a revised bid. A bidder may not supplement an inadvertently erroneous bid after
the time at which the bids were opened.
      (2)   A bidder may withdraw a bid containing inadvertent errors up to the
time at which bids will be opened and for a period of not more than 24 hours
after the time at which the bids were opened.
   (D)   Cancellation of solicitation. When the purchasing agent makes a
written determination that it is in the city's best interests, the purchasing
agent may cancel a solicitation or reject all offers, provided that the
solicitation included information concerning the procedure for cancellation.
(Ord. 607, passed 6-22-1998)
§ 35.52 SMALL PURCHASES.
   The purchasing agent may purchase supplies with an estimated cost of less
than $25,000 on the open market without inviting or receiving quotes.
(Ord. 607, passed 6-22-1998)
CHAPTER 36: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Section
   
36.01   General provisions
   
36.02   Schedule of fines adopted by reference
§ 36.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Ordinance Violations Bureau created. There shall be created an
Ordinance Violations Bureau for the city, and the Clerk-Treasurer shall serve
as the Violations Clerk of the Bureau.
   (B)   Duty of Violations Clerk. The Violations Clerk shall accept written
appearances, waivers of trial, admissions of violations and payments of civil
penalties up to the specified dollar amounts set forth herein.
   (C)   Definition of second offense. A SECOND OFFENSE shall consist of a
violation of an ordinance within 365 days of a prior violation of the same
ordinance.
   (D)   Definition of a third offense. A THIRD OFFENSE shall mean a violation
of an ordinance within 365 days of the commission of a "second offense" as
defined herein.
   (E)   Schedule of ordinances subject to admission of violation. Copies of
the provisions adopted by reference in §
36.02 below are the ordinances of the city, which shall be subject to admission
of violation before the Violations Clerk in the amount specified.
(Ord. 734, passed 3-24-2008)
§ 36.02 SCHEDULE OF FINES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The schedule of fines of the city is hereby adopted by reference and set out
as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 734, passed 3-24-2008; Ord. 745, passed 11-24-2008; Ord. 757-09, passed
9-14-2009; Ord. 782-2011, passed 2-14-2011; Ord. 1028-2025, passed 9-22-2025)
CHAPTER 37: EMPLOYMENT POLICIES
Section
   
37.01   Employee Policy and Procedure Manual adopted by reference
§ 37.01 EMPLOYEE POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The “City of Ligonier Employee Policy and Procedure Manual” is hereby
incorporated by reference as if set forth in full herein. Two copies thereof
are on file for public inspection in the Office of the City Clerk-Treasurer
during regular office hours.
(Ord. 807-2012, passed 4-23-2013; Ord. 852-2014, passed 8-25-2014; Ord. 899-
2017, passed 2-13-2017; Ord. 938-2019, passed 12-9-2019; Ord. 1000-2023, passed
12-11-2023)
CHAPTER 38: PUBLIC RECORDS
Section
   
38.01   Use of public records for commercial purposes
§ 38.01 USE OF PUBLIC RECORDS FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.
   (A)   Any individual or entity receiving public records or information,
pursuant to a request made under I.C. 5-14-3-3(d), shall not use the records or
information for commercial purposes. This prohibition does not apply to the use
of such records in connection with the preparation or publication of news, for
nonprofit activities, or for academic research.
   (B)   When the city reasonably believes the intent of the requester of
public records is to use those records for commercial purposes, the city may
refuse the request.
(Ord. 1027-2025, passed 9-8-2025)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
50.   UTILITIES IN GENERAL
         
51.   SEWAGE USE
         
52.   WATERWORKS; RATES AND CHARGES
         
53.   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
         
54.   WATER UTILITY DEPARTMENT
         
55.   PRIVATE WELL REGULATION
         
56.   WATERWORKS ADMINISTRATION
         
57.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
         
58.   WATER CONSERVATION
         
59.   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
         
60.   CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES IN GENERAL
Section
   
50.01   Authority to regulate water
   
50.02   Authority over utilities
   
50.03   Authority over waste substances and sewage
   
50.04   Authority to establish sewage systems
Statutory reference:
   Disposal of waste substances and sewage, see I.C. 36-9-2-16
   Disposal systems, see I.C. 36-9-2-17
   Municipal waterworks, see I.C. 36-9-23-1 et seq.
   Utility service to the public, see I.C. 36-9-2-15
   Waterworks operations, see I.C. 36-9-2-14
§ 50.01 AUTHORITY TO REGULATE WATER.
   The city may regulate the furnishing of water to the public as well as
establish, maintain and operate waterworks system.
(1998 Code, § 9-1)
§ 50.02 AUTHORITY OVER UTILITIES.
   The city may furnish or regulate the furnishing of utility service to the
public.
(1998 Code, § 9-2)
§ 50.03 AUTHORITY OVER WASTE SUBSTANCES AND SEWAGE.
   (A)   The city may regulate the furnishing of the service of collecting,
processing and disposing of waste substances and domestic or sanitary sewage.
   (B)   This includes the power to fix the price to be charged for that
service.
(1998 Code, § 9-3)
§ 50.04 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH SEWAGE SYSTEMS.
   The city may collect, process and dispose of waste substances and domestic
or sanitary sewage. It may establish, maintain and operate sewers, sewage
disposal systems and systems to collect and dispose of waste substances.
(1998 Code, § 9-4)
CHAPTER 51: SEWAGE USE
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Definitions
Public Sewage Disposal
   
51.015   Permit for building sewers and connections required
   
51.016   Two classes of building sewer permits; fees
   
51.017   Owner's costs and expenses
   
51.018   Separate and independent building sewers
   
51.019   Old building sewers
   
51.020   Installation requirements
   
51.021   Inspector
   
51.022   Barricaded lights required
   
51.023   New combined sewers prohibited
Use of Public Sewers
   
51.035   Discharge restrictions and prohibitions
   
51.036   Notice regarding other types of discharge
   
51.037   Role of Superintendent
   
51.038   Prohibited discharge points
   
51.039   Authority of Superintendent
   
51.040   Interceptors
   
51.041   Dischargers
   
51.042   Meters and manholes
   
51.043   Measurements, tests and analyses
   
51.044   Special agreements
   
51.045   Miscellaneous provisions
   
51.046   Spills reporting
   
51.047   Damage to city sewage works
Industrial Wastes
   
51.060   Pretreatment of industrial wastes
   
51.061   Limitations on wastewater strength
   
51.062   Plans and specifications of pretreatment facilities
   
51.063   Accidental discharges
   
51.064   Wastewater discharge permits
   
51.065   Wastewater permit discharge application and fees
   
51.066   Permit modifications
   
51.067   Permit duration
   
51.068   Limitations on permit transfer
   
51.069   Reporting requirements
   
51.070   Emergency suspension of service and permit
   
51.071   Revocation of permit
   
51.072   Notification of violation; administrative adjustment
   
51.073   Show cause hearing
   
51.074   Judicial proceedings
   
51.075   Unpolluted cooling waters
   
51.076   Polluted cooling waters
   
51.077   Industrial flow information
   
51.078   Industrial wastewater sampling
   
51.079   Grease, oil and sand traps
   
51.080   Power and authority of inspectors
   
51.081   Enforcement
Rates and Charges
   
51.095   Owner's liability
   
51.096   Basis of charges
   
51.097   Charges for metered users
   
51.098   Minimum charges
   
51.099   Un-metered users
   
51.100   June, July and August rates
   
51.101   Multiple residential lots with single water meter
   
51.102   Multiple units; commercial and residential with single meter
   
51.103   Sewage works connection charges
   
51.104   Limited case by case basis charges
   
51.105   Outside corporate limits; users
   
51.106   Limited exemptions regarding manufacturing users
   
51.107   When sewage user is not a water user
   
51.108   Measurement requirements
   
51.109   Volume, strength, content and character of discharge
   
51.110   Charges to the city
   
51.111   Rental businesses
   
51.112   Limited adjustments
   
51.113   Monthly billings; delinquent penalty
   
51.114   Effective date on rates and charges
   
51.115   Surcharges on industrial users
   
51.116   Storm water rates
 
   
51.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Form of sewer tap permit
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMMONIA or NH3-N. The same as Ammonia Nitrogen measured as Nitrogen. The
laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth
in "Standards Methods" as defined in this subchapter.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. Of sewage, sewage effluent, polluted
waters or industrial wastes. The rate at which microorganisms use the oxygen in
water or wastewater while stabilizing decomposable organic matter under aerobic
conditions. The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods as defined in this subchapter.
   BOARD. The City of Ligonier, acting through its Board of Public Works or
duly authorized officials or Boards acting on its behalf.
   BUILDING (OR HOUSE) DRAIN. The lowest horizontal piping of building drainage
system which receives the discharge from waste, and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to a point approximately five feet
outside the foundation all of the building or house.
      (1)   BUILDING DRAIN (SANITARY). A building drain which conveys sanitary
or industrial sewage only.
      (2)   BUILDING DRAIN (STORM). A building drain which conveys storm water
or other clean water drainage, but no wastewater.
   BUILDING (OR HOUSE) LATERAL SEWER. The extension from the building drain to
the sewage system or other place of disposal (Also called HOUSE CONNECTIONS.)
      (1)   BUILDING SEWER (SANITARY). A building sewer which conveys sanitary
or industrial sewage only.
      (2)   BUILDING SEWER (STORM). A building sewer which conveys storm water
or other clean water drainage, but no wastewater.
   CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or CBOD. Of sewage, sewage effluent,
polluted waters or industrial wastes. The rate at which microorganisms use the
oxygen in water or wastewater while stabilizing decomposable carbonaceous
organic matter under aerobic conditions. The laboratory determinations shall be
made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods as defined in
this subchapter.
   C.F.R. The Code of Federal Regulations.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD. Of sewage, sewage effluent, polluted waters
or industrial wastes is a measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic
and organic matter present in wastewater. The laboratory determination shall be
made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   CITY. The City of Ligonier, Noble County, Indiana.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the city, or his or her authorized
deputy, agent or representative.
   COLLECTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect wastewaters
from individual point source discharges.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or
surface water.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Any establishment involved in a commercial enterprise,
business or service which based on a determination by the city discharges
primarily segregated domestic waste or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.
      (1)   Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal
chloroform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit
if the treatment works was designed to treat the pollutants and in fact does
remove the pollutants to a substantial degree. The term SUBSTANTIAL DEGREE is
not subject to precise definition, but generally contemplates removals in the
order of 80% or greater.
      (2)   Minor incidental removals in the order of 10% to 30% are not
considered substantial. Examples of the additional pollutants which may be
considered compatible include:
         (a)   Chemical oxygen demand;
         (b)   Total organic carbon;
         (c)   Phosphorus and phosphorus compounds;
         (d)   Nitrogen and nitrogen compounds; and
         (e)   Fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin (except as
prohibited where these materials would interfere with the operation of the
treatment works).
   DEBT SERVICE COST. The average annual principal and interest payments on all
proposed revenue bonds or other long-term capital debt.
   DISCHARGER. Any user of the sewer system who discharges or allows to be
discharged any effluent into the system.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   E-COLIFORM. Any of a number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of
man and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pollution.
   EFFLUENT DATA. Information necessary to determine the identity, amount,
frequency, concentration, temperature or other characteristics of any pollutant
discharged.
   EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or a duly authorized official
of that agency.
   EQUIVALENT CONNECTION. The ratio of the cross-sectional area of a water
meter connection to the cross-sectional area of a five-eighths-inch water meter
connection. The following table displays the EQUIVALENT CONNECTION of various
size water meters.
Water Meter Size Equivalent Connection
Water Meter Size Equivalent Connection
5/8-inch         1.0
3/4-inch         1.4
1-inch           2.5
1/4-inch         4.0
1/2-inch         58
2-inch           10.0
3-inch           23.0
4-inch           41.0
6-inch           92.0
8-inch           164.0
10-inch          256.0
12-inch          369.0
 
   EXCESSIVE STRENGTH SURCHARGE. An additional charge which is billed to users
for treating compatible sewage wastes with an average strength in excess of
"normal domestic sewage".
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state, such that will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment facility
approved by the city.
   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
   GARBAGE. Any solid wastes from the preparation, cooking or dispensing of
food and from handling, storage or sale of produce.
   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Any federal, state or local governmental user of the
wastewater treatment works.
   HEAVY DEMAND SUBSTANCES. Concentrations of phosphorus, ammonia, suspended
solids or biochemical oxygen demand in sewage which exceed the levels
established in this chapter.
   IDEM. The Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible
pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids, and further defined in
40 C.F.R. Part 403.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any manufacturing or processing facility that discharges
industrial waste to a wastewater treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substances or form of energy
discharged, permitted to flow or escape from an industrial, manufacturing,
commercial or business process or from the development, recovery or processing
of any natural resource carried on by a person and shall further mean any waste
from an industrial sewer.
   INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from the ground, through means such as, but not limited to,
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. (INFILTRATION does
not include and is distinguished from inflow.)
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both infiltration and
inflow without distinguishing the source.
   INFLOW. The water discharged into a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leader, cellar, yard
and area drains, foundation drains, unpolluted cooling water discharges, drains
from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm
sewers, and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff, street
wash waters or drainage. (Inflow does not include, and is distinguishable from
infiltration.)
   INSPECTOR. The person or persons duly authorized by the city through its
Board of Public Works to inspect and approve the installation of building
sewers and then connection to the public sewer system.
    INSTITUTIONAL USER. Any establishment involved in a social, charitable,
religious and/or educational function which, based on a determination by the
city discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences.
   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewater
from collector sewers to a treatment facility.
   INTERFERENCE.  The inhibition or disruption of the municipal sewer system,
treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any
requirement of its NPDES permit, and/or any other waste disposal permit, and/or
the inhibition or disruption of any receiving systems thereof.
   MAY. The indication of a discretionary condition.
   MGD. Million gallons per day.
   MG/L. Milligrams per liter.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with §§ (b) and (c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to a specific
category of nonresidential dischargers.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
   NONRESIDENTIAL DISCHARGER. Any user of the sewer system who discharges a
non-domestic effluent into the system by means of pipes, conduits, pumping
stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting
ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto.
(Specified in 40 C.F.R. Part 403 as "industrial user".)
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. For the purpose of determining surcharges,
wastewater or sewage having an average daily concentration as follows:
 
S.S.             Not more than 230 mg/l
BOD              Not more than 230 mg/l
Ammonia-Nitrogen Not more than 25 mg/l
Phosphorus       Not more than 1 mg/l
 
   NPDES PERMIT. A national pollutant discharge elimination system permit
setting forth conditions for the discharge of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants to the navigable waters of the United States.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COST. Include all costs, direct and indirect,
necessary to provide adequate wastewater collection, transport and treatment on
continuing basis and produce discharges to receiving waters that conform with
all related federal, state and local requirements. (These COSTS include
replacement.)
   OTHER SERVICE CHARGES. Tap charges, connection charges, area charges and
other identifiable charges other than excessive strength surcharges.
   pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ions, in grams per liter of solution.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, partnership,
copartnership, joint stock company, trust, estate, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency, the state, the United States of
America, or other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.
   PHOSPHORUS (P). The chemical element phosphorus, total. The laboratory
determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in C.F.R.
as defined in this subchapter.
   PLUMBING INSPECTOR. The authorized agent of the Board of Works having
responsibility for administration of the provisions of this subchapter as such
may pertain to plumbing work.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing the pollutants into the sewage works. The reduction or
alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes,
process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 C.F.R. § 403.6
(d); and shall include all applicable rules and regulations contained in the
Code of Federal Regulations as published in the Federal Register, under § 307
of PL 95-217, under regulation 40 C.F.R. Part 403 pursuant to the Act, and
amendments.
   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned by public authority.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is owned and controlled by the public authority
and will consist of the following increments: collector sewer, interceptor
sewer, force main, pumping station.
   PUMPING STATION. A station positioned in the public sewer system at which
wastewater is pumped from one point to another.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. The expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the works
were designed and constructed.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment works whose premises or building
is used primarily as a residence for one or more persons, including all
dwelling units and the like.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sanitary and industrial wastes, and to
which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. The combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions (including
polluted cooling water). The three most common types of SEWAGE are:
      (1)   COMBINED SEWAGE. Wastes including sanitary sewage, industrial
sewage, storm water, infiltration and inflow carried to the wastewater
treatment facilities by a combined sewer;
      (2)   INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE. A combination of liquid and water-carried
wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment, and resulting from any
trade or process carried on in that establishment (this shall include the
wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water);
      (3)   SANITARY SEWAGE. The combination of liquid and water-carried wastes
discharged from toilet and other sanitary pumping facilities; and
      (4)   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. The structures, equipment and processes to collect, transport
and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent and
accumulated residual solids.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than five minutes more than two times the average 24-hour concentration
of flow during normal operation or which adversely affects the sewage works.
   STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures approved by the IDEM.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer for conveying water, ground water or unpolluted water
from any source and to which sanitary and/or industrial wastes are not
intentionally admitted.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The appointed superintendent, or in his or her absence the
duly appointed acting superintendent, of the city's sewage works.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS or S.S. Solids which either float on the surface of or are
in suspension in water, sewage or other liquid and which are removable by
laboratory filtration.
      (1)   Their concentration shall be expressed in milligrams per liter.
      (2)   Quantitative determination shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
   TOXIC AMOUNT. Concentrations of any pollutant or combination of pollutants
which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause adverse
effects, such as cancer, genetic mutations and physiological manifestations.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USER CHARGES. A charge levied on users of the wastewater treatment works for
the cost of operation and maintenance of the public works.
   USER CLASS. The division of wastewater treatment customers by source,
function, waste characteristics and process or discharge similarities, (i.e.
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental in the user
charge system).
   VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER. The material in the sewage solids transformed to
gases or vapors when heated to 5,500°C for 15 to 20 minutes.
   WASTEWATER. Water in which sewage has been discharged.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
(1998 Code, § 9-7) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994; Ord. 818-2012, passed 8-24-
2012)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal waterworks, see I.C. 36-9-23-1 et seq.
PUBLIC SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 51.015 PERMIT FOR BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Board or its designee.
(1998 Code, § 9-18) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.016 TWO CLASSES OF BUILDING SEWER PERMITS; FEES.
   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
      (1)   Residential/commercial sewer permit: For residential and commercial
service producing only sanitary sewage; and
      (2)   Industrial sewer permit: For service to establishments producing
industrial sewage.
   (B)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application
on a form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented
by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Superintendent.
   (C)   A permit and inspection fee of $25 for a residential or commercial
building permit and $50 for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid
to the city at the time the application is filed.
   (D)   The permit and inspection fee shall be in addition to any applicable
tap fee. Also, an additional fee of $20 shall be charged for each inspection
necessitated by an applicant's failure to properly install the sewage line and
connection to the public sewer system.
(1998 Code, § 9-19) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.017 OWNER'S COSTS AND EXPENSES.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer to a public sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(1998 Code, § 9-20) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.018 SEPARATE AND INDEPENDENT BUILDING SEWERS.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building that is capable of producing sewage; except where one building stands
at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court yard
or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
(1998 Code, § 9-21) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.019 OLD BUILDING SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found upon examination by the Superintendent to meet all requirements
of this subchapter. In that event, no additional permit, inspection or tap fees
shall be charged.
(1998 Code, § 9-22) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.020 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The size, slope, alignment, materials and construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, joint
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials and the Water Pollution Control
Federation Manual of Practice No. MOP9 shall apply. All the connections shall
be made gas tight and water tight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved by the city Engineer before installation.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (C)   No person shall make connection or allow the continued connection of
roof down spouts, basement drains, sump pumps, exterior foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building
sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a
public sanitary sewer or combined sewer.
(1998 Code, § 9-23) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.021 INSPECTOR.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent
24 hours prior to when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The construction shall be made under the
supervision of the Superintendent or his or her representatives.
(1998 Code, § 9-24) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.022 BARRICADED LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   All excavations for building sewer installation must be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(1998 Code, § 9-25) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.023 NEW COMBINED SEWERS PROHIBITED.
   All construction of new combined sewers shall be prohibited. Any new
connections to a combined sewer must be designed to minimize or delay inflow
into the combined sewer. Any new construction of a sewer for carrying
unpolluted clear water must be constructed so as to be able to be removed from
a combined sewer if a storm sewer becomes available.
(1998 Code, § 9-26) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994; Ord. 637, passed 9-25-2000)
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 51.035 DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structure, equipment and personnel of the sewage works, or that interferes with
any treatment process;
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch, manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, paper, dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either
whole or ground by garbage grinders; or
   (E)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process, or that may constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
wastewater works, or exceed the limitations set forth in the applicable Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or other pretreatment standards or
regulations issued by EPA or the IDEM. Toxic pollutant(s) are identified
pursuant to § 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Action, being 33
U.S.C. § 1317(a), as amended.
(1998 Code, § 9-30) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.036 NOTICE REGARDING OTHER TYPES OF DISCHARGE.
   (A)   Upon prior notice being given to the user by the Superintendent, no
person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the
Superintendent that the wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment
process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
   (B)   In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Superintendent shall give consideration to the sewers, the nature of the sewage
treatment process, the capacity of the sewage treatment plant and other
pertinent factors.
   (C)   The substances that may be prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F or 65°C;
      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F or 0°C and
65°C;
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   (a)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc
and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to a degree that any material received in the composite
sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the
Board for the materials.
         (b)   Under no circumstances shall a discharger release water or waste
containing concentrations of the following substances in amounts exceeding the
stated values:
Parameter Daily Maximum
Parameter      Daily Maximum
Arsenic        0.5 mg/l
Cadmium        0.6 mg/l
Copper         1.0 mg/l
Cyanide        0.5 mg/l
Lead           0.6 mg/l
Mercury        0.0005 mg/l
Molybdenum     0.05 mg/l
Nickel         2.0 mg/l
Total Chromium 2.0 mg/l
Zinc           3.0 mg/l
 
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Board as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies with
jurisdiction, to regulate the discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of the half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Board in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert S.S. (such as, but not limited
to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual S.S., CBOD, BOD, Ammonia-Nitrogen, Phosphorus or
chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on
the sewage treatment works; or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to the degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent can not meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
(1998 Code, § 9-31) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994; Ord. 637, passed 9-25-2000)
§ 51.037 ROLE OF SUPERINTENDENT.
   Any decision of the Superintendent made under this section shall be subject
to the user's right to appeal the decision to the Board.
(1998 Code, § 9-32) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.038 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE POINTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, permit to be
deposited, or discharged in any manner whatsoever, any substance into the
city's sewer system at a point different than the user's building sewer
connection to the city's sewer system.
(1998 Code, § 9-33) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.039 AUTHORITY OF SUPERINTENDENT.
   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, to
the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in §
51.035 above, and which in the judgment of the Superintendent may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving
waters, or otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance,
the Superintendent may:
   (A)   Require the user or discharger to submit information on wastewater
characteristics and obtain prior approval for discharges;
   (B)   Reject the wastes in whole or in part for any reason deemed
appropriate by the Superintendent;
   (C)   Require pretreatment of the wastes to within the limits of normal
domestic sewage as defined;
   (D)   Require control of flow equalization of the wastes so as to avoid any
"slug" loads or excessive loads that may be harmful to the treatment works;
   (E)   Require that any new construction tributary to the combined sewers be
designed to minimize or delay inflow contribution to the existing combined
sewer; and
   (F)   Require payment of a surcharge on any excessive flows or loadings
discharged to the treatment works to cover the additional costs of having
capacity for and treating the wastes. If the Superintendent permits the
pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the
plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Superintendent and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws. Any surcharge required to be paid by the Superintendent
shall be subject to the approval of the Board.
(1998 Code, § 9-34) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.040 INTERCEPTORS.
   Interceptors shall be provided by the discharger as deemed necessary by the
Superintendent for the removal of grease, flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful substances. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved
by the Superintendent, and shall be readily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. The owner and/or operator of interceptor equipment shall be
required to maintain certified records as to time and date of cleaning and
inspection.
(1998 Code, § 9-35) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.041 DISCHARGERS.
   When a discharger is required to provide preliminary treatment, including
interceptors or flow equalization facilities, the equipment shall be maintained
by the discharger in satisfactory operating condition as determined by the
Superintendent.
(1998 Code, § 9-36) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.042 METERS AND MANHOLES.
   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying wastes shall install a suitable control manhole,
together with the necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer, to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. The
manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be
maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times. Agents
of the city, IDEM, the State Water Pollution Control Agencies and the EPA shall
be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing at all reasonable times.
(1998 Code, § 9-37) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.043 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES.
   (A)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with C.F.R. 40 Part 136 Appendix B, and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control
manhole, except for application for NPDES permits and report thereof such shall
be conducted in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the IDEM.
   (B)   In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be
carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to
life, limb and property.
   (C)   The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and S.S. analysis are
obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined
from periodic grab samples.
(1998 Code, § 9-38) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.044 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the
industrial concern, at such rates as are compatible with the rate ordinance.
(1998 Code, § 9-39) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.045 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise authorized by this subchapter, no person shall
place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any natural outlet or on public or
private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
city any human excrement, garbage, objectionable waste, wastewater or other
polluted water except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance
with provisions of this chapter and any applicable NPDES permit, if required.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sanitary
sewer, either directly or indirectly, storm water, surface water, ground water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted water or unpolluted
industrial water.
   (C)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, cooling water, unpolluted water or unpolluted industrial process
water may be admitted to storm sewers which have adequate capacity for their
accommodation. No person shall use the sewers, however, without the specific
permission of the city.
   (D)   No new sanitary sewer connection shall be made unless there is
capacity available to all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains and the
sewage treatment plant, including capacity for BOD and S.S.
(1998 Code, § 9-40) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.046 SPILLS REPORTING.
   Users of the sewage works shall immediately notify the Superintendent of any
unusual flows or wastes that are discharged accidentally or otherwise to the
sewer system.
(1998 Code, § 9-41) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.047 DAMAGE TO CITY SEWAGE WORKS.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is a part of the municipal sewage works.
(1998 Code, § 9-42) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994) Penalty, see §
51.999
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
§ 51.060 PRETREATMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   Pretreatment of industrial wastes prior to discharge to the treatment works
may be required by the Board and in such event is subject to the Rules and
Regulations adopted by the EPA (40 C.F.R. Part 403), and Guidelines
Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants (40 C.F.R. Part 136),
in addition to any more stringent requirements established by the city and
subsequent State or Federal Guidelines and Rules and Regulations.
(1998 Code, § 9-48) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.061 LIMITATIONS ON WASTEWATER STRENGTH.
   (A)   National categorical pretreatment standards as promulgated by the EPA
shall be met by all affected nonresidential waste dischargers. An application
for modification of the national categorical pretreatment standards may be
considered by the Board when the wastewater treatment plant achieves consistent
removal of the pollutants described herein.
   (B)   State and local requirements and limitations on discharges shall be
met by all dischargers when the requirements and limitations are more stringent
than federal requirements and limitations.
   (C)   No discharger shall use potable water to dilute a discharge as a
substitute for adequate treatment of prohibited substances to achieve
compliance with the standards set forth in this division.
   (D)   Under no circumstances shall a discharger release water or waste
containing concentrations of the following substances in amounts exceeding the
stated values:
Parameter Daily Maximum Monthly Average
Parameter      Daily Maximum Monthly Average
Arsenic        0.5           0.2
Cadmium        1.0           0.3
Copper         4.0           2.5
Cyanide        1.5           0.7
Lead           1.5           0.5
Mercury        0.1           0.005
Nickel         5.0           2.5
Total chromium 4.0           2.0
Zinc           3.0           2.0
All units mg/l
 
(1998 Code, § 9-49) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.062 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS OF PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   (A)   Pretreatment information including plans and specifications of control
facilities shall be submitted for approval by the Board and no construction of
the facilities shall be commenced until approval in writing is granted.
   (B)   Where the facilities are provided, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operating order by the owner at his
or her expense and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the city to
determine that the facilities are being operated in conformance with the
applicable federal, state and local laws and permits.
   (C)   The owner shall maintain operating records of the influent and
effluent to show the performance of the treatment facilities and for comparison
against city monitoring records.
(1998 Code, § 9-50) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.063 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   An industrial discharger shall provide a plan of protection for the
prevention of accidental discharges of prohibited or regulated substances
listed herein and providing for corrective action in the event of an accidental
discharge. Each protection plan is subject to the approval of the Board.
   (B)   Industrial dischargers shall notify the Superintendent immediately
upon the occurrence of a "slug" or accidental discharge of substances
prohibited by this chapter. The notification shall include location of
discharge, date and time of occurrence, type of waste, concentration and
volume, and corrective actions. Immediate notification may be verbal, followed
by a written verification within five days of the incident.
(1998 Code, § 9-51) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.064 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge sewage, non-domestic wastes or any
other wastes into any sewer outlet within the jurisdiction of the city without
having been issued a wastewater discharge permit if the discharger:
      (1)   Is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards as
promulgated by the EPA;
      (2)   Discharges non-domestic wastewater in the amount equal to or
exceeding 10,000 gallons per day;
      (3)   Contributes a non-domestic waste stream exceeding 5% of the dry
weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the wastewater treatment plan; or
      (4)   Has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the treatment plant
processes by inhibition, pass-through of pollutants, sludge contamination or
endangerment of treatment plant personnel.
   (B)   Prospective non-domestic users of any sewer which are subject to the
provisions of division (A) above shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit
prior to connecting to or discharging into the wastewater system and shall
apply for the permit at least 90 days prior to anticipated connection.
   (C)   All existing nonresidential dischargers which are subject to the
provisions of division (A) above shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 9-52) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.065 WASTEWATER PERMIT DISCHARGE APPLICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   Applications for wastewater discharge permits may be procured from the
Superintendent.
   (B)   Dischargers subject to the provisions of division (A) above shall
obtain from, complete and file with the Superintendent a permit application on
a form prescribed by the Board. The form shall require the following
information:
      (1)   Disclosure of name, address and location of the discharger;
      (2)   Disclosure of Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) number
according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the
Budget, 1972, as amended;
      (3)   Disclosure of wastewater constituents and characteristics including
but not limited to those mentioned in this division, as determined by bona fide
chemical and biological analysis;
      (4)   Disclosure of time and duration of discharges;
      (5)   Disclosure of average daily wastewater flow rates in gallons per
day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any. All flows must be
measured unless other verifiable techniques are approved by the Board due to
cost or non-feasibility;
      (6)   Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes,
sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation;
      (7)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or may be discharged to the sewers;
      (8)   Disclosure of the nature and concentration of any pollutants or
materials prohibited by this division in the discharge, including a statement
regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved on a consistent basis and
if not, what additional operation and maintenance activities and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the discharger to comply;
      (9)   Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance
activities are required to comply with the applicable pretreatment standard,
the discharger must provide a compliance schedule by which he or she will
provide the additional pretreatment and maintenance activities. All
pretreatment plans shall be submitted to the Board for review and approval
prior to implementation;
      (10)   Disclosure of each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate of production;
      (11)   Disclosure of the type and amount of the raw materials utilized;
      (12)   All permit applications for new or modified permits must be signed
by a principal executive officer of the discharger; and
      (13)   A wastewater discharge permit application fee of $200 shall be
paid when the permit application is filed.
   (C)   Within 90 days after receipt of the application for discharge permit,
the Superintendent shall review the application for compliance with the terms
and conditions of this subchapter and shall make recommendations to the Board.
   (D)   The Board shall review the Superintendent's recommendations and shall
approve or reject the application.
   (E)   If the Board finds the applicant to be in compliance, it shall approve
the application and a permit to discharge shall be issued subject to the
imposition of reasonable terms and conditions if deemed necessary by the Board,
including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Modification of the unit charge or schedule of user charges and
fees for the wastewater to be discharged into the municipal sewer system;
      (2)   Numerical limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics;
      (3)   Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (4)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
      (5)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number and types of samples, and standards
for analyses and reporting schedules;
      (6)   Compliance schedules;
      (7)   Requirements for submittal of technical reports or discharge
reports;
      (8)   Requirements for maintaining and retention of plant records
pertaining to wastewater discharge as specified by this division, and affording
Board personnel access thereto;
      (9)   Requirements for reporting the nature of significant changes in
wastewater flow or substantial changes in type and concentration of wastewater
constituents;
      (10)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges; and
      (11)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Board to ensure
compliance with this division.
   (F)   If the Board rejects the application for non-compliance, it shall
establish a compliance schedule and require compliance schedule reports and
compliance date reports on forms supplied by the Board.
(1998 Code, § 9-53) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.066 PERMIT MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The Board reserves the right to amend any wastewater discharge permit
issued hereunder in order to ensure compliance by the city with applicable laws
and regulations. The terms and conditions of the wastewater discharge permit
are of each discharger subject to the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards. All National Categorical Pretreatment Standards adopted after the
promulgation of this subchapter shall be a part of the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Any discharger required to obtain a discharge permit under the newly
promulgated standards shall apply for the same immediately upon notification by
the Board.
   (C)   Any current permittee whose wastewater discharge permit is affected by
the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall, upon
notification by the Superintendent, submit all documentation, information and
proposed changes necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the new
standards. Upon receipt of the information, the Superintendent shall establish
a compliance schedule whereby the permittee shall attain compliance with the
applicable standards. The permittee shall be advised of any proposed changes in
his or her permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any
changes in new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance, not to exceed the duration specified in the applicable
National Categorical Standards.
(1998 Code, § 9-54) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.067 PERMIT DURATION.
   All wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a five-year duration
and shall be valid subject to amendment or revocation as provided in this
subchapter. Under special circumstances, as determined by the Board, a permit
may be issued for a period of less than five years. A permit may be revoked or
rescinded if the permittee is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
(1998 Code, § 9-55) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.068 LIMITATIONS ON PERMIT TRANSFER.
   Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific discharger for a
specific operation and are not assignable to another discharger or transferable
to any other location without the prior written approval of the Board.
(1998 Code, § 9-56) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.069 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Within 90 days following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the wastewater system, a new permittee shall submit to the
Superintendent a baseline monitoring report on forms furnished by the Board
indicating the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated
substances contained in its discharge, and the average and maximum daily flow
in gallons. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, what additional
operations, maintenance and/or pretreatment activities are necessary to bring
the discharger into compliance with the applicable standards.
   (B)   Any permittee subject to a pretreatment standard set forth in this
subchapter shall submit to the Superintendent during the months of June and
December of each year, unless required more frequently by the discharge permit
or by the Superintendent, a periodic compliance report on forms provided by the
Board indicating the nature and concentration of prohibited or regulated
substances in the effluent. Included in the report shall be a record of all
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows during the reporting
period, computed by verifiable techniques as required by the applicable
discharge permit.
   (C)   Reports of all monitoring events, whether required by the wastewater
discharge permit or not, shall be filed with the Superintendent. The reports
shall contain all results of analyses, including flow conditions and the nature
and concentration of those prohibited substances specified in the applicable
categorical standards. The reports shall also specify sampling location, date,
time and techniques, analysis date, analyst and analysis methods, and results
of all analyses.
   (D)   All permittees shall retain and preserve for no less than three years
any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and
all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and analyses made in
connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are
the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation
activities brought by the Board pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved
by the permittee until all enforcement activities have concluded and all
periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired.
   (E)   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this subchapter, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this subchapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished by the
imposition of a civil penalty of not more than $2,500.
   (F)   Compliance schedule reports must be submitted by any nonresidential
discharger not subject to categorical standards who is not in compliance with
the terms and conditions of this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 9-57) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.070 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF SERVICE AND PERMIT.
   The Board may, for good cause shown, suspend the wastewater treatment
service and the discharge permit of a nonresidential discharger when an actual
or threatened discharge presents or may present an imminent or substantial
danger to the health or welfare of persons, or substantial danger to the
environment, interferes or may interfere with the operations of the wastewater
treatment plan, or violates or may violate any pretreatment limits imposed by
this division. Any nonresidential discharger notified of the suspension of
treatment service and/or permit shall cease all discharges to the sewer system
in the event of failure of the nonresidential discharger to comply voluntarily
with the suspension order within the specified time, the Board shall commence
judicial proceedings immediately thereafter to compel the nonresidential user's
compliance with the order.
(1998 Code, § 9-58) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.071 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Board may revoke the permit of a nonresidential discharger which:
   (A)   Fails to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristic of its discharge;
   (B)   Fails to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or
characteristics, including periods of non-compliance with applicable effluent
limitations;
   (C)   Fails to report modifications of operational and/or pretreatment
processes or facilities;
   (D)   Fails to refuse reasonable access to the nonresidential user's
premises by representatives of the wastewater treatment plant for the purpose
of inspection or monitoring; or
   (E)   Violates the provisions of this chapter, the conditions of its permit,
or any final judicial order entered with respect thereto.
(1998 Code, § 9-59) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.072 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the Board finds that a permittee has engaged in conduct which
justifies revocation of its permit, pursuant to this chapter, the Board shall
serve or cause to be served upon the permittee a written notice by certified
mail, return receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation.
   (B)   Within 15 days of the date of receipt of the notice, the permittee
shall respond in writing to the Board advising of its position with respect to
the allegations.
   (C)   Thereafter the parties shall meet within 15 days to establish a plan
for the satisfactory correction of all confirmed violations.
(1998 Code, § 9-60) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.073 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   (A)   Where the violation of this chapter is not corrected by timely
compliance by means of administrative adjustment, the Board may order any
discharger which causes or allows conduct herein prohibited, to show cause
before the Board or its duly authorized representative, why the proposed permit
revocation should not be taken.
   (B)   A written notice shall be served on the discharger by personal service
or certified mail, return receipt requested, specifying the time and place of a
hearing to be held by the Board or its designee regarding the violation, the
reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement
action, and directing the discharger to show cause before the Board or its
designee why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
   (C)   The notice of the hearing shall be served not less than ten days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer or authorized
representative of a discharger.
   (D)   The proceedings at the hearing shall be considered by the Board which
shall then enter appropriate orders with respect to the alleged improper
activities of the discharger.
(1998 Code, § 9-61) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.074 JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.
   Following a finding by the Board that a permittee is not in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, the City Attorney, at the direction of the
Board, shall commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief
in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
(1998 Code, § 9-62) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.075 UNPOLLUTED COOLING WATERS.
   Unpolluted water from air conditioners, cooling, condensing systems or
swimming pools shall be discharged only to a storm sewer. Where a storm sewer
is not available, discharge may be to a natural outlet approved by the City
Engineer and by the state. Where a storm sewer or natural sewer is not
available, the unpolluted water may be discharged to a sanitary sewer pending
written approval by the Superintendent.
(1998 Code, § 9-63) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.076 POLLUTED COOLING WATERS.
   Industrial cooling water, which may be polluted with insoluble oils or
grease or suspended solids, shall be pre-treated for removal of pollutants and
the resultant clear water shall be discharged in accordance with the above
section.
(1998 Code, § 9-64) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.077 INDUSTRIAL FLOW INFORMATION.
   The Superintendent may require users of the sewage works, other than
residential users, to supply pertinent information on wastewater flow
characteristics. The measurements, tests and analyses shall be made at the
user's expense. If made by the city, an appropriate charge may be assessed to
the user at the option of the city.
(1998 Code, § 9-65) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.078 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER SAMPLING.
   The strength of wastewaters may be determined, for purposes of periodic
review and establishment of charges provided for in the sewer rate ordinance,
from samplings taken during any period of time and of a duration and in a
manner as the city may elect. Appropriate charges for sampling and analysis may
be assessed to the user at the option of the city. The results of routine
sampling and analysis by the user may also be used for determination of charges
after verification by the city.
(1998 Code, § 9-66) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.079 GREASE, OIL AND SAND TRAPS.
   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, sand or other harmful
ingredients, except that the interceptors or traps will not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units.
   (B)   All interceptors or traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the city and shall be located so as to be accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
   (C)   They shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperatures and shall be of
substantial construction, gas tight and equipped with easily removable covers.
   (D)   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall
be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times. Specifications for grease, oil and sand interceptors
shall be available from the City Engineer.
(1998 Code, § 9-67) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.080 POWER AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The Superintendent, the Inspector and other duly authorized employees
of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties, at all reasonable times, for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter. The persons shall have no authority to inquire
into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic,
paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company
and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city
employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to
its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions.
   (C)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties, at all reasonable times, through which the city holds a
duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(1998 Code, § 9-68) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
§ 51.081 ENFORCEMENT.
   The city may, by suit in the circuit or superior court of the county enjoin
the violation of this chapter. The city may, by mandatory injunction in the
circuit or superior court of the county, require compliance with the terms and
provisions of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 9-75) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 51.095 OWNER'S LIABILITY.
   For the use of and the service rendered by the sewage works, rates and
charges shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of
real estate or building that is connected with the city's sanitary sewerage
system or otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or
other liquids, either directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewage system of
the city, which charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be
in an amount determinable as set forth in this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 9-85) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 51.096 BASIS OF CHARGES.
   Except as herein otherwise provided, sewage rates and charges shall be based
on the quantity of water used on or in the property or premises subject to the
rates and charges, as the same is measured by the water meter there in use.
(1998 Code, § 9-86) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 51.097 CHARGES FOR METERED USERS.
   The water usage schedule on which the amount of the sewage rates and charges
shall be determined shall be as follows:
 
Quantity of Water Used Per Month Rate per 100 Cubic Feet*
First 333 cubic feet             $10.825
Next 2,333 cubic feet            $7.73
Next 2,667 cubic feet            $6.74
Next 8,000 cubic feet            $5.75
Over 13,333 cubic feet           $4.75
* The city may utilize available tax increment financing to “buy down” the
rates billed to customers. The city will analyze available tax increment
financing funds available annually to determine the amount of credit afforded
to sewage works customers.
 
(1998 Code, § 9-87) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991; Ord. 850-2014, passed 10-27-
2014)
§ 51.098 MINIMUM CHARGES.
   The minimum charge for sewage service for any user, where the user is a
metered water consumer, shall be based upon meter sizes as follows:
Meter Size Charges per Month*
Meter Size                 Charges per Month*
5/8-inch to 3/4-inch meter $36.05
1-inch meter               $67.70
1-1/4-inch meter           $100.45
1-1/2-inch meter           $117.15
2-inch meter               $183.90
3-inch meter               $536.65
4-inch meter               $1,186.50
6-inch meter               $2,374.95
* The city may utilize available tax increment financing to “buy down” the
rates billed to customers. The city will analyze available tax increment
financing funds available annually to determine the amount of credit afforded
to sewage works customers.
 
(1998 Code, § 9-88) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991; Ord. 850-2014, passed 10-27-
2014)
§ 51.099 UN-METERED USERS.
   The minimum charge for domestic sewage service where the user is not a
metered water consumer is $56.40 per single family equivalent dwelling unit.
(1998 Code, § 9-89) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991; Ord. 850-2014, passed 10-27-
2014)
§ 51.100 JUNE, JULY AND AUGUST RATES.
   (A)   In order that domestic and residential users of sewage services shall
not be penalized for the sprinkling of lawns during the months of June, July
and August, the billing for sewage services for residences and/or domestic
users for the months of June, July and August shall be based on the water usage
for the previous months of December, January and February.
   (B)   In the event the water usage for the previous months of December,
January and February is greater than the water usage for the months of June,
July and August, then the billing for sewage service shall be computed on the
actual water used in the month for which the sewage service bill is being
rendered.
   (C)   Domestic and/or residential sewage service, as applicable to the
sprinkling rate, shall apply to each lot, parcel or real estate or building
which is occupied and used as a residence.
   (D)   The sprinkling rate shall not apply to any premises which are
partially or wholly used for industrial or commercial purposes. In the event a
portion of the premises shall be used for commercial or industrial purposes,
the owner shall have the privilege of separating the water service so that the
residential portion of the premises is served through a separate meter, and in
that case, the water usage as registered by the water meter servicing the
portion of the premises used for residential purposes would qualify under the
sprinkling rate.
(1998 Code, § 9-90) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 51.101 MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL LOTS WITH SINGLE WATER METER.
   In the event two or more residential lots, parcels of real estate or
buildings discharging sanitary sewage, water or other liquids into the city's
sanitary sewer system, either directly or indirectly, are users of water and
the quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then in each case,
for billing purposes, the quantity of water used shall be averaged for each
user and the minimum charge and the sewage rates and charges shall apply to
each of the number of residential lots, parcels of real estate or buildings
served through the single water meter.
(1998 Code, § 9-91) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 51.102 MULTIPLE UNITS; COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL WITH SINGLE METER.
   (A)   In the event two or more dwelling or business units such as trailers,
offices, apartments, housekeeping rooms and the like, discharging sanitary
sewage, water or other liquids into the city's sanitary sewer system, either
directly or indirectly, are users of water and the quantity of water is
measured by a single water meter, then in that case, billing shall be for a
single service in the manner set out elsewhere herein, except that the minimum
charge shall not be less than the number of dwelling units times the minimum
charge per month for a five-eighths-inch to three-fourths-inch meter size.
   (B)   In the case of trailer parks, the number of dwelling units shall be
computed and interpreted as the total number of trailers located and installed
in the park plus any other dwelling units served through the meter.
   (C)   A DWELLING UNIT shall be interpreted as a room or rooms or any other
space or spaces in which cooking facilities are provided.
   (D)   A business unit shall be interpreted to mean any separately
distinguishable commercial enterprise.
(1998 Code, § 9-92) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 51.103 SEWAGE WORKS CONNECTION CHARGES.
   The owner of each lot or parcel of real estate connecting to the sewage
works shall pay the following connection charge in cash prior to connecting to
the sewage works, which connection charge shall be based upon the customer's
water meter size:
Water Meter Size Sewage Works Connection Charge
Water Meter Size     Sewage Works Connection Charge
5/8-inch to 3/4-inch $350
1-inch               $560
1-1/4-inch           $700
1-1/2-inch           $840
2-inch               $1,120
3-inch               $1,680
4-inch               $2,240
 
(1998 Code, § 9-93) (Ord. 523, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 51.104 LIMITED CASE BY CASE BASIS CHARGES.
   If any lot or parcel of real estate being connected to the sewage works is
not connected to the city's water works and does not have a water meter, the
sewage works connection charge shall be established on a case by case basis by
the City Board of Public Works.
(1998 Code, § 9-94) (Ord. 523, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 51.105 OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS; USERS.
   Any user connected to the sewage works, and located outside the corporate
limits of the city, shall pay rates and charges in an amount equal to rates and
charges set forth for a user located within the corporate limits of the city.
(1998 Code, § 9-95) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 51.106 LIMITED EXEMPTIONS REGARDING MANUFACTURING USERS.
   Water which is used in process of manufacture or for any other purpose which
does not discharge to the sanitary sewers shall be exempted, provided, however,
that the property owner shall install the necessary meters to indicate the
amount of water which does not discharge into the sanitary sewers, all subject
to the approval of the city.
(1998 Code, § 9-96) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 51.107 WHEN SEWAGE USER IS NOT A WATER USER.
   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building discharging sanitary
sewage, water or other liquids into the sanitary sewage system of the city,
either directly or indirectly, is not a user of water obtained from the public
water supply, and the water used thereon or therein is not measured by a meter
acceptable to the city, then the amount of water used may be otherwise measured
or determined by the city in order to determine the rate or charge provided for
in this chapter, or the owner or other interested parry, at his or her expense,
may install and maintain a meter acceptable to the city for that purpose.
(1998 Code, § 9-97) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 51.108 MEASUREMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building discharges sewage in
the form of industrial waste, either directly or indirectly, into the city's
sanitary sewerage system, and the city finds it not practicable to attempt to
measure the wastes by meter, it shall measure the same in a manner and by the
method as it may find practicable in the light of the conditions and attendant
circumstances of the case in order to determine the rate or charge according to
the corresponding rates in this chapter, all subject to the approval of the
city.
(1998 Code, § 9-98) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 51.109 VOLUME, STRENGTH, CONTENT AND CHARACTER OF DISCHARGE.
   (A)   In order that the rates and charges may be justly and equitably
adjusted to the service rendered, the city shall have the right to base its
charges not only on volume but also on the strength, content and character of
the sewage and wastes which it is required to treat and dispose of.
   (B)   The city shall have the right to measure and determine the strength
and content of all sewage and wastes discharged, either directly or indirectly,
into the city's sanitary sewage system, in a manner and by the method as it may
find practicable, in the light of the conditions and attending circumstances of
the case, in order to determine proper charge.
(1998 Code, § 9-99) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 51.110 CHARGES TO THE CITY.
   For the services rendered to the city, the city shall be subject to the same
rates and charges hereinabove provided for, or to charges and rates established
in harmony therewith.
(1998 Code, § 9-100) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 51.111 RENTAL BUSINESSES.
   (A)   The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant or tenants occupying
the properties services, unless otherwise requested in writing by the owners,
but the billing shall in no way relieve the owner from liability in the event
payment is not made as herein required.
   (B)   The owners of properties served, which are occupied by tenants, shall
have the right to examine the collection records of the city for the purpose of
determining whether the rates and charges have been paid by the tenants,
provided the examination shall be made at the office at which the records are
kept and during the hours that the office is open for business.
(1998 Code, § 9-101) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 51.112 LIMITED ADJUSTMENTS.
   Where a metered water supply is used for fire protection as well as for
other uses, the city may, in its discretion, make adjustments in the minimum
charge and in the use charge as may be equitable.
(1998 Code, § 9-102) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 51.113 MONTHLY BILLINGS; DELINQUENT PENALTY.
   (A)   The rates and charges shall be billed monthly.
   (B)   All rates and charges not paid by the fifteenth day following the
billing date are hereby declared to be delinquent and a penalty of 10% of the
amount of the rates or charges outstanding shall be charged and shall become a
part of the bill.
   (C)   Notwithstanding division (B), for utility payments due on April 15,
2020, the city shall not collect any delinquency penalty.
(1998 Code, § 9-103) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991; Ord. 836-2013, passed 6-24-
2013; Ord. 850-2014, passed 10-27-2014; Ord. 942-2020, passed 5-11-2020)
§ 51.114 EFFECTIVE DATE ON RATES AND CHARGES.
   The rates and charges fixed by this chapter shall be effective for service
beginning the first month following adoption of this chapter and all ordinances
in conflict herewith are repealed as of that date.
(1998 Code, § 9-104) (Ord. 500, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 51.115 SURCHARGES ON INDUSTRIAL USERS.
   (A)   The following surcharges are hereby imposed:
      (1)   $0.50/lb that exceeds BOD of 230 mg/l.
      (2)   $0.50/lb that exceeds TSS of 230 mg/l.
      (3)   $0.60/lb that exceeds ammonia-nitrogen of 25 mg/l.
      (4)   $1.50/lb that exceeds phosphorous of 1 mg/l.
   (B)   A surcharge will be imposed for every day that the limits are violated
for any pollutant listed hereinabove.
   (C)   The calculation of each surcharge amount will be as follows, using BOD
as an example:
 
Facility flow in million gallons per day (0.025 x 8.34 lb/gallon x amount
exceeding the limit of 230 (if BOD is 280 the mg/l that is to be surcharged is
50 mg/l) x $0.50/lb
0.025 x 8.34 x 50 x $0.50 = $5.21 per day per violation
 
(Ord. 818-2012, passed 8-24-2012)
§ 51.116 STORM WATER RATES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU). The amount of impervious area included
upon an average residential property. An impervious area refers to those
surface areas of residential and non-residential properties which water will
not penetrate and from which storm water runoff will be produced.
      LARGE INDUSTRIAL. All properties not encompassed within the definition of
residential, non-residential class I, and non-residential class II, that are
assigned 500,000 or greater square feet of impervious area.
      NON-RESIDENTIAL CLASS I. All properties not encompassed within the
definition of residential property, including but not limited to: multi-family,
commercial, industrial, governmental, educational and churches that are
assigned zero to 124,999 square feet of impervious area.
      NON-RESIDENTIAL CLASS II. All properties not encompassed within the
definition of residential and non-residential class I property, including but
not limited to: multi-family, commercial, industrial, governmental, educational
and churches that are assigned 125,000 to 499,999 square feet of impervious
area.
      RESIDENTIAL shall mean any lot or parcel existing in the city on which a
single building or mobile home is situated; containing up to and including four
dwelling units on a single water meter.
   (B)   Monthly fee. The initial monthly fee is to be paid by each user and
shall be paid according to the following schedule effective July 1, 2013.
 
Type of Property           ERU  Monthly Charge
Residential                1.0  $5.65
Non-Residential - Class I  2.0  $11.30
Non-Residential - Class II 5.0  $28.25
Large Industrial           10.0 $56.50
 
   (C)   Creation of Storm Water Revenue Fund. Rates and charges incurred under
this section shall be prepared and collected by the city in accordance with
those provisions regulating the preparation and issuance of bills for sewer
service generally. The monies collected under this section shall be deposited
in the Storm Water Revenue Fund hereby created.
   (D)   All rates and charges not paid by the fifteenth day following the
billing date are hereby declared to be delinquent and a penalty of 10% of the
amount of the rates or charges outstanding shall be charged and shall become a
part of the bill.
   (E)   Notwithstanding division (D), for utility payments due on April 15,
2020, the city shall not collect any delinquency penalty.
(Ord. 834-2013, passed 5-13-2013; Ord. 837-2013, passed 6-24-2013; Ord. 941-
2020, passed 5-11-2020)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter commits an ordinance
violation.
   (B)   Upon judgment being entered against that person for the violation,
that person shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500 per each separate
and distinct violation plus applicable court costs.
   (C)   Each day a violation of this chapter continues shall be considered a
separate and distinct violation of the ordinance for purposes of the assessment
of a penalty.
(1998 Code, § 9-76) (Ord. 539, passed 3-14-1994)
APPENDIX A: FORM OF SEWER TAP PERMIT
Sewer Tap Permit for Residential, Commercial or Industrial Users
Name of Resident or Business ________________________________________________
Address ________________________________________________
Date of Application_____/___________/______________
Purposed Date of Connection ________/__________/__________
Tap for Residents: ________ Commercial: ____________ Industrial: ____________
1.    Distance from Building to Sewer ____ (Ft)
2.    Name of Street or Location of Alley Where Tap is to Be Made
________________________
3.    Distance from Tap to Nearest Manhole _____ (Ft)
4.    Name of Person(s) or Contractor Making Tap
_______________________________________
   Note: A Drawing Showing the Information Listed on Lines 1, 2, and 3 Must
Accompany This Application.
Inspection Date: _____/______/______      Inspection Passed: YES   NO
Reason for Failing Inspection:
__________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
Date to Be Reinspected: _____/______/ ________
   Note: A $20.00 Reinspection Fee will Be Charged for Every Additional
Inspection.
Sewer Tap Permit for Residential, Commercial or Industrial Users.
Sewer Tap Fees are Based on Water Meter Size (Circle One)
Meter Size Tap Fee   Tap Fee
5/8-inch-3/4-inch................................................$350.00
1-inch.................................................................$560.00
1-1/4-inch...........................................................$700.00
1-1/2-inch...........................................................$840.00
2-inch..............................................................$1,120.00
3-inch..............................................................$1,680.00
4-inch..............................................................$2,240.00
Enter Amount of Tap Fee $______
Enter Amount of Inspection Fee $______
(Residential and Commercial Inspection Fee $25.00 Industrial Inspection Fee are
$50.00)
Enter Total Amount $____
Tap Fee Collected By: ____________________________________________
Permit Approved by (W.W.T.P.)_____Date_____/______/________
Water Works Superintendent_____________   Date______ /______/_________
Reinspection Fee $_____      Collected By: __________________________
In Consideration of the Granting of this Permit I, the Undersigned Agree:
(Sign)______________________      Date_____/_____/________
   (A)   TO ACCEPT AND ABIDE BY ALL PROVISIONS of THE CITY of LIGONIER
ORDINANCE NO. 539, AND ALL OTHER PERTINENT ORDINANCES OR REGULATIONS THAT MAY
BE ADOPTED IN THE FUTURE.
   (B)   TO INSTALL AND MAINTAIN THE BUILDING SEWER AT NO EXPENSE TO THE CITY
OF LIGONIER.
   (C)   TO NOTIFY THE SUPERINTENDENT WHEN THE BUILDING SEWER IS READY for
INSPECTION AND CONNECTION TO THE PUBLIC SEWER, BUT BEFORE ANY PORTION OF THE
WORK IS COVERED.
(1998 Code, § 9-105)
CHAPTER 52: WATERWORKS; RATES AND CHARGES
Section
   
52.01   Minimum waterworks charges
   
52.02   Effective date of charges
   
52.03   Refunds
   
52.04   Billing cycle
   
52.05   Rents and payments
   
52.06   Tapping fees; residential
   
52.07   Tapping fees; commercial/industrial
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 MINIMUM WATERWORKS CHARGES.
   (A)   Rates and charges. There is established for use of water supplied by
the waterworks system of the city, and for services rendered by the Waterworks
Department, the following rates and charges:
 
Consumption Per Month     Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet
First 1,333.33 cubic feet $6.05
Next 1,333.33 cubic feet  $4.81
Next 1,777.73 cubic feet  $4.18
Next 17,777.73 cubic feet $3.37
Over 22,222.12 cubic feet $2.97
 
   (B)   Monthly minimum charge.
 
Size of Meter Minimum Cubic Feet Allowed Minimum Monthly Charge
5/8-inch      400                        $24.20
3/4-inch      600                        $36.30
1-inch        1,000                      $60.50
1-1/2-inch    2,000                      $112.73
 
 
Size of Meter Minimum Cubic Feet Allowed Minimum Monthly Charge
2-inch        3,200                      $167.09
3-inch        6,000                      $271.53
4-inch        10,000                     $406.33
6-inch        20,000                     $743.33
 
   (C)   Fire protection services.
 
Private hydrants; each per annum $556.34
 
Private Fire Protection Per Annum
2-inch connection       $93.89
4-inch connection       $375.06
6-inch connection       $843.10
8-inch connection       $1,496.50
10-inch connection      $2,340.53
 
 
Public Fire Protection Surcharge Monthly Surcharge
5/8-inch - 3/4-inch meter        $3.83
1-inch meter                     $9.57
1-1/2-inch meter                 $19.14
2-inch meter                     $30.63
3-inch meter                     $57.43
4-inch meter                     $95.71
 
   (D)   Non-recurring charges.
 
Tap fees 5/8-inch to 3/4-inch $1,200
1 inch and larger             Cost, but not less than tap fees for 5/8-inch to
                              3/4-inch
Reconnect charges             $30
Meter check for accuracy      $50
All rates and charges not paid by the fifteenth day following the billing date
are hereby declared to be delinquent and a penalty of 10% of the amount of the
rates and charges outstanding shall be charged and shall become a part of the
bill.
 
(1998 Code, § 9-110) (Ord. 576, passed 12-23-1996; Ord. 672, passed 2-24-2003;
Ord. 767-2010, passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 835-2013, passed 5-13-2013; Ord. 838-
2013, passed 6-24-2013; Ord. 905-2017, passed 8-14-2017; Ord. 940-2020, passed
5-11-2020; Ord. 973-2022, passed 6-27-2022)
§ 52.02 EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHARGES.
   The charges set forth in §
52.01 above shall be in full force and effect from and after June 27, 2022.
(1998 Code, § 9-111) (Ord. 576, passed 12-23-1996; Ord. 767-2010, passed 11-22-
2010; Ord. 835-2013, passed 5-13-2013; Ord. 973-2022, passed 6-27-2022)
§ 52.03 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Any deposit made by the applicant, customer or any other person to the
utility, or any sum which the utility is ordered to refund for utility service,
which has remained unclaimed for seven years after the utility has made
diligent efforts to locate the person who made the deposit or the heirs of
those persons, shall be presumed abandoned and treated in accordance with the
laws of this state which currently are I.C. 32-34-1 et seq., Ind. Ann. Stat. §
51-706, Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act (Acts 1967, ch. 253, § 1,
p. 659).
   (B)   A deposit may be used by the utility to cover any unpaid balance
following disconnection of service, provided, however that any surplus be
returned to the customer as provided above.
   (C)   Non-recurring charges:
      (1)   Reconnect charge: $25; and
      (2)   Meter check for accuracy: $20
(1998 Code, § 9-114) (Ord. 738, passed 10-27-2008)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 32-34-1 was repealed by P.L. 141-2021, Sec. 19.
§ 52.04 BILLING CYCLE.
Water Used the Month of Is Read in Month of Is Billed in Month of
Water Used the Month of Is Read in Month of Is Billed in Month of
December                January             February
January                 February            March
February                March               April
March                   April               May
April                   May                 June
May                     June                July
June                    July                August
July                    August              September
August                  September           October
September               October             November
October                 November            December
November                December            January
 
(1998 Code, § 9-115)
§ 52.05 RENTS AND PAYMENTS.
   (A)   Rents are to be paid at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer within
20 days and unless the same are paid within that time, a deferred payment
charge penalty of 10% will be added thereto.
   (B)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall deliver to each party paying rent a
receipt therefor. The Board however, if in its opinion deems best to protect
the interests of the city, may cause the water employees to shut off the water
from any parties not complying with the rules and regulations. The City Clerk-
Treasurer is instructed to furnish the Board a list of all premises upon which
the water tax remains unpaid 30 days after the commencement of the terms for
which it is due; and the Board shall instruct the water employees at once to
turn off the supply from the premises and should the owner thereof desire the
same again turned on, an extra charge of $20 shall be made for the service. No
partial payments shall be accepted unless permitted by the Water Board. All
charges for the use of water shall be the responsibility of the real estate
owner for which the water is furnished.
   (C)   All charges for the use of water shall be made to the owner of the
real estate upon which water service is furnished. If the property is for
rental purposes, then the renter shall submit a "Renter's Application for Water
Services" form. The form may be obtained from the City Clerk-Treasurer's
office, filled out by the renter and then returned back to the City Clerk-
Treasurer's office.
   (D)   Disconnection of water service for nonpayment of a bill will be done
in accordance with §
54.02(D).
   (E)   All persons digging on city, state or private property shall contact
the Underground Plan Protection Services Inc., at 1-800-382-5544 at least 48
hours before digging. Anyone digging without proper notice will be liable for
any and all damages and fines caused by the affected utilities.
(1998 Code, § 9-116)
§ 52.06 TAPPING FEES; RESIDENTIAL.
   The city shall tap the distribution pipes or insert connections therein and
furnish the tap, pipes to the curb cocks, and curb cocks and make connections
to the curb line for a charge of $491.90, to be paid for in cash upon
completion of work, and no other terms unless by special permit by the Water
Board. Owner shall provide an open trench for the Water Department to make
necessary taps from the main to the curb cock; $25 will be charged as a fee for
turning on water again, and under no circumstances will the owner or tenant of
adjacent property be allowed to open or shut off this curb cock. If owner
requests a larger than 3/4-inch tap, owner shall pay for the additional parts
and labor required.
(1998 Code, § 9-117)
§ 52.07 TAPPING FEES; COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL.
   The city shall tap the distribution pipes or insert connections therein and
furnish the tap, pipes to the curb cocks, and curb cocks and make connections
to the curb line for a charge of city time and materials in an amount not less
than $491.90, to be paid for in cash upon completion of work, and no other
terms unless by special permit by the Water Board. Owner shall provide an open
trench for the Water Department to make necessary taps from the main to the
curb cock; $25 will be charged as a fee for turning on water again, and under
no circumstances will the owner or tenant of adjacent property be allowed to
open or shut off this curb cock. If owner requests a tap larger than three-
fourths-inch, owner shall pay for the additional parts and labor required.
(1998 Code, § 9-118) (Ord. 581, passed - -1997)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It is declared unlawful for any person or corporation to violate any
of the foregoing sections or provisions.
   (B)   The consequence of the violation of the preceding rules will be, in
the discretion of the Common Council, the stoppage of the supply of water
without any preliminary notice; and it will not be restored except upon the
payment of all arrearages and damages, and upon satisfactory understanding with
the party offending, that no future cause for complaint shall arise.
   (C)   The Common Council may direct the City Attorney to bring an action for
any water rent due, and in that case the delinquent shall pay as a penalty, in
addition to the sum due, a reasonable attorney's fee to the City Attorney,
which shall be included in the judgment.
   (D)   Any person, persons or corporations who shall violate any of the
foregoing sections of this chapter, or any of the provisions thereof, shall
upon conviction, in addition to the enforcement of the forfeitures,
liabilities, stipulations and reservations therein contained be fined in any
sum not less than $1, nor more than $500 for each offense.
(1998 Code, § 9-119)
CHAPTER 53: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Authority and responsibility
   
53.03   Effect of chapter as to other laws
   
53.04   Commercial and industrial hazards
   
53.05   Irrigation systems
   
53.06   Residential requirements
   
53.07   Fire service
   
53.08   Pre-existing facilities
   
53.09   Location
   
53.10   Uninterrupted services
   
53.11   Looped taps
   
53.12   Thermal expansion tanks
   
53.13   Inspection and testing; fees
   
53.14   Enforcement
Cross-Connection Control Program
   
53.25   Definition
   
53.26   Prohibition
   
53.27   Inspections
   
53.28   Reasonable request to enter; furnishing information to inspection
agency
   
53.29   Discontinuation of water service
   
53.30   Emergency discontinuation of water service
   
53.31   Hazardous materials
   
53.32   Installation of backflow preventers
   
53.33   Conflict of laws
   
53.34   Customer facilities requiring backflow prevention device
   
53.35   Safety of public water system
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR-GAP. An unobstructed vertical distance through atmosphere between the
discharge end of a pipeline supplied from a public water supply, and the
overflow rim of the receiving portion of the customer water system.
   COMMISSIONER. The executive and the chief administrative officer of the
Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical arrangement, including cross-connection
control devices not in working order, whereby a public water supply
distribution system is directly connected, either continuously or
intermittently, with any secondary source of supply, sewer, drain, conduit,
pool, piping, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which is
capable of imparting to the public water supply, contaminants, contaminated
water, sewage or other waste or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality.
   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL INSPECTOR. A person who has successfully completed
training in testing and inspection of cross-connection control devices at any
agency or school acceptable to the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Management.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. A device or assembly composed of two tightly
closing shut-off valves surrounding two independently acting check valves, with
four test cocks, one upstream of the four valves and one between each of the
four check and shut-off valves.
   DOWNSTREAM. The normal direction of water flow from the public supply to the
user. Upstream is that direction which is opposite of downstream.
   HAZARD. The danger of public water contamination caused by chemical,
bacteriological or other sources that may, under certain conditions such as
backflow, enter the public water supply system.
   POTABLE WATER. Water that is suitable for drinking as determined by the
requirements of the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 300f et
seq.
   PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER. An assembly containing an independently operating
internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air inlet
valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly is to be
equipped with properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut off valves
attached to each end of the assembly.
   PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. Consists of private wells or other private
water supplies which are normally entirely independent and not connected to the
public water supply.
   PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. Consists of the lateral fire and service line
to the user's premises starting at the tap on the public water supply system
and terminating at the point-of-usage; whether for fire-suppression, irrigation
or domestic usage.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. Consists of the water mains and appurtenances
such as fire hydrants and main valves used to distribute the potable water
supply to the public, and shall terminate at the tap for lateral service to the
users; the utility is the owner of the public water supply system.
   REDUCED PRESSURE BACKFLOW PREVENTER. A device which is composed of two
tightly closing shut-off valves surrounding two independently acting press
reducing check relief valves, and four test cocks, one upstream of the five
valves and one between each of four check and shut-off valves. The check valves
effectively divide the structure into three chambers; pressure is reduced in
each downstream chamber allowing the pressure differential relief valve to vent
the center chamber to atmosphere should either or both check valves
malfunction.
   USER. The water customer or public authority using potable municipal water.
   UTILITY. The City of Ligonier Water Works, a municipally owned utility.
(1998 Code, § 9-125) (Ord. 582, passed - -1996)
§ 53.02 AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Utility authorized.
      (1)   This chapter authorizes the utility to require certain backflow
prevention devices in private water supply systems to prevent backflow into the
public water supply system.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the user to install and maintain
the devices in conformance with this chapter and other rules and regulations
established by the state.
   (B)   Utility sole interpreter. The utility shall be the interpreter of this
chapter and the arbiter and judge as to whether such a backflow prevention
device is required. If such a backflow prevention device is required, the
utility shall determine the type and the location of the device. The utility
may order installation of the device by written notice to the user, under the
conditions defined.
   (C)   Areas of application, geographic location. Inasmuch as the utility
serves customers outside of the corporate limits of the city, this chapter
shall apply to all users, both urban and suburban.
   (D)   State Uniform Plumbing Code of Interface. This chapter supplements the
uniform Indiana Plumbing Code and shall not supersede the provisions of the
Plumbing Code.
   (E)   Check valve. In all cases where boilers, hot water tanks, cooling
towers or any such device which may cause higher pressure than that which is in
the main; shall have a state approved check valve/backflow prevention device
placed on the effluent side of the water meter. A list of approved check valves
shall be on file at the City Clerk-Treasurer's office.
   (F)   List of installers. The City Water Department will provide a list of
installers and materials if requested.
(1998 Code, § 9-126) (Ord. 582, passed - -1996)
§ 53.03 EFFECT OF CHAPTER AS TO OTHER LAWS.
   Where the requirements of this chapter are more specific than the state law
authorizing the enactment of these requirements, the provisions of the
ordinance shall apply, but under no circumstances shall this chapter be
construed to contradict existing state law regulating this matter.
(1998 Code, § 9-127) (Ord. 582, passed - -1996)
§ 53.04 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL HAZARDS.
   A reduced pressure backflow preventer device shall be required for the
following hazards:
   (A)   Manufacturers of automotive, aircraft, farm and similar equipment;
   (B)   Canneries, packing, bottling and similar plants;
   (C)   Laundries, car washes, dry cleaners and similar facilities;
   (D)   Mortuaries, laboratories, hospitals and medical facilities;
   (E)   Plating, metal, plastic and paper product plants;
   (F)   Producers of chemicals, fertilizers, rubber, oil, drugs, dyes and
other similar products;
   (G)   Swimming pools, saunas and solar heat systems;
   (H)   Any private auxiliary water supply connected to the public supply;
   (I)   Sewage treatment, recyclers and similar facilities;
   (J)   Any facility using a booster pump to amplify the pressure of water
provided by the utility;
   (K)   Schools with any of the above hazardous activities; and
   (L)   Any other commercial or industrial facility that is deemed by the
utility to pose a contamination hazard.
(1998 Code, § 9-128) (Ord. 586, passed - -1996)
§ 53.05 IRRIGATION SYSTEMS.
   A reduced pressure backflow preventer, an air-gap or an approved pressure
type vacuum-breaker device shall be required for the following hazards:
   (A)   Lawn-irrigation systems;
   (B)   Similar lawn-care systems; and
   (C)   Garden hose spigots placed below lawn grade.
(1998 Code, § 9-129) (Ord. 582, passed - -1996)
§ 53.06 RESIDENTIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   A reduced pressure backflow preventer shall be required for the following
hazards:
   (A)   Residents with hot water heat (boilers); the boilers should have, as
per the State Plumbing Code, an expansion tank and or safety valves to prevent
expansion problems; and
   (B)   Any residence with a private auxiliary water supply connected to the
public supply through the user's private water supply system.
(1998 Code, § 9-130) (Ord. 582, passed - -1996)
§ 53.07 FIRE SERVICE.
   (A)   No hazardous line shall be attached to any fire hydrant or other fire
service line without an approved backflow prevention device. Permanent fire
service lines shall incorporate a double check valve assembly in 100% water
systems or a reduced pressure backflow preventer in chemical systems.
   (B)   Where domestic service is tapped into a fire line, the domestic tap
shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 9-131) (Ord. 582, passed - -1996)
§ 53.08 PRE-EXISTING FACILITIES.
   (A)   (1)   In general, pre-existing backflow preventers will not be allowed
simply because they were approved before the enactment of this chapter.
      (2)   The utility will review the operation and hazard of each facility
with backflow preventers and determine acceptability based on operability and
present hazard.
      (3)   If the backflow preventers are found unacceptable, they shall be
replaced with a backflow prevention device in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   Pre-existing facilities that have no backflow prevention device and
where there is a definite present hazard shall be required to install an
appropriate device, regardless of whether their plumbing system was previously
approved by the city.
(1998 Code, § 9-132) (Ord. 582, passed - -1996)
§ 53.09 LOCATION.
   (A)   The backflow prevention device shall be located immediately downstream
of the water meter and shall not be bypassed by any means.
   (B)   There shall be no taps upstream of the backflow prevention devices on
the user's premises other than at this required location shall not negate the
requirement at this location.
   (C)   Exact installation alignment and elevation requirements shall be
determined by reference to 327 I.A.C. 8-10-7 and other applicable state law
regulations.
(1998 Code, § 9-133) (Ord. 582, passed - -1996)
§ 53.10 UNINTERRUPTED SERVICES.
   Users needing continuous service that cannot be interrupted for testing the
backflow prevention device shall install dual devices in parallel so that they
can be checked separately.
(1998 Code, § 9-134) (Ord. 582, passed - -1996)
§ 53.11 LOOPED TAPS.
   (A)   Heat exchange loops, intentionally returning water to the public
supply, shall not be allowed.
   (B)   Any other loop or set of taps into a private water system allowing
water to return to the public systems shall require appropriate backflow
prevention devices on all taps.
(1998 Code, § 9-135) (Ord. 582, passed - -1996)
§ 53.12 THERMAL EXPANSION TANKS.
   (A)   All closed looped systems with a water heater or boiler system shall
include a thermal expansion tank. The tank shall be located on the downstream
side of the heating unit. Expansion tanks shall be installed in accordance with
state plumbing codes. Units shall not have a capacity less than the following.
 
Existing Water Heater Size  Supply Pressure (PSIG) Expansion Tank Capacity
(Gallons)                                          (Gallons)
0-20                        0-60                   2.0
30-120                      0-80                   4.0
30-120                      0-100                  10.0
 
   (B)   For larger capacity units, consult manufacture listed rating.
(1998 Code, § 9-136) (Ord. 582, passed - -1996)
§ 53.13 INSPECTION AND TESTING; FEES.
   (A)   Any water user or owner of a private water supply system shall allow
access to his, her or its facilities for inspection of their system and for
testing of any backflow prevention device.
   (B)   If access for inspection is denied on the basis of government security
or any other reason, a maximum hazard shall be assumed requiring a reduced
pressure backflow prevention device.
   (C)   The user is required to maintain the backflow prevention devices and
shall have them inspected and tested at six- or 12-month intervals in
accordance with 327 I.A.C. § 8-10-8 by a certified inspector, who shall report
the results to the utility and to the user. The inspection shall be at the
expense of the user.
   (D)   All water users shall have their facility inspected by a certified
inspector provided by the utility. The utility fee for inspection and testing
is $50 for one and one-half inch or smaller device and $75 for two-inch and
larger device.
   (E)   The user shall retain records of all testing, repair and approval of
backflow prevention devices for a three-year period. The utility is required to
retain all records of testing and repair of the devices.
(1998 Code, § 9-137) (Ord. 582, passed - -1996)
§ 53.14 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Non-compliance to any of the terms stated in this chapter will result
in the following escalating enforcement procedures:
      (1)   A 30-day written notice will be sent by certified mail to the user
stating the specific violation, the recommended action, the time by which the
violation must be cured, and the penalty for failing to cure the violation. The
notice also will inform the user of this right to administrative review of the
specific alleged violation;
      (2)   A ten-day final written notice by certified mail will be sent
stating the specific violation, the recommended action, the time by which the
violation must be cured, and the penalty to be imposed (discontinued service)
if the violation is not cured;
      (3)   When the user has been provided with both required notices of non-
compliance and fails to cure the same as provided in the written notice,
service to the user will be discontinued; and
      (4)   Discontinued service will consist of closing the control valve to
the user's system, and the user will incur the standard monetary penalties for
delinquent shut-off. The utility will not restore service to the user until the
utility has determined that the user is in compliance with the provision of
this chapter.
   (B)   In the event that inspection of the use's premises or other compelling
evidence shows an immediate hazard of public water supply contamination, the
utility is authorized to discontinue service to that user without prior notice.
Written notice shall be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer's Office and the County
Health Department and a copy given to the user within three days of the
emergency action.
(1998 Code, § 9-138) (Ord. 582, passed - -1996)
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM
§ 53.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the city
water system, and the other, water from a private source, water of unknown or
questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow
from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure
differential between the two systems.
(Ord. 990-2023, passed 6-26-2023)
§ 53.26 PROHIBITIONS.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be established,
maintain, or permit to be maintained any cross-connection. No interconnection
shall be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary, or
emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the City
may enter the supply or distribution system of the city, unless such private,
auxiliary, or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of
such supply shall have been approved by the City Water Department and by the
Indiana Department of Environmental Management in accordance with 327 IAC 8-10.
(Ord. 990-2023, passed 6-26-2023)
§ 53.27 INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the City Water Department to cause inspections to be
made of all properties served by the public water system where cross-
connections with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of
inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall
be established by the City Department.
(Ord. 990-2023, passed 6-26-2023)
§ 53.28 REASONABLE REQUEST TO ENTER; FURNISHING INFORMATION TO INSPECTION
AGENCY.
   Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the City Water
Department shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to
examine the property served by a connection to the public water system of the
city for cross-connections. On request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of any
property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent
information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The
refusal of access or a refusal of requested pertinent information shall be
deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connections.
(Ord. 990-2023, passed 6-26-2023)
§ 53.29 DISCONTINUATION OF WATER SERVICE.
   The City Water Department is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue
water service to any property wherein the owner, lessee, or occupant of any
property refuses to allow a representative of the City Water Department access
to such property or upon which any connection in violation of this subchapter,
and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any
danger of contamination of the public water system. Water service shall be
discontinued only after reasonable notice is served to the owner, lessee, or
occupants of the property or premises where a violation is found or suspected
to exist. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross-
connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 990-2023, passed 6-26-2023)
§ 53.30 EMERGENCY DISCONTINUATION OF WATER SERVICE.
   If it is deemed by the City Department that a cross-connection or an
emergency endangers public health, safety, or welfare and requires immediate
action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the City Clerk and
delivered to the consumer’s premises, service may be immediately discontinued.
The consumer shall have an opportunity for hearing within ten days of such
emergency discontinuance.
(Ord. 990-2023, passed 6-26-2023)
§ 53.31 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   All consumers using toxic or hazardous liquids, all hospitals, mortuaries,
wastewater treatment plants, laboratories, and all other hazardous users, or
users identified in §
53.34, shall install and maintain a reduced pressure principal backflow
preventer in the main water line serving each building on the premises. The
backflow preventer must be installed in an easily accessible location not
subject to flooding or freezing.
(Ord. 990-2023, passed 6-26-2023)
§ 53.32 INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTERS.
   The reduced pressure principal backflow preventers shall not be installed
below ground level.
(Ord. 990-2023, passed 6-26-2023)
§ 53.33 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   This subchapter does not supersede the Indiana Plumbing Code, the IDEM Rule
327 IAC 8-10 or any city plumbing ordinance but is supplementary to them.
(Ord. 990-2023, passed 6-26-2023)
§ 53.34 CUSTOMER FACILITIES REQUIRING BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.
   In addition to IDEM Rule 327 IAC 8-10-4(c), the following customer
facilities need a backflow prevention device:
   (A)   Industrial customers;
   (B)   Commercial customers.
(Ord. 990-2023, passed 6-26-2023)
§ 53.35 SAFETY OF PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM.
   If, in the judgment of the Superintendent of Water, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water system, the
Superintendent of Water will give notice to the water consumer to install such
an approved device immediately. The water consumer shall, at his or her own
expenses, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner
approved by the Superintendent of Water and shall have inspections and tests
made of such approved devices as required by the Superintendent of Water and in
accordance with the IDEM Rule 327 IAC 8-10.
(Ord. 990-2023, passed 6-26-2023)
CHAPTER 54: WATER UTILITY DEPARTMENT
Section
   
54.01   General regulations
   
54.02   Disconnection of service; prohibited disconnection; reconnection
   
54.03   Customer request for meter test
   
54.04   Periodic inspections and tests
   
54.05   Accuracy of meters
   
54.06   Meter services
   
54.07   Forms
§ 54.01 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No person, company or corporation, unless duly authorized by the
Water Board, shall, except in the time of fire, take water from any public
hydrant, or remove the cover from any hydrant, or place or deposit any earth or
material on or around any hydrant or in, on or around the box or appendage
thereto, or turn any public stop cock, or commit any act injuring or tending to
obstruct the use thereof, or injure in any manner any building, machinery,
apparatus, pipe or fixture of the water works.
      (2)   If fire hydrants are placed on public or private grounds by
companies or individuals, the use of the same, except in the case of fire, is
prohibited. Payments of $113.88 per private hydrant shall be charged yearly.
   (B)   A backflow preventer shall be used on all fire hydrants that are being
used for purposes other than fighting a fire.
   (C)   Anyone requesting use of a fire hydrant shall obtain a City Waterworks
Hydrant Usage Report from the City Clerk's office.
   (D)   Anyone taking water from fire hydrants without city authorization
shall be subject to a fine up to $500 per instance.
   (E)   Persons taking water must keep their service connection pipes and all
fixtures connected therewith, in good repair and protected from frost, at his
or her own expense.
   (F)   Persons taking water shall prevent all unnecessary waste of water by
repairing leaking pipes, valves and fixtures.
   (G)   No addition to, or alteration whatsoever of any tap, pipe, water cock
or other fixtures shall be made or caused to be made by persons taking water,
except through a duly licensed plumber and a permit first obtained from the
City Clerk-Treasurer.
   (H)   Plumbers must have a state license.
   (I)   The members of the Water Board, Water Department employees and
department head shall have free access at all reasonable hours of the day to
all parts of the premises to which water is supplied, to make necessary
examinations.
   (J)   All private fountains shall not be used longer than ten hours per day,
and not earlier than 6:00 a.m. nor after 10:00 p.m., during the summer season,
unless specially permitted, and the right is reserved to suspend their use
whenever the public exigency may require it. Fountains or private hose(s) shall
not be used in time of fire, except the use of the hose for protection from
fire. All persons using fountains are required to immediately shut off the
water upon an alarm of fire.
   (K)   The Water Board reserves the right to limit the use of the water for
the sprinkling or watering of alleys, streets, lawns and other places at any
and all times when the supply of water is deemed by the Board insufficient for
those purposes.
      (1)   In the event the Board shall at any time deem the supply of water
insufficient for the purpose of sprinkling or watering of alleys, streets,
lawns, gardens or other places, it shall at a regular or special meeting of the
Board enter a finding to that effect and prescribe the manner in which the
water may be used for either of any like purposes, if at all, and shall
immediately thereafter cause notice of the finding and the rules prescribed for
the use of water, to be published one time in the local newspapers published in
the city.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation, who shall after the entering of
the finding by the Board and the service of the notice, upon him or her either
in person or by the publication thereof as hereinabove provided use the water
in violation of the finding and notice, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction shall be fined in any sum not less than $1 or
more than $100 for each and every offense so committed.
   (L)   Feed pumps for supplying water to steam boilers will not be permitted
to take water directly from the service pipe but must draw from a suitable
receptacle into which water has been previously discharged, and any parties
using water to supply steam boilers are cautioned against collapse or damage
that may be caused by the whole or partial stoppage of the water. The city will
not be liable or responsible for any accident or damage to which boilers, gas
engines, pipes, fixtures and all other apparatus are subject.
   (M)   House boilers for domestic use must in all cases be provided with
necessary valves and apparatus to prevent collapsing when the water is cut off
from the distributing pipes, and the city will in no case be liable or
responsible for any accident or damage resulting from imperfect action of any
such valves or apparatus.
   (N)   No plumber, finding the water cut off at the curb of any premises,
shall turn on or off the water until he or she shall first have obtained
approval from the City Water Department.
   (O)   No person or persons shall in any manner obstruct the access to any
stop cock connected with any water pipe within any street or alley or place in
the city by means of any lumber, building material, fencing, buildings or other
articles or hindrances whatsoever.
   (P)   When a person builds a new sidewalk or raises an old one to a higher
grade, care must be taken to keep the stop-box cover above the ground in plain
sight. If same cannot be done with old cover, report same to City Clerk-
Treasurer who will notify waterworks employees.
   (Q)   When an alarm of fire is given, all hydrants not supplying the fire
must be immediately closed; street sprinklers are prohibited from taking water;
elevators and motors run by city water must be stopped. All water takers at
that time are expected to use no water, except when absolutely necessary.
   (R)   It is expressly understood that the city reserves the right at any
time to shut off the water in their mains, for the purpose of repairing, making
connections, extensions or for the purpose of cleaning same, and to make
further rules and regulations as may be necessary for the preservation and
protection of their works.
   (S)   The city requires 48-hour notice prior to making water taps.
(1998 Code, § 9-145) (Ord. 584, passed - -1996) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.02 DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE; PROHIBITED DISCONNECTION; RECONNECTION.
   (A)   Disconnection of service.
      (1)   Upon customer's request.
         (a)   The customer shall notify the utility at least three days in
advance of the day disconnection is desired.
         (b)   The customer shall remain responsible for all service used and
the billings therefor until service is disconnected pursuant to the notice.
         (c)   The customer shall not be liable for any service rendered to the
address or location after the expiration of these three days.
      (2)   Repair of main customer shut off valve. If the owner is repairing
or replacing his or her main shut off valve, no fee shall be assessed.
      (3)   Any other disconnects; fee. Any other disconnects shall be assessed
a total fee of $25 for turn-off and turn-on.
   (B)   Without customer's request.
      (1)   A utility may disconnect service without request by the customer
and without prior notice only:
         (a)   If a condition dangerous or hazardous to life, physical safety
or property exists;
         (b)   Upon order by any court, or other duly authorized public
authority;
         (c)   If fraudulent or unauthorized use of water is detected, and the
utility has reasonable grounds to believe the affected customer is responsible
for the use; or
         (d)   If the utility's regulating or measuring equipment has been
tampered with and the utility has reasonable grounds to believe that the
affected customer is responsible for the tampering.
      (2)   In all other instances, a utility, upon providing the customer with
proper notice (as defined in 170 I.A.C. 6-1-16(E)), §
54.05 below may disconnect service subject to the other provisions of these
rules.
   (C)   Prohibited disconnection.
      (1)   Utility shall postpone the disconnection of service for ten days
if, prior to the disconnect date specified in the disconnect notice, the
customer provides the utility with a medical statement from a licensed
physician or public health official which states that disconnection would be a
serious and immediate threat to the health or safety of a designated person in
the household of the customer. The postponement of disconnection shall be
continued for one additional ten-day period upon the provision of an additional
medical statement.
      (2)   Upon his or her failure to pay for services to a previous occupant
of premises to be served, unless the utility has good reason to believe the
customer is attempting to defraud the utility by using another name.
      (3)   Upon his or her failure to pay for a different form or class of
utility service.
      (4)   If the customer shows cause for his or her inability to pay the
full amount due (financial hardship shall constitute cause), and the customer:
         (a)   Pays a reasonable portion (not to exceed $10 or one-tenth of the
bill, whichever is less, unless the customer agrees to a greater portion) of
the bill;
         (b)   Agrees to pay the remainder of the outstanding bill within three
months;
         (c)   Agrees to pay all undisputed future bills for service as they
become due; and
         (d)   Has not breached any similar agreement with the utility made
pursuant to this rule within the past 12 months.
      (5)   Provided, however, that the utility may add to the outstanding bill
a late payment charge. Provided further, that the above terms of the agreement
shall be put in writing by the utility and signed by the customer and by a
representative of the utility. Only one late payment charge may be made to the
customer under this section.
      (6)   If a customer is unable to pay a bill, which is unusually large due
to prior incorrect reading of the meter, incorrect connection or functioning of
the meter, prior estimates where no actual reading was taken for over two
months, stopped or slow meter, or any human or mechanical error of the utility,
and the customer:
         (a)   Pays a reasonable portion of the bill, not to exceed an amount
equal to the customer's average bill for the 12 bills immediately preceding the
bill in question;
         (b)   Agrees to pay the remainder at a reasonable rate; and
         (c)   Agrees to pay all undisputed future bills for service as they
become due.
      (7)   Provided however, that the utility may not add to the outstanding
bill any late fee. Provided, further, that the above terms of agreement shall
be put in writing by the utility and signed by the customer and a
representative of the utility.
   (D)   Disconnection of service; prohibited disconnection; reconnection. It
is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to customers by reason
of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be
heard on disputed bills. The city's form for application for utility service
and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address, room number,
and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly visible and
easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill; and
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.
      (4)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (5)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge in the sum of $20.
(1998 Code, § 9-146) (Ord. 584, passed - -1996)
§ 54.03 CUSTOMER REQUEST FOR METER TEST.
   (A)   (1)   Each utility supplying water service shall make a test of the
accuracy of registration of a meter upon written request by a customer.
      (2)   A second test of the customer's meter may be requested after 12
months.
      (3)   The customer may be required to bear the full cost of any
subsequent test of his or her meter if requested at less than 36 months after
the preceding test, if error of the meter is found to be in compliance with
Rule 9 (170 I.A.C. 6-1-9).
      (4)   A written report giving the results of the tests shall be made to
the customer within ten days after the test is complete, and a complete record
of the same shall be kept on file in the office of the utility.
   (B)   There will be a fee of $25 if meter is right or the billing will be
adjusted if the meter is wrong. Owner will be required to deliver the meter to
the Waterworks Department, watch the test for verification. If the meter is
incorrect, waterworks will pull the meter and replace it.
(1998 Code, § 9-147) (Ord. 584, passed - -1996)
§ 54.04 PERIODIC INSPECTIONS AND TESTS.
   Each consumer water meter installed shall be periodically inspected and
tested in accordance with state regulations.
(1998 Code, § 9-148) (Ord. 584, passed - -1996)
§ 54.05 ACCURACY OF METERS.
   (A)   Meter accuracy. The city shall maintain all meters and appurtenances
used for measuring quantity of water delivered to a customer in good mechanical
condition and shall be adequate in size and design for the type of service
which they measure and shall be accurate to within generally accepted
standards.
   (B)   Test flows. For determination of minimum test flow and normal test
flow limits, the following specifications will be used for test flows for
displacement type cold water meters:
Nominal Meter Size Minimum Test Flow Gallons Per Normal Test Flow Limit Gallons
                   Minutes                       Per Minute
Nominal Meter Size Minimum Test Flow Gallons Per Normal Test Flow Limit Gallons
                   Minutes                       Per Minute
5/8-inch           1/4                           1-20
3/4-inch           1/2                           2-30
1-inch             3/4                           3-50
1-1/2-inch         1-1/2                         5-100
2-inch             2                             8-160
3-inch             4                             16-300
4-inch             7                             28-500
6-inch             12                            48-1000
 
(1998 Code, § 9-149) (Ord. 584, passed - -1996)
§ 54.06 METER SERVICES.
   Each residence, business and industry shall have its own water meter.
(1998 Code, § 9-150) (Ord. 584, passed - -1996)
§ 54.07 FORMS.
   All forms including but not limited to hydrant usage reports, renters check
list, renters application for water services are on file in the office of the
City Clerk-Treasurer and are available for public inspection during regular
business hours.
(1998 Code, § 9-151) (Ord. 584, passed - -1996)
CHAPTER 55: PRIVATE WELL REGULATION
Section
   
55.01   Role of Board of Public Works and Safety
   
55.02   Application requirements
   
55.03   Injunctive relief
 
   
55.99   Penalty
§ 55.01 ROLE OF BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.
   (A)   From and after the passage and the enactment hereof, no private wells
for the extraction of subterranean water for use for human consumption shall be
installed or constructed by any person, firm or corporation within the
boundaries of the city, unless, in the opinion of the Board of Public Works and
Safety, it shall be economically impractical or otherwise not feasible for the
extension of the city's water lines to the property in question.
   (B)   Any permission by the Board of Public Works and Safety for the
installation or construction of a private well is subject to satisfaction of
any other federal, state or local statute, ordinance, resolution, regulation or
rule as well as to the approval of any federal, state or local governing body
or governmental subdivision which shall have jurisdiction over the installation
or construction.
(1998 Code, § 9-155) (Ord. 580, passed - -1997) Penalty, see §
55.99
§ 55.02 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct a well for the
extraction of water for industrial or other uses, but not for human
consumption, shall submit his or her application to the Board of Public Works
and Safety of the city, together with plans, specifications, designs and other
information whereupon the Board of Public Works and Safety may approve, modify,
approve as modified or reject the application for a private well; provided
however, that no permit for the private well shall be approved unless adequate
safeguards are installed and constructed to ensure against human consumption of
the water.
(1998 Code, § 9-156) (Ord. 580, passed - -1997) Penalty, see §
55.99
§ 55.03 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   This chapter and all of the terms and provisions thereof shall be
enforceable by injunctive or other procedures in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(1998 Code, § 9-157) (Ord. 580, passed - -1997)
§ 55.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the terms or
provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100 and
each day that the violation or non-compliance shall be permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
(1998 Code, § 9-158) (Ord. 580, passed - -1997; Ord. 761-2010, passed 6-28-
2010)
CHAPTER 56: WATERWORKS ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
56.01   Board of Waterworks
   
56.02   Waterworks Superintendent
   
56.03   Removal from State Utility Regulatory Commission
§ 56.01 BOARD OF WATERWORKS.
   The City Board of Public Works and Safety shall operate and control the city
waterworks utility.
(1998 Code, § 9-165) (Ord. 632, passed 3-13-2000)
§ 56.02 WATERWORKS SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Superintendent, appointed by the Board, shall have charge of the
waterworks building, engine and pumps, and the care and management of running
the machinery, and perform the other duties required of him or her by the
Common Council.
(1998 Code, § 9-166)
§ 56.03 REMOVAL FROM STATE UTILITY REGULATORY COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Common Council of the city adopts, pursuant to the provisions of
I.C. 8-1.5-3-9.1, an ordinance removing the city waterworks from the
jurisdiction of the State Utility Regulatory Commission and the transfer of the
regulation and approval of rates and charges and the issuance of stocks, bonds,
notes and other evidence of indebtedness to the Common Council of the city.
   (B)   At least 30 days before the final vote upon this chapter, the Clerk-
Treasurer of the city shall mail written notice to all current rate payers of
the city waterworks and to the State Utility Regulatory Commission of the
meeting at which this chapter will be considered for its final reading.
(1998 Code, § 9-167) (Ord. 519, passed 6-4-1992)
CHAPTER 57: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
   
57.01   Garbage collection
   
57.02   Definitions
   
57.03   Responsibility of owner or occupant
   
57.04   Destruction of garbage by incineration or garbage grinders
   
57.05   Container regulations
   
57.06   Prohibited acts
   
57.07   Garbage pick-up fees for city residents
 
   
57.99   Penalty
§ 57.01 GARBAGE COLLECTION.
   Collection of garbage shall be subject to specifications on file in the
office of the City Clerk-Treasurer as adopted by contract and approved by the
Board of Public Works and Safety.
(1998 Code, § 6-135)
Statutory reference:
   Hazardous waste management, see I.C. 13-22-1-1 et seq.
   State's Solid Waste Management Plan, see I.C. 13-21-1-1 et seq.
§ 57.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF WORKS AND SAFETY. The Board of Works and Safety of the City of
Ligonier.
   CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Ligonier.
   GARBAGE. All table matter that results from the preparation and use of meat,
fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter. It shall further mean and include tin
cans, glass cans, bottles and crockery which have been used as food or beverage
holders.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any solid, liquid or gaseous matter, any odor, any
radioactive material, any pollutant as defined in the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act of 1972 (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 through 1376), or any combination
thereof, from whatever source, which is injurious to human health, plant or
animal life, or to property or which interferes unreasonably with the enjoyment
of life or property, or which is otherwise violative of the provisions of this
chapter.
   RUBBISH. Material other than garbage resulting from ordinary household
operations, including such items as cans, glass, bottles, papers, magazines,
newsprint, boxes, rags and small cartons. Included are such items as large
boxes, furniture, appliances, springs, metal waste or articles and all types of
debris resulting from repairing or remodeling any buildings, such as dirt,
wood, plaster, roofing, pipes, cement blocks, broken concrete or stones. Also
included are lawn cuttings, shrubbery, tree trimmings, leaves, dead animals and
animal excrement.
(1998 Code, § 6-146) (Ord. 421, passed 2-8-1982)
§ 57.03 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT.
   The owner, occupant or lessee of property located in the city shall cause to
be removed from the premises all garbage at least once each week and all
rubbish and other debris at least each month, and the premises shall be kept
free and clear of any accumulation of garbage and rubbish.
(1998 Code, § 6-147) (Ord. 421, passed 2-8-1982) Penalty, see §
57.99
§ 57.04 DESTRUCTION OF GARBAGE BY INCINERATION OR GARBAGE GRINDERS.
   (A)   Any person who immediately destroys the garbage upon his or her own
premises by incineration in an approved self-contained incinerator shall not be
required to place the garbage in approved containers. The incineration must be
of the type to be approved in writing by the Fire Chief of the city or another
designated inspector provided by the Board of Works and Safety.
   (B)   The disposal of garbage through home garbage grinders in sewers or
private sewage disposal systems shall be considered a satisfactory destruction
of the garbage and within the meaning of this chapter.
   (C)   Burning of shrubbery and tree trimmings is permitted.
(1998 Code, § 6-148) (Ord. 421, passed 2-8-1982) Penalty, see §
57.99
§ 57.05 CONTAINER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All containers in which have been deposited garbage shall be kept in a
sanitary condition, and closely covered against flies and other disturbances.
   (B)   The sole responsibility for the sanitary condition of the receptacles
as provided in this chapter shall rest on the owner and occupant of the
premises where the container is kept.
   (C)   Trash containers for curbside pickup shall be placed by the curb no
earlier than 4:00 p.m. on the day before trash is collected. The container
shall be removed from the curb no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day following the
collection day.
(1998 Code, § 6-149) (Ord. 421, passed 2-8-1982; Ord. 819-2012, passed 9-24-
2012) Penalty, see §
57.99
§ 57.06 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   The making of private dumps in the city is prohibited except by
special permission under the supervision of the Board of Works and Safety, and
it shall be unlawful to place any explosive material such as dynamite, dynamite
cap, shotgun shells, rifle cartridges, gunpowder, gasoline, hazardous waste or
similar materials in any container for the collection of garbage.
   (B)   The dumping, placement or disposal of any garbage or refuse in
privately owned commercial garbage receptacles placed on any commercial
establishment or rented by individuals other than the person dumping or placing
the refuse in the containers shall be a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   The placing of garbage, refuse or hazardous waste on any person's
property not owned or controlled by the depositor of the garbage, refuse or
hazardous waste, unless the garbage, refuse or hazardous waste is taken to a
sanitary landfill approved by the Board of Works or the County Board of Health
shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 421, passed 2-8-1982) Penalty, see §
57.99
§ 57.07 GARBAGE PICK-UP FEES FOR CITY RESIDENTS.
   (A)   Residential dwelling units included. Each residence served under the
city's garbage and rubbish collection contract shall be responsible for its
pro-rated share of the monthly contract payment.
   (B)   Definition. For purposes of this section, a RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT
shall mean a residential dwelling containing up to and including two units.
   (C)   Excluded multi-family residential units. Residential dwellings
containing three or more units are excluded from the city's garbage and rubbish
collection contract and must enter into their own agreement with an established
trash collection contractor for the removal of their garbage and rubbish.
   (D)   Excluded downtown residential dwellings. All downtown residential
dwellings are excluded from the city's contract and must enter into their own
agreement with an established trash collection contractor for the removal of
their garbage and rubbish. For purposes of this section, a DOWNTOWN RESIDENTIAL
DWELLING is a residential dwelling located in the 100-400 blocks of Cavin
Street in Ligonier, Indiana.
   (E)   Dumpster requirement for downtown residential dwellings. Owners of
downtown residential dwellings are required to provide a dumpster for the use
of their tenants for the removal of the tenants' garbage and rubbish.
Individual totes, or other similar trash receptacles, shall not be permitted
for downtown residential dwellings.
(Ord. 779-2011, passed 1-10-2011; Ord. 975-2022, passed 6-13-2022; Ord. 1037-
2025, passed 12-8-2025)
§ 57.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person, firm or corporation
who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be fined any sum not more than $50, and each day that the violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §
57.05(C) will be given a written warning for the first offense, a fine of $10
for the second offense (as the term “second offense” is defined in §
36.01), and $25 for the third offense (as the term “third offense” is defined
in §
36.01) or subsequent offenses. Said violations may be admitted before the
Ligonier Ordinance Violation Bureau within ten days of the alleged violation.
Thereafter, said violation will be subject to the fine provided in §
10.99.
(1998 Code, § 6-146) (Ord. 421, passed 2-8-1982; Ord. 819-2012, passed 9-24-
2012)
CHAPTER 58: WATER CONSERVATION
Section
   
58.01   Application
   
58.02   Declaration of need
   
58.03   Voluntary conservation
   
58.04   Mandatory conservation
   
58.05   Rationing
   
58.06   Exceptions
   
58.07   Notice
 
   
58.99   Penalty
§ 58.01 APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall apply to all persons, firms, partnerships, associations,
corporations, companies or organizations of any kind connected to the city's
public water system or using water therefrom (hereafter, users).
(1998 Code, § 6-125) (Ord. 583, passed - -)
§ 58.02 DECLARATION OF NEED.
   Upon determining that the city public water system is in imminent danger of
a shortage of water or is experiencing a shortage of water, the governing body
shall declare a water conservation emergency and establish the appropriate
conservation measures and the duration thereof.
(1998 Code, § 6-126) (Ord. 583, passed - -)
§ 58.03 VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION.
   In accordance with §
58.07 below, users shall be requested to reduce water consumption by practicing
voluntary conservation techniques. The governing body shall suggest reasonable
and meaningful actions which will alleviate existing or potential water
shortage.
(1998 Code, § 6-127) (Ord. 583, passed - -)
§ 58.04 MANDATORY CONSERVATION.
   In accordance with §
58.07 below, users shall be prohibited from the water uses listed below,
subject to reasonable terms, times and conditions as the governing body shall
determine:
   (A)   Sprinkling, watering or irrigating of shrubbery, trees, grass, ground
covers, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables or any other vegetation;
   (B)   Washing of automobiles, trucks trailers, mobile homes, railroad cars
or any other type of mobile equipment;
   (C)   Cleaning or spraying of sidewalks, driveways, paved areas or other
outdoor surfaces;
   (D)   Washing and cleaning of any business equipment or machinery;
   (E)   The filling of swimming pools, wading pools and ornamental fountains;
and
   (F)   Knowingly allowing leakage through defective plumbing.
(1998 Code, § 6-128) (Ord. 583, passed - -)
§ 58.05 RATIONING.
   In addition to the mandatory conservation measures defined in §
58.07 below, and in accordance with §
58.07 below, users shall be limited to water use per the following schedule:
   (A)   Even numbered homes may water on even days;
   (B)   Odd numbered homes may water on odd days; and
   (C)   No excessive watering or washing of cars, homes, boats and the like.
(1998 Code, § 6-129) (Ord. 583, passed - -)
§ 58.06 EXCEPTIONS.
   The governing body of the city reserves the right to establish alternative
rationing requirements for the following:
   (A)   Health care providers;
   (B)   A reasonable use of water to maintain adequate health and sanitary
standards; and
   (C)   Those industrial and agricultural activities declared to be necessary
for the public health and well being.
(1998 Code, § 6-130) (Ord. 583, passed - -)
§ 58.07 NOTICE.
   (A)   Notice of voluntary conservation measures shall be by publication in a
local newspaper of general circulation or other means as deemed appropriate by
the governing body. The notice shall be effective upon publication.
   (B)   Notice of mandatory conservation or rationing shall be by first class
United States Mail, or by other door-to-door distribution to each current user,
and by electronic and print media. The notice shall be deemed effective at the
conclusion of door-to-door distribution, or at noon of the third day after
depositing same in the United States Mail.
(1998 Code, § 6-131) (Ord. 583, passed - -)
§ 58.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99
   (B)   Any user who violates §§
58.04 or
58.05 above may be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500 (see I.C. 36-1-3-
8(a)(10)). Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition to, or in the alternative to a fine, water service may be terminated
for any user who violations §§
58.04 or
58.05 above.
(1998 Code, § 6-132) (Ord. 583, passed - -)
CHAPTER 59: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Section
General Provisions
   
59.001   Authority to establish sewage utility
   
59.002   Purpose and policy
   
59.003   Administrative authority
   
59.004   Definitions
   
59.005   Abbreviations
   
59.006   Bylaws, rules and regulations
   
59.007   Application
   
59.008   Right of amendment
Construction and Connections
   
59.020   Permit required
   
59.021   Extensions and connections outside corporate limits
   
59.022   Properly designed sewers
   
59.023   Overloading prohibited
   
59.024   Connection surcharge
   
59.025   Expenses; responsibility of owner
   
59.026   Independent building sewers
   
59.027   Old building sewers
   
59.028   Materials and methods of construction
   
59.029   Building sewer elevation
   
59.030   Runoff drainage connections and the like prohibited
   
59.031   Combined sanitary and storm sewers prohibited
   
59.032   New combined sewer tributaries restricted
   
59.033   Separate inflow/clear water and sanitary connection
   
59.034   Codes applicable
   
59.035   Inspections
   
59.036   Excavations; barricades; restoration
Discharge to Public Sewers
   
59.050   Unsanitary deposits prohibited
   
59.051   Discharges to natural outlets restricted
   
59.052   Private sewage disposal restricted
   
59.053   Connection to public sewer required
   
59.054   Storm water and unpolluted drainage
Private Sewage Systems
   
59.065   Unavailable public sewer; private system required
   
59.066   Permit required
   
59.067   Inspection
   
59.068   State health requirements
   
59.069   Sanitary operation required
   
59.070   Additional health requirements
   
59.071   Connection to public sewer
   
59.072   Time limit to connect
Wastewater Treatment System; Regulations and Standards
   
59.085   General discharge prohibitions
   
59.086   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
   
59.087   State requirements
   
59.088   Right of revision
   
59.089   Dilution
   
59.090   Supplementary discharge limitations
   
59.091   Accidental discharges
   
59.092   Pretreatment of wastewater
   
59.093   Approval of pretreatment facilities
   
59.094   Additional pretreatment measures
   
59.095   Hauled wastewater
   
59.096   Lift stations; specifications
Specific Provisions
   
59.110   Prohibited industrial discharges
   
59.111   Admissible industrial wastes
   
59.112   Wastewater treatment systems; administration and enforcement
   
59.113   Industrial users; reporting requirements
   
59.114   Monitoring facilities
   
59.115   Inspection and sampling; right of access
   
59.116   Confidential information
   
59.117   Wastewater discharge permits
   
59.118   Records; three-year retention requirement
   
59.119   Credits and adjustments
   
59.120   Emergency suspension
   
59.121   Revocation of service
   
59.122   Notice of violation; administrative adjustments
   
59.123   Consent orders
   
59.124   Show cause hearing
   
59.125   Judicial proceedings
   
59.126   Enforcement actions; annual publication
   
59.127   Right of appeal
   
59.128   Operating upset defense
   
59.129   Prohibited discharge standards defense
   
59.130   Bypass
   
59.131   Falsifying information unlawful
   
59.132   Property damage
   
59.133   Inspection; right of access; safety rules
 
   
59.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 59.001 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH SEWAGE UTILITY.
   The Board of Public Works and Safety may erect, maintain and operate works
for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
Statutory reference:
   Right to operate a sewage plant, see I.C. 36-9-6-11
§ 59.002 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly
owned treatment works for the city to comply with all applicable state and
federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the
General Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R. Part 403).
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with
the publicly owned treatment works;
      (3)   To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment, and the
general public;
      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the publicly owned treatment works;
      (5)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works;
and
      (6)   To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned
treatment works are subject.
   (C)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment
works. The ordinance authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits,
provides for monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities, establishes
administrative review procedures, requires user reporting, and provides for the
setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
program established herein.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.003 ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to, or
duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be delegated by the Superintendent
to other city personnel.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, or for terms as used in the rules and
regulations adopted by the Board of Public Works and Safety to implement the
provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Director in an NPDES state with an approved state
pretreatment program, or the Administer of the EPA in a non-NPDES state without
an approved state pretreatment program.
   AUTHORITY. The Pretreatment Coordinator of the city.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.
      (1)   If the user is a corporation:
         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having a gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars),
if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      (3)   If the user is a federal, state or local government facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his or her
designee.
      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3) of this
definition, may designate another AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or
position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters
for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.
   AVERAGE MONTHLY DISCHARGE LIMITATION. The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharges
measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges
during that month.
   AVERAGE WEEKLY DISCHARGE LIMITATION. The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar week, calculated as the sum of all daily discharges
measured during a calendar week divided by the number of daily discharges
measured during that week.
   BENEFICIAL USES. These uses include, but are not limited to: domestic,
municipal, agricultural and industrial use, power generation, recreation,
aesthetic enjoyment, navigation and the preservation and enhancement of fish,
wildlife and other aquatic resources or reserves, and other uses, both tangible
or intangible, as specified by state or federal law.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
   BUILDING DRAIN or HOUSE DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to a point
approximately three feet outside the foundation wall of the building.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
§ 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific
category of users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
405-471.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). In regard to sewage, sewage effluent, polluted
waters or industrial wastes, a measure of the oxygen equivalent of that portion
of the organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong
chemical oxidant. The laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
   CITY. The City of Ligonier, Noble County, Indiana, or any duly authorized
officials acting in its behalf.
   CITY CODE ENFORCER/ENGINEER. The duly authorized representative of the city.
The individual designated may be the Code Enforcer, Engineer, Superintendent of
the wastewater treatment plant, consulting civil or environmental engineer to
the city, or some similar, knowledgeable and technically qualified person.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES
permit if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat those
pollutants, and in fact does remove those pollutants to a substantial degree.
The term substantial degree is not subject to precise definition, but generally
contemplates removals in the order of 80% or greater. Minor incidental removals
in the order of 10% to 30% are not considered substantial. Examples of the
additional pollutants which may be considered compatible include: chemical
oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds,
nitrogen and nitrogen compounds, fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable
origin (except as prohibited where these materials would interfere with the
operation of the treatment works).
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Should contain a minimum of eight discrete samples taken
at equal time intervals over the compositing period or proportional to the flow
rate over the compositing period. More than the minimum number of discrete
samples will be required where the wastewater loading is highly variable.
   DAILY DISCHARGE. Discharge of a pollutant measured during a calendar day or
any 24-hour period that reasonably represents the calendar day for the purposes
of sampling.
   DISCHARGER. Any user of the sewer system who discharges or allows to be
discharged any effluent into the system.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   E-COLIFORM. Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of man
and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of pollution.
   EFFLUENT. The water, together with any wastes that may be present, flowing
out of a drain, sewer, receptacle or outlet.
   EFFLUENT DATA. The information necessary to determine the identity, amount,
frequency, concentration, temperature or other characteristics of any pollutant
discharged.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for
the administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency.
   EQUIPMENT. All movable, non-fixed items necessary to the wastewater
treatment process.
   EXCESSIVE STRENGTH SURCHARGE. An additional charge, which is billed to users
treating compatible sewage, wastes with an average strength in excess of
"normal domestic sewage".
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state, such that will
separate by gravity from the wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment facility
approved by the city.
   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
   GARBAGE. Any solid wastes from the preparation, cooking or dispensing of
food and from handling, storage or sale of produce.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample, which is taken from a waste stream without regard to
the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15
minutes.
   GROUND OR SHREDDED GARBAGE. Garbage that is shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely in suspension under conditions normally
prevailing in the sewerage system, with no particle being greater than one-half
inch in dimension.
   HEAVY DEMAND SUBSTANCES. Substances in concentration amounts of phosphorus,
ammonia, suspended solids or biochemical oxygen demand in sewage which exceed
the levels established in this chapter.
   IDEM. Indiana Department of Environmental Management
   INCOMPAT1BLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant, which is not a compatible pollutant,
including non-biodegradable, dissolved solids, and further defined in 40 C.F.R.
Part 403.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the
POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the
Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial or commercial establishment that discharges
industrial (process) wastewater to a publicly owned treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form energy
discharged, permitted to flow, or escaping from an industrial, manufacturing,
commercial or business process or from the development, recovery or processing
of any natural resource carried on by any person as defined in this section,
and shall further mean any waste from an industrial user as defined in this
section.
   INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including sewer service
connections, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to,
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.
   INFLOW. The water discharged into a sewer system, including service
connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar,
yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from
springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers,
catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage.
INFLOW does not include and is distinguished from "infiltration".
   INFLUENT. The water, together with any wastes that may be present, flowing
into a drain, sewer, receptacle or outlet.
   INSPECTOR. The person or persons duly authorized by the city through its
Board of Public Works, to inspect and approve the installation of building
sewers and their connection to the public sewer system.
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT. The maximum concentration
of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any one time, determined from the
analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Any establishment involved in a social, charitable,
religious and/or educational function which, based on a determination by the
city, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences.
   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer line with the primary purpose to transport
wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment facility.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
therefore, is a cause of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage
sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory or
regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state
or local regulations: § 405 of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345; the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901, including Title II commonly
referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), being 42
U.S.C. § 6941; any state regulations contained in any state sludge management
plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean
Air Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251; the Toxic Substances Control Act, being 15
U.S.C. § 2601; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act, being
16 U.S.C. § 1431 and 33 U.S.C. § 1401.
   MAXIMUM DAILY DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS. Highest allowable daily discharge.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive. The term indicates a discretionary
condition.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
also known as the Clean Water Act 33 U.S.C. § 1347, which applies to a specific
category of non-residential dischargers.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
   NEW SOURCE.
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the
Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1347, which will be applicable to the source if those
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided
that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located;
         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of division (1)(b) or (1)(c) above but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
the existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE as defined herein has commenced if the
owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
            1.   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities, which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of NEW SOURCE facilities
or equipment.
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts, which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this division.
   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling, which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or
finished product.
   NONRESIDENTIAL DISCHARGER. Any user of the sewer system who discharges a
non-domestic effluent into the system by means of pipes, conduits, pumping
stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting
ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto.
(Specified in 40 C.F.R. Part 403 as "industrial user".)
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Domestic sewage, (for the purpose of determining
surcharges), shall mean wastewater or sewage having an average daily
concentration as follows:
      (1)   Suspended solids (SS) not more than 230 mg/l;
      (2)   BOD not more than 230 mg/l;
      (3)   Ammonia-Nitrogen not more than 25 mg/l; and
      (4)   Phosphorus not more than one mg/l.
   NPDES PERMIT. National pollution discharge elimination system permit which
sets the conditions for the discharge of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants to the navigable waters of the United States pursuant to § 402 of PL
95-217, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE EXPENSES. All annual expenses including
replacement costs, related directly to operating and maintaining the sewage
works as identified in Uniform System of Accounts for Wastewater Utilities or
as prescribed by the state Board of Accounts under general headings Plant and
Maintenance, Sewer Operation and Maintenance, Customer Accounts, Administrative
and General, Insurance Taxes.
   OTHER SERVICE CHARGES. Other service charges include tap charges, connection
charges, area charges and other identifiable charges, other than excessive
strength surcharges.
   OUTLET. Any outlet, natural or constructed, which is the point of final
discharge of sewage, or treatment plant effluent, into any watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States, in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporation, partnership, co-partnership, joint stock
company, trust, estate, association, society, institution, enterprise,
governmental agency, this state, the United States or other legal entity, or
their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. The masculine gender includes
the feminine, and the singular includes the plural where indicated by context.
This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units (SU).
   PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR. The Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment
Plant or his or her designee.
   POLLUTANT. Includes: dredged spoil, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agriculture and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
   POLLUTION. An alteration of the quality of the wastes of the state by waste
to a degree, which unreasonably affects those waters for beneficial uses or
facilities, which serve beneficial uses. The human-made or human-induced
alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of
water.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of the pollutants, the elimination
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in the
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing the pollutants into the sewage works.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Pretreatment standards, prohibited
discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A treatment works, as defined by §
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) that is owned by the city. This definition
includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and
any conveyances that convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
   PUMPING STATION. A station positioned in the public sewer system at which
wastewater is pumped from one point to another.
   REAL PROPERTY. All non-movable, fixed in place items, such as structures and
buildings that house equipment or other items used in the wastewater treatment
plant.
   RECEIVING STREAM. The watercourse, stream or body of water receiving the
waters finally discharged from the wastewater treatment plant.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances, which are necessary during the service life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which those
works were designed and constructed.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY UNIT. A building under one roof designed, arranged and
used primarily for dwelling purposes by a single family.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. Sewage discharged from the sanitary conveniences of
dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories
or institutions, and free from storm water, surface water and industrial
wastes.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
   SERVICE AREA. The area, which presently or in the future, contributes sewage
to the wastewater treatment plant.
   SERVICE LIFE. The period of time during which a component of a wastewater
treatment works will be capable of performing a function.
   SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations and the like).
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, transporting, pumping, treating
and disposing of sewage and sludge, namely the sewerage system and the
wastewater treatment plant.
   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage or other waste liquids.
      (1)   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer in which carries both storm, surface and
ground water runoff and sewage.
      (2)   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting property have
equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
      (3)   SANITARY SEWER. Sewers that carry sewage and to which storm,
surface, ground waters and unpolluted industrial wastewaters are not
intentionally admitted.
      (4)   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground
drainage, but excludes sewage.
   SEWER ENGINEER/SUPERINTENDENT. The duly authorized representative of the
city. The individual designated may be the City Code Enforcer, Superintendent
of the wastewater treatment plant, consulting civil or environmental engineer
to the city, or some similar, knowledgeable and technically qualified person.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM. The network of sewers and appurtenances used for
collecting, transporting and pumping sewage to the wastewater treatment plant.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
      (2)   A user that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler
blow-down wastewater);
         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
         (c)   Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (3)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in division (2)(b)
has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time,
on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6), determine that the user
should not be considered a SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
   SLUDGE. Any solid, semi-solid or liquid waste generated from a municipal,
commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply plant or an
air pollution control facility or any other waste having similar
characteristics and effects as defined in standards issued under §§ 402 and 405
of the Federal Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342 and in the applicable requirements
under §§ 3001, 3004 and 4004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, PL 94-580, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.
   SLUG LOAD or SLUG. Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature or at a
flow rate or concentration that could cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION CODE or SIC. A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.
   STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition,
at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from that precipitation, including snow melt.
   STRENGTH-OF-WASTES SURCHARGES. The extra user charges for sewerage service
assessed users whose sewage is of such a nature that it imposes upon the sewage
works a burden greater than that covered by the basic user charge.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the City of Ligonier Wastewater
Treatment Plant.
   SURCHARGE. A charge for sewerage services, in addition to the basic user and
debt service charges.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or any other liquid, and which is
removable by laboratory filtering.
   TOXIC AMOUNT. Concentrations of any pollutant or combination of pollutants,
which upon exposure to any organism will cause adverse effects such as cancer,
genetic mutations, and physiological manifestations, as, defined in standards
issued pursuant to § 307(a) of PL 95-217, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. Those substances referred to in § 307(a) of the Act, being
33 U.S.C. § 1342, as well as any other known potential substances capable of
producing toxic effects.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water quality that is equal or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause a violation of receiving
water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   UPSET. An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and
temporarily is in a state of non-compliance with the applicable standard due to
factors beyond reasonable control of the discharger, and excluding non-
compliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless and
improper operation of the facilities.
   USER. Any person that discharges, or causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the sewerage system.
   USER CHARGES. A system of charges levied on users of a treatment works for
the cost of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of those works.
   USER CLASSES. Each recipient of municipal wastewater treatment services
shall be either in the industrial class or the non-industrial class (including
domestic, commercial, institutional and governmental).
      INDUSTRIAL CLASS.
         (a)   Includes any user as determined by the Board of Works and
Safety, identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual of 1972
Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the
following divisions:
            1.   Division A: Agricultural, Forestry and Fishing;
            2.   Division B: Mining;
            3.   Division D: Manufacturing;
            4.   Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services; and
            5.   Division I: Services.
         (b)   NON-INDUSTRIAL CLASS. Includes all users whose wastes are
segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences, where regular
domestic wastes are those generated by normal domestic activity as determined
by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
   WASTEWATER. Liquid- and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS. The individual chemical,
physical, bacteriological and radiological parameters, including volume flow
rate, and other parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the
contents, quality and strength of wastewater.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW that
is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously
or intermittently.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 817-2012, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 59.005 ABBREVIATIONS.
BOD           Biochemical Oxygen Demand
C.F.R.        Code of Federal Regulations
COD           Chemical Oxygen Demand
EPA (U.S.EPA) U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
GPD           Gallons Per Day
IDEM          Indiana Department of Environmental Management
IU            Industrial User
Mg            Milligrams
Mg/l          Milligrams per liter
NPDES         National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
O&M           Operation and Maintenance
POTW          Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA          Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC           Standard Industrial Classification
TSS           Total Suspended Solids
WWTP          Wastewater Treatment Plant
 
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.006 BYLAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Public Works and safety of the city shall, in accordance
with the statutes of the state, make and enforce whatever bylaws, rules and
regulations it may deem necessary for the safe, economical and efficient
management of the city's sewage works, for the regulation, collection and
refunding of the sewer charges for sewerage service, and, in general, for the
implementation of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city shall, in accordance
with the statutes of the state, make and enforce whatever bylaws, rules and
regulations it may deem necessary for the safe, economical and efficient
management of the city's sewage works, for the construction and use of building
sewers and connections to the sewerage system, and, in general, for the
implementation of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.007 APPLICATION.
   The terms of this chapter shall apply to the entire service area from which
sewage is received and treated at the wastewater treatment plant.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.008 RIGHT OF AMENDMENT.
   The city reserves the right to amend this chapter, including the user
charges and surcharges herein established, in part or in whole, as provided and
permitted by the statutes of the state, whenever it may deem it necessary.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
CONSTRUCTION AND CONNECTIONS
§ 59.020 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No owner or occupant of any real property shall tap or drain either
directly or indirectly into any public sewer until a tap permit has been
obtained and until the construction and connections person has satisfied his or
her obligation to pay all assessments, reimbursements or pro rata shares of
sewer extension costs laid against that property for public sewers required to
serve it. A tap permit given in error or sewerage services billed to a property
in error shall not operate to nullify any such obligation that has been duly
recorded.
   (B)   No owner or occupant of any real property shall attempt to repair,
through professional or personal effort, any public sewer or sewer connection,
unless plans for the repair are approved by the City Engineer, Director of
Public Works or the management of the municipal sewage utility.
   (C)   An owner or occupant of any real property who either taps or drains
directly or indirectly into any public sewer, or attempts to repair any public
sewer or sewer connection, without obtaining the necessary approvals, permits
and supervision required under this chapter, or of management of the municipal
sewage utility, shall be fined. That owner or occupant shall also be required
to reimburse the city and the municipal sewage utility for any costs incurred
for the inspection, correction and/or repair of the unauthorized sewer tap-in
or repair, including any streets and right-of-way involved. The penalty shall
be determined by the Board of Public Works and Safety, after service of notice
of the violation upon the owner or occupant, and presentation of information
pertaining to the violation to the Board of Public Works and Safety at a
regular or special meeting of the same by the Building Code Inspector, City
Engineer or Superintendent of the municipal sewage utility, and a proper
finding of fault by the Board.
   (D)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall have the authority to
require an owner of real property to disconnect from a building any sewer which
drains into a sanitary sewer any downspouts, yard drains or other drains which
carry run-off of natural precipitation. Property owners shall have 30 days
after notice to comply with these requirements. The Board of Public Works and
Safety shall not authorize any tap permit which will cause excess flow, BOD or
suspended solid loading of the wastewater treatment plant, force mains, lift
stations or sewers.
   (E)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Clerk-Treasurer or Facility
Manager of the POTW.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.021 EXTENSIONS AND CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   (A)   The installation, construction or extension of sewers by the city
outside the corporate limits of the city and the connection or extension of
sewers into the city's sewerage system from, by or for properties located
outside the limits shall be prohibited, except upon prior approval by the City
Council by duly enacted ordinance.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, the Board of
Public Works and Safety of the city shall have the authority to permit a
property located outside the corporate limits of the city to connect to an
existing sewer which is part of the city's sewerage system, provided the
property abuts, adjoins, and is immediately contiguous to the street, alley or
easement in which the sewer is located and provided the property owner or
occupant has complied with the conditions set out in §
59.020(A) and (D).
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.022 PROPERLY DESIGNED SEWERS.
   The city shall prohibit any storm water from new inflow sources into the
sanitary sewer portions of the sewerage system, and shall insure that new
sewers and connections to the sanitary sewers are properly designed and
connected.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.023 OVERLOADING PROHIBITED.
   The city shall not approve any new connection into the sanitary sewers that
will cause overloading.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.024 CONNECTION SURCHARGE.
   In the event that a sewer connection is made from any lot, parcel of real
estate, or building located within the zoning jurisdictional area of the city,
directly to one of the interceptors or to one of the interceptor extensions, or
into any other municipal sewer, or indirectly (as for example by connection to
a privately owned sewer system which connects to one of the interceptors or to
one of the interceptors extensions or to any other municipal sewer), a
connection surcharge (as set forth in §
51.103 of this code, as amended or supplemented from time to time) shall be
levied against that lot, parcel of real estate, or building. The connection
surcharge set out herein shall be over and above any and all costs and charges
for making the physical connection from the lot to the sewer. In the event the
surcharge is not paid as required, the surcharge shall be collectible in the
manner provided by statute.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.025 EXPENSES; RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.026 INDEPENDENT BUILDING SEWERS.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.027 OLD BUILDING SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and tested by the Superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.028 MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of A.S.T.M.
and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.029 BUILDING SEWER ELEVATION.
   Whenever possible, the public sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by that building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the public sewer.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.030 RUNOFF DRAINAGE CONNECTIONS AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall make connection of roof down spouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a
building sewer or building drain, which, in turn, is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.031 COMBINED SANITARY AND STORM SEWERS PROHIBITED.
   The construction of new combined sanitary/storm sewers is prohibited.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.032 NEW COMBINED SEWER TRIBUTARIES RESTRICTED.
   It is required that all new construction tributary to the combined sanitary/
storm sewer be designed to minimize or delay inflow to the combined sewer.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.033 SEPARATE INFLOW/CLEAR WATER AND SANITARY CONNECTION.
   (A)   Separate inflow/clear water and sanitary connections to a combined
sewer are required to facilitate disconnection of the former if a separate
storm sewer becomes available.
   (B)   The introduction of combined inflow sources to any sanitary sewer is
prohibited.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.034 CODES APPLICABLE.
   (A)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No.
9.
   (B)   All the connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
   (C)   Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Superintendent before installation.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.035 INSPECTIONS.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Inspector when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the inspector or his or
her representative.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.036 EXCAVATIONS; BARRICADES; RESTORATION.
   (A)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
   (B)   Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Superintendent.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
DISCHARGE TO PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 59.050 UNSANITARY DEPOSITS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.051 DISCHARGES TO NATURAL OUTLETS RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.052 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL RESTRICTED.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.053 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED.
   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting
on any street or alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located a public
sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is required at his or her own expense
to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect those facilities
directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that
the public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.054 STORM WATER AND UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
sewers that are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
approved by the Superintendent.
   (C)   Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged on approval of the Superintendent to a storm sewer or natural
outlet.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEMS
§ 59.065 UNAVAILABLE PUBLIC SEWER; PRIVATE SYSTEM REQUIRED.
   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.066 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Superintendent.
   (B)   The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by
the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and
other information deemed necessary by the Superintendent.
   (C)   A connection surcharge and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at
the time the application is filed.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.067 INSPECTION.
   (A)   A permit for private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
   (B)   He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground portions are covered.
   (C)   The inspection shall be made within 72 hours of the receipt of notice
by the Superintendent.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.068 STATE HEALTH REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Board of Health.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than 15,000 square feet.
   (C)   No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.069 SANITARY OPERATION REQUIRED.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.070 ADDITIONAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.071 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER.
   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system as provided above, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks,
cesspools and similar private disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled
with suitable material.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.072 TIME LIMIT TO CONNECT.
   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected
to that sewer within 90 days and the private sewage disposal system shall be
cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM; REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS
§ 59.085 GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These
general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are
subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or
local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (B)   No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the
following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which may by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction to cause
lire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the operation of the
POTW, including, but not limited to, waste-streams with a closed-cup flashpoint
of less than 140°F (60°C) using test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
      (2)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, or personnel of the system;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances which will or may cause obstruction to
the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
system; but in no case solids greater than two and one-half inches or six
centimeters in any dimension;
      (4)   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD and the
like) released in a discharge flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
      (5)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F or 0°C and
65°C;
      (6)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 120°F (48.889°C),
or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting
in interference; but in no case, wastewater with a temperature at the
introduction into the POTW which exceeds 104°F (40°C);
      (7)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either alone or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment process, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals;
      (8)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids, which alone or
by interaction are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or
are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and
repair;
      (9)   Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment
process, such as dye wastes and tanning solutions;
      (10)   Any slug load, including any oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD and
the like), released in a single extraordinary discharge episode of volume or
strength as to cause interference to the POTW;
      (11)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (12)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Superintendent in accordance with this chapter;
      (13)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a
half-life concentration so as to exceed limits established by the Authority in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (14)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of a character
and quantity so that unusual provision, attention and expense would be required
to handle the materials at the wastewater treatment plant, its pumping
stations, or other facilities;
      (15)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, spa or hot tub
drainage, condensate, de-ionized water, non-contact cooling water, and
unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent;
      (16)   Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (17)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit;
      (18)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; or
      (19)   (a)   Interceptors shall be provided by the discharger as deemed
necessary by the Superintendent for the removal of grease, flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful substances. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall be readily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
         (b)   The owner/operator of interceptor equipment shall be required to
maintain certified records as to time and date of cleaning and inspection.
   (C)   Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to
the POTW.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 817-2012, passed 8-13-2012; Ord. 985-2023,
passed 2-13-2023) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.086 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R. Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, are hereby incorporated by reference.
   (B)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard found at 40 C.F.R. Chapter
I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, are hereby incorporated by reference,
copies thereof are available in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer of the city,
for public inspection.
   (C)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Superintendent
shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(e).
   (D)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard
if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in
40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally
different from the factors considered by the EPA when developing the
categorical pretreatment standard.
   (E)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.087 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
   State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by
all dischargers which are subject to those standards in any instance in which
they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in
this chapter.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.088 RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The city reserves the right to amend this chapter to provide for more
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW where deemed
necessary to comply with objectives set forth in the introduction of this
chapter.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.089 DILUTION.
   (A)   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.
   (B)   The Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other
cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.090 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS.
   The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass
through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in
excess of the following daily maximum limit:
Ammonia-Nitrogen      25.0 mg/l
Arsenic               0.15 mg/l
Cadmium               0.33 mg/l
Chromium              2.0 mg/l
Copper                1.0 mg/l
Cyanide               0.3 mg/l
Lead                  0.33 mg/l
Mercury               0.0001 mg/l
Molybdenum            0.05 mg/l
Nickel                2.0 mg/l
Nitrogen              25.0 mg/l
Phosphorus            1.0 mg/l
Zinc                  2.5 mg/l
Suspended solids (SS) 230.0 mg/l
BOD                   230.0 mg/l
Oil/grease            100 mg/l
pH                    5.5-9.5 su
 
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the
POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless
indicated otherwise. The Superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition
to the concentration-based limitations above.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 817-2012, passed 8-13-2012; Ord. 985-2023,
passed 2-13-2023) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.091 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   At least once every two years, the Superintendent shall evaluate
whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge or slug
control plan. The Superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for
approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the Superintendent may
develop a plan for any user.
   (B)   An accidental discharge or slug control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Superintendent of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by this chapter; and
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. These procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.092 PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in this chapter within the
time limitations specified by the EPA, the state or the Superintendent,
whichever is more stringent.
   (B)   Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated
and maintained at the user's expense.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.093 APPROVAL OF PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   (A)   Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment or processing facilities shall be submitted to
the city for examination and approval, and no construction of these facilities
shall begin until the city, through its Board of Public Works and Safety, has
given its written approval. This approval shall not exempt the person from the
obligation to make further reasonable adaptations of the facilities when
adaptations prove necessary to secure the results desired. Plans,
specifications and other pertinent information shall also be submitted to the
Stream Pollution Control Board for approval in accordance with Stream Pollution
Control Board Res. 15.
   (B)   The review of these plans and operating procedures shall in no way
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facilities as
necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.094 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Superintendent may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage waste-streams from industrial waste-
streams, and other conditions as be necessary to protect the POTW and determine
the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The Superintendent may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on his or her property and at his or her expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   (C)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the user when,
in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand;
except that interceptors shall not be required for residential users.
   (D)   All interception units shall be of the type and capacity approved by
the Superintendent and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection.
   (E)   These interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly,
as needed, by the user at his or her own expense.
   (F)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.095 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the Superintendent, and at times as are established by the
Superintendent. This type of waste shall not violate this chapter or any other
requirements established by the city. The Superintendent may require septic
tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
   (B)   The Superintendent shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain
wastewater discharge permits. The Superintendent may require generators of
hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The
Superintendent also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The
discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of
this chapter.
   (C)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the Superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior
written consent of the Superintendent. The Superintendent may collect samples
of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The
Superintendent may require the industrial hauler to provide a waste analysis of
any load prior to discharge.
   (D)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the
industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and
addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The
form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.096 LIFT STATIONS; SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   No owner or occupant of any real property shall install a lift station
on his or her property or public property without adhering to the provisions of
the municipal sewage utility and the Recommended Standards for Sewage Works
(Ten State Standards).
   (B)   All plans for lift stations must be approved by the management of the
municipal sewage utility before commencing construction on the lift station.
      (1)   An owner or occupant of any real property who constructs or
operates a lift station without obtaining the necessary approvals, permits and
supervision required under this chapter, or of management of the municipal
sewage utility, shall be fined.
      (2)   That owner or occupant shall also be required to reimburse the city
and the municipal sewage utility for all costs incurred for the inspection, and
correction or repair of the unauthorized lift station, including repair of any
streets and rights-of-way involved.
      (3)   The penalty shall be determined by the Board of Public Works and
Safety upon service of notice of the violation to the Board at a regularly
scheduled meeting of the same by the City Code Enforcer, Director of Public
Works, or a facilities manager of the municipal sewage utility, and a proper
finding of fault by the Board.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
SPECIFIC PROVISIONS
§ 59.110 PROHIBITED INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Prohibited substances. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall
discharge or cause as defined in this chapter to be discharged to a public
sewer any substances, wastes or waters prohibited by this chapter.
   (B)   Obstruction or damage; responsibility. If a public sewer becomes
obstructed or damaged because any of the aforementioned substances were
improperly discharged, the person or persons responsible for that discharge
shall be billed and shall pay for the expenses incurred by the city in cleaning
out, repairing or rebuilding the sewer.
   (C)   Special agreements. No statement contained in this chapter shall be
construed as prohibiting any special agreement between the city and any person
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment either with or without pretreatment, provided there is
no impairment to the functioning of the sewage works by reason of admission of
those wastes and no extra costs are incurred by the city without recompense by
the person.
   (D)   Industrial wastes; additional exclusions. All or certain industrial
wastes may be excluded when conditions are such that NPDES permit restrictions
cannot be met.
   (E)   Surcharge for excess pollutants. Surcharges shall be imposed by the
city for any pollutant discharged in excess of the limits set forth herein.
   (F)   NPDES requirements adopted. All of the terms and conditions of the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit No. IN0023582
are hereby incorporated herein by reference, with copies being available in the
office of the City Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.111 ADMISSIBLE INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   (A)   Wastes requiring prior approval. Review and acceptance by the
Superintendent shall be obtained prior to the discharge into the public sewers
by any person of sewage whose wastes have:
      (1)   A BOD greater than 230 mg/l;
      (2)   A suspended solids content greater than 230 mg/l; or
      (3)   Other contaminants or characteristics which, from their nature and
quantity, might be harmful to the structures, processes or operations of the
sewage works or to health, whether by themselves or through interacting with
other wastes in the public sewers.
   (B)   Pretreatment facilities. When, after making the above review, the
Superintendent concludes that, before the person discharges his or her wastes
into the public sewers, he or she must modify or eliminate those constituents
which would be harmful to the structures, processes or operations of the sewage
works or injurious to health, then the person shall either modify the wastes at
the point of origin or shall provide and operate at his or her own expense the
preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be determined to be
necessary to render those wastes acceptable for admission to the public sewers
and follow the procedures outlined in this chapter.
   (C)   Approval of pretreatment facilities. Plans, specifications and other
pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment or processing
facilities shall be submitted to the city for examination and approval, and no
construction of these facilities shall begin until the city, through its Board
of Public Works and Safety, has given its written approval. This approval shall
not exempt the person from the obligation to make further reasonable
adaptations of the facilities when adaptations prove necessary to secure the
results desired. Plans, specifications and other pertinent information shall
also be submitted to the IDEM for approval in accordance with IDEM regulations.
   (D)   Operation of pretreatment facilities. When preliminary treatment
facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operating condition by the person at his or her own expense and
shall be subject to monthly inspection by the city. The person shall maintain
suitable operating records and shall submit to the Superintendent those monthly
summary reports of the character of the influent and effluent as the latter may
prescribe.
   (E)   Grease and sand traps. Whenever the Board of Public Works and Safety
determines that interceptors or traps are needed to protect the sewerage system
or the operations of the wastewater treatment plant from grease, oil, sand or
similar substances from occurring in a customer's sewage, then those traps
shall be installed by the customer on his or her own lines at his or her own
expense and shall be so maintained by the customer that none of these
substances can be carried over into the public sewers. All traps shall be
subject to the city's approval as to construction, location and installation.
   (F)   Data submission and permit requirements. The procedures authorized in
this chapter shall be followed.
   (G)   Control manholes. Any person discharging industrial wastes into a
public sewer, either directly or indirectly, may be required by the Board of
Public Works and Safety, upon the recommendation of the Superintendent, to
construct and maintain at his or her own expense one or more control manholes
at specified location or locations to facilitate the observation, measurement,
and sampling of his or her wastes. These manholes shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards and specifications of the city. The Board may
also require the person to install and maintain in any manhole at the person's
expense an approved volume-measuring device. Plans for the installation of
control manholes and related equipment must be approved by the Board of Public
Works and Safety, upon the recommendation of the Superintendent, before
construction is begun.
   (H)   Waste sampling; right of access.
      (1)   The Superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises of
any user, at all reasonable times, to determine whether the user is complying
with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Superintendent ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
         (a)   Where a user has security measures in force, which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the Superintendent will be permitted
to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
         (b)   The Superintendent shall have the right to set up on the user's
property, or require installation of, devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and metering of the user's operations.
         (c)   The Superintendent may require the user, at the user's expense,
to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quantity shall be calibrated at a minimum of once a year to
ensure their accuracy.
         (d)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or verbal request of the Superintendent and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing this access shall be borne by the user.
         (e)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Superintendent access to the
user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
      (2)   If the Superintendent has been refused access to a building,
structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable
cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there
is a need to inspect or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Superintendent may seek issuance
of a search warrant from the Superior or Circuit Court.
   (I)   Laboratory procedures.
      (1)   Laboratory procedures used in the examination of industrial wastes
shall be those set forth in Standard Methods For the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, 21st Edition (list of approved biological test procedures as set
forth in 40 C.F.R. § 136.3). However, alternative methods for certain analyses
of industrial wastes may be used to mutual agreement between the Superintendent
and the user provided they meet federal requirements as set forth in 40 C.F.R.
Part 136. The city may make, without charge to the user, the initial analysis
of the user's wastes as well as other initial tests the Superintendent may deem
advisable. Regular periodic check analyses and analyses made by the city at the
request of the user shall be charged to the user according to the standard work
order billing practice.
      (2)   All the analyses shall be binding in determining strength-of-wastes
surcharges and other matters dependent upon the character and concentration of
wastes.
   (J)   Representative analyses.
      (1)   Until an adequate analysis of a representative sample of a user's
wastes has been obtained, the city shall, for the purpose of this chapter, make
a determination of the character and concentration of the user's wastes by
using data based on analyses of similar processes or data for that type of
business that are available from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or
from industry-recognized authoritative sources.
      (2)   This method, if selected by the city, shall continue at the city's
pleasure or until an adequate analysis has been made.
   (K)   EPA review. All data collected pertaining to industrial wastes,
including records kept by each industrial user, shall be subject to audit and
review by the Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 817-2012, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 59.112 WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Wastewater dischargers; compliance required. It shall be unlawful to
discharge sewage, industrial waste or other waste to any sewer within the
jurisdiction of the municipal sanitation utility, or to the city wastewater
treatment plant, without having first complied with the terms of this chapter.
   (B)   Industrial users; data disclosure requirements.
      (1)   All industrial dischargers proposing to connect to or to discharge
sewage, industrial wastes and other wastes to the POTW shall comply with all
terms of this chapter.
      (2)   Industrial dischargers shall complete and file with the Authority,
a disclosure declaration in the form prescribed by the Authority, and
accompanied by the appropriate fee. Proposed new dischargers shall file their
disclosure forms at least 90 days prior to connecting to the POTW. The
disclosure to be made by the discharger shall be made on written forms provided
by the Authority and shall cover:
         (a)   Disclosure of name, address and location of the discharger;
         (b)   Disclosure of Standard Industrial Classification (SIC);
         (c)   Disclosure of wastewater constituents and characteristics,
including but not limited to those mentioned in this chapter, as determined by
bona fide chemical and biological analyses. Sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the U.S. EPA and
contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136, as amended;
         (d)   Disclosure of time and duration of discharges;
         (e)   Disclosure of average daily and instantaneous peak wastewater
flow rates, in gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal
variations, if any. All flows shall be measured unless other verifiable
techniques are approved by the Authority due to cost or non-feasibility;
         (f)   Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans, and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes,
sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation;
         (g)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or may be discharged to the sewers
or works of the Authority;
         (h)   Disclosure of the nature and concentration of any pollutants or
materials prohibited by this chapter in the discharge, together or with a
statement regarding whether or not additional operation and maintenance
activities and/or additional pretreatment are required to comply with this
chapter;
         (i)   Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance
activities will be required to comply with this chapter, the discharger shall
provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the discharger will
provide that additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional
operation and maintenance activities.
            1.   The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the discharger to comply with
the requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to, dates relating
to hiring an engineer, hiring other appropriate personnel, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major
components, commencing construction, completing construction and all other acts
necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter.
            2.   Under no circumstances shall the Authority permit a time
increment for any single step directed toward compliance, which exceeds nine
months.
            3.   Not later than 14 days following each milestone date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the discharger shall submit a
progress report to the Authority, including no less than a statement as to
whether or not it complied with the increment progress represented by that
milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this
increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the
discharger to return the construction to the approved schedule. In no event
shall more than nine months elapse between these progress reports to the
Authority.
         (j)   Disclosure of each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes, and rate of production;
         (k)   Disclosure of the type of raw materials utilized (average and
maximum per day);
         (l)   All disclosure forms shall be signed by a principal executive
officer of the discharger; and
         (m)   All sewers shall have an inspection and sampling manhole or
structure with an opening of no less than 24 inches in diameter and an internal
diameter of no less than 36 inches containing flow measuring, recording and
sampling equipment as required by the Authority to assure compliance with this
chapter.
      (3)   The Authority will evaluate the complete disclosure form and data
furnished by the discharger and may require additional information. Within 30
days after full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the Authority
shall notify the discharger of the Authority's acceptance thereof.
      (4)   The Authority reserves the right to amend this chapter and the
conditions hereof in order to assure compliance by the Authority with
applicable laws and regulations. Within nine months of the promulgation of a
national categorical pretreatment standard, this chapter shall be amended to
require compliance by dischargers with the standards within the time frame
prescribed by those standards. All national categorical pretreatment standards
adopted after the promulgation of this chapter, are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference, and copies thereof are on file for the public
inspection in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer of the city. Where a
discharger, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not
previously submitted a disclosure statement form as required by division (B) of
this section, the discharger shall file a disclosure form with the Authority
within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical
pretreatment standard by the U.S. EPA. In addition, any discharger operating on
the basis of a previous filing of a disclosure statement, shall submit to the
Authority within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable national
categorical pretreatment standard, the additional information required by
divisions (B)(2)(h) and (B)(2)(i) above. The discharger shall be informed of
any proposed changes in the ordinance at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the ordinance shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.113 INDUSTRIAL USERS; REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Baseline monitoring reports.
      (1)   Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW, shall submit to the Superintendent a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) below. At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the Superintendent a report which contains the
information listed in division (A)(2) below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
      (2)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
         (a)   Identifying information: the name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner;
         (b)   Environmental permits: a list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility;
         (c)   Description of operations: a brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by the user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes;
         (d)   Flow measurement: Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste-
stream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 6(e);
         (e)   Measurement of pollutants.
            1.   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process;
            2.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
Superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations, or
mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of
daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
division (J) of this section; and
            3.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set
out in division (K) of this section.
         (f)   Certification: a statement, reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a constant basis, and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;
         (g)   Compliance schedule progress reports: if additional pretreatment
and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide that additional pretreatment and/or
O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this division must meet the requirements set
out in division (B) of this section; and
         (h)   Signature and certification: all baseline monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with division (A)(2)(f) of this
section.
   (B)   Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall
apply to the compliance schedule required by division (A)(2)(g) of this
section:
      (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (which events include, but are not limited
to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing
contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and
beginning and conducting routine operation);
      (2)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
      (3)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
      (4)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between these
progress reports to the Superintendent.
   (C)   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to those pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Superintendent a report containing the information described in divisions (A)
(2)(a) through (A)(2)(e) of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass
or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's
long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per
unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include
the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with division (A)
(2)(f) of this section.
   (D)   Periodic compliance reports.
      (1)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined
by the Superintendent but in no case less than twice per year (in June and
December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
division (A)(2)(f) of this section.
      (2)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
      (3)   If a user is subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Superintendent,
using the procedures prescribed in division (K) of this section, the results of
this monitoring shall be included in the report.
   (E)   Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the
Superintendent of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or
system that might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at
least 60 days before the change.
      (1)   The Superintendent may require the user to submit information as
may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under this chapter.
      (2)   The Superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit under
this chapter, or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under this
chapter, in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
      (3)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but
are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants.
   (F)   Reports of potential problems.
      (1)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-
customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that cause potential problems for
the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the Superintendent of
the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge,
type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken
by the user.
      (2)   Within five days following the discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the Superintendent, submit a detailed written report describing the
cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. This notification shall not relieve the user from
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall this notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
      (3)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees who call in the event of a
discharge described in division (F)(1) above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   (G)   Reports from un-permitted users. All users not required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the
Superintendent as the Superintendent may require.
   (H)   Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the
Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the Superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of
the violation. The user is not required to re-sample if the Superintendent
monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the Superintendent
samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the
results of this sampling.
   (I)   Discharge of hazardous waste prohibited. The discharge of hazardous
wastes to the city sewer treatment and collections system is prohibited.
   (J)   Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be in accordance with the techniques prescribed in
40 C.F.R. part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard. If 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must
be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
   (K)   Sample collection. Except as indicated in division (K) below, the user
must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the
Superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum
of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab
samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides and
volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
   (L)   Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
shall govern.
   (M)   Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this
section shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required
by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of these requirements.
Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling, and
the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the date analyses were performed;
who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the
results of the analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of
at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user
has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the
Superintendent.
   (N)   Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance by the discharger with applicable pretreatment standards set forth
in this chapter or 90 days following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW by a new discharger, any discharger subject to this
chapter shall submit to the Authority a report indicating the nature and
concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its
discharge, and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall
state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being
met on a constant basis, and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment
is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the discharger and certified by a qualified
engineer.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.114 MONITORING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Requirements of discharger. Each discharger shall provide and operate
at the discharger's own expense, a monitoring facility to allow inspection,
sampling and flow measurement of each sewer discharge to the Authority. Each
discharger facility shall be situated on the discharger's premises, except
where such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the
discharger, the Authority may concur with the facility being constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area providing that the facility is located so that
it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be
ample room in or near the sampling facility to allow accurate sampling and
preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition at the expense of the discharger. All monitoring facilities shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction
standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 120 days
of receipt of permit by the discharger.
   (B)   Inspection and access. All sewers shall have an inspection and
sampling manhole or structure with an opening of no less than 24 inches in
diameter and an internal diameter of no less than 36 inches containing flow
measuring, recording and sampling equipment as required by the Authority to
assure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.115 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING; RIGHT OF ACCESS.
   (A)   The Authority may inspect the monitoring facilities of any discharger
to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The discharger
shall allow the Authority or its representatives, upon presentation of proper
credentials of identification, to enter upon the premises of the discharger at
all reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspection, sampling or records
examination.
   (B)   The Authority shall have the right to set up on the discharger's
property devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance
monitoring and metering operations.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.116 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Circumstances in which information may be treated as confidential, and
not open to public inspection. Information and data on a user obtained from
reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater
discharge permits and monitoring programs, and from the Superintendent's
inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without
restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the Superintendent, that the release of this information
would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must
be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data.
   (B)   Information containing trade secrets or secret processes. When
requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that this
information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request
to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment
program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as
defined by 40 C.F.R. § 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information
and will be available to the public without restriction.
   (C)   Disclosure of trade secrets or secret processes to government
entities. Trade secrets or secret process shall not be made available upon
written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, State Disposal
System Permit, and/or the Pretreatment Programs, provided, however, that the
portions of a report shall be made available for use by the state or state
agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the discharger
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information. Information accepted by the Authority
as confidential, shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the
general public by the Authority until and unless a ten-day notification is
given to the discharger.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.117 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit necessary.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to discharge sewage, non-domestic wastes or
any other wastes into any sewer outlet within the jurisdiction of the city
without having been issued a wastewater discharge permit if the discharger:
         (a)   Is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards as
promulgated by the EPA;
         (b)   Discharges non-domestic wastewater in the amount equal to or
exceeding 10,000 gallons per day;
         (c)   Contributes a non-domestic waste stream exceeding 5% of the dry
weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the wastewater treatment plan; or
         (d)   Has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the treatment
plant processes by inhibition, pass-through of pollutants, sludge contamination
or endangerment of treatment plant personnel.
      (2)   Prospective non-domestic users of any sewer which are subject to
the provisions of division (A)(1) above shall obtain a wastewater discharge
permit prior to connecting to or discharging into the wastewater system and
shall apply for the permit at least 90 days prior to anticipated connection.
      (3)   All existing nonresidential dischargers who are subject to the
provisions of division (A)(1) above shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter.
   (B)   Permit application fee.
      (1)   Applications for wastewater discharge permits shall be procured
from the Superintendent.
      (2)   Dischargers subject to the provisions of division (A)(1) above
shall obtain from, complete and file with the Superintendent a permit
application on a form prescribed by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
      (3)   A wastewater discharge permit application fee of $350 shall be paid
when the permit application is filed.
      (4)   Within 90 days after receipt of the application for discharge
permit, the Superintendent shall review the application for compliance with the
terms and conditions of this article and shall make recommendations to the
Board of Public Works and Safety.
      (5)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall review the
Superintendent's recommendations and shall approve or reject the application.
      (6)   If the board of Public Works and Safety finds the applicant to be
in compliance, it shall approve the application and a permit to discharge shall
be issued by the Superintendent subject to the imposition of reasonable terms
and conditions.
      (7)   If the Board of Public Works and Safety and the Superintendent,
rejects the application for non-compliance, they shall establish a compliance
schedule and require compliance schedule reports and compliance date reports on
forms supplied by the Superintendent.
   (C)   Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit
shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the
effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for
less than five years, at the discretion of the Superintendent. Each wastewater
discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
   (D)   Wastewater discharge permit contents.
      (1)   A wastewater discharge permit shall include conditions as are
deemed reasonably necessary by the Superintendent to prevent pass through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. Wastewater
discharge permits must contain:
         (a)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five years;
         (b)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is non-
transferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with division
(G) of this section, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator
with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
         (c)   Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
         (d)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample
type based on federal, state and local law; and
         (e)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. The schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond
that required by applicable federal, state or local law.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited
to, the following conditions:
         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
         (b)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
         (c)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or non-routine
discharges;
         (d)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
         (e)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
         (f)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
         (g)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
         (h)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Superintendent to
ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
   (E)   Wastewater discharge permit appeals. The Superintendent shall provide
public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person,
including the user, may petition the Superintendent to reconsider the terms of
a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance.
      (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to
be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
      (2)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
      (3)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
      (4)   If the Superintendent fails to act within 90 days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
      (5)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the Superior or Circuit Court within 30 days after final
administrative action, pursuant to I.C. 4-21.5-5-5.
   (F)   Wastewater discharge permit modification. The Superintendent may
modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited
to, the following reasons:
      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
      (3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;
      (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
      (6)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      (7)   Revision of a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.13;
      (8)   To correct a typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit; or
      (9)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a
new owner or operator.
   (G)   Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the permittee gives at least 90-days' advance notice to the
Superintendent and the Superintendent approves the wastewater discharge permit
transfer.
      (2)   The notice to the Superintendent must include a written
certification by the new owner or operator which:
         (a)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate
intent to change the facility's operations and processes;
         (b)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
and
         (c)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
      (3)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
   (H)   Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
      (1)   The Superintendent may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
         (a)   Failure to notify the Superintendent of significant changes to
the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
         (b)   Failure to provide prior notification to the Superintendent of
the changed conditions pursuant to this chapter;
         (c)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
         (d)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
         (e)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
         (f)   Refusing to allow the Superintendent timely access to the
facility premises and records;
         (g)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
         (h)   Failure to pay fines;
         (i)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
         (j)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
         (k)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
         (l)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
         (m)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or of this chapter.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits
issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit to that user.
   (I)   Wastewater discharge permit re-issuance. A user with an expiring
wastewater discharge permit shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit re-
issuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with this
section, a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
wastewater discharge permit.
   (J)   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
      (1)   If another municipality, or user located within another
municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Superintendent shall
enter into an inter-municipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
      (2)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by (J)(l) above, the
Superintendent shall request the following information from the contributing
municipality: a description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged
to the POTW by the contributing municipality; an inventory of all users located
within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
other information as the Superintendent may deem necessary.
      (3)   An inter-municipal agreement, as required by division (H)(1) above,
shall contain the following conditions:
         (a)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance, which is at least as stringent as this chapter, and local
limits, which are at least as stringent as those, set out in this chapter. The
requirement shall specify that the ordinance and limits must be revised as
necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits;
         (b)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a
revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;
         (c)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permits issuance, inspection and
sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality;
which of these activities will be conducted by the Superintendent; and which of
these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and
the Superintendent;
         (d)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Superintendent with access to all information that the contributing
municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
         (e)   Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
         (f)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
         (g)   A provision ensuring the Superintendent access to the facilities
of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional
boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling and any other duties deemed
necessary by the Superintendent; and
         (h)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the
terms of the inter-municipal agreement.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.118 RECORDS; THREE-YEAR RETENTION REQUIREMENT.
   All dischargers subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for no
less than three years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports,
correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring,
sampling and chemical analysis made by or in behalf of a discharger in
connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are
subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation
activities brought by the Authority pursuant hereto shall be retained and
preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded and
all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.119 CREDITS AND ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Removal credits. Where applicable, the Authority may elect to initiate
a program of removal credits as part of this chapter to reflect the POTW's
ability to remove pollutants in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.7
   (B)   Net and gross calculations. The Authority may elect to adjust
categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in the
discharger's intake water, in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.120 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Superintendent may order emergency suspension of a user's discharge.
The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal
notice to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to
present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere
with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
   (B)   Implementation of emergency suspension. Any user notified of a
suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the Superintendent may take steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to
prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or the
endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the Superintendent that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the
termination proceedings of this chapter are initiated against the user.
   (C)   Responsibilities in the event of emergency suspension. A user that is
responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes
of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to the Superintendent prior to the date of any show cause or
termination hearing under this chapter.
   (D)   No hearing required. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as
requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.121 REVOCATION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Conditions that give rise to revocation. In addition to the provisions
in §
59.117(H)(1) above (wastewater permit revocation), any user who violates the
following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
      (1)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards of this chapter.
   (B)   Notice to user. The user will be notified of the proposed termination
of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under this chapter
why the proposed action should not be taken.
   (C)   Remedy not exclusive. Exercise of this option by the Superintendent
shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against
the user.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.122 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Notice of violation. When the Superintendent finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the Superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of
violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to
include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the
Superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
Superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
   (B)   Compliance order. When the Superintendent finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the Superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible
for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a
specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time
provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the
non-compliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A
compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a
pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the
user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user.
   (C)   Cease and desist orders.
      (1)   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement,
or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Superintendent may
issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all violations and
directing the user to:
         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
         (b)   Take appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and terminating the discharge.
      (2)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.123 CONSENT ORDERS.
   (A)   The Superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with
any user responsible for non-compliance.
   (B)   The documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to
correct the non-compliance within a time period specified by the document.
   (C)   These documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant of this code and shall be judicially
enforceable.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.124 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   (A)   The Superintendent may order a user which has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to
appear before the Superintendent and show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the
time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons
for the action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken.
   (B)   The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered
or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the
hearing. The notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user.
A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.125 JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Judicial action authorized. Following the entry of any order by the
Authority with respect to the conduct of a discharger contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, the City Attorney, following the authorization of
the action by the Authority, may commence an action for appropriate legal and/
or equitable relief in the appropriate court.
   (B)   Injunctive relief. When the Superintendent finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the Superintendent may petition the appropriate court through
the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement imposed by this chapter
on activities of the user. The Superintendent may also seek other action as is
appropriate for legal or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user
to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall
not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a
user.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.126 ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS; ANNUAL PUBLICATION.
   (A)   Annual publication of list of users who are in significant non-
compliance. The Superintendent shall publish annually, in the largest daily
newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of
users, which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant non-compliance
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (B)   Definition of "significant non-compliance". For purposes of this
section, SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE shall be defined as follows, unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant
parameter by any amount;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);
      (3)   Any other discharge violation that the Superintendent believes has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public;
      (4)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Superintendent's
exercise of emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standards deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports,
and reports on compliance with compliance schedule;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or
      (8)   Any other violation(s), which the Superintendent determines, will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.127 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any discharger or any interested party shall have the right to request in
writing an interpretation or ruling by the Authority on any matter covered by
this chapter, and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. In the event
that an inquiry is received by a discharger, and deals with matters of
performance or compliance with this chapter for which enforcement activity
relating to an alleged violation is the subject, the Superintendent may, upon
receipt of a discharger's request, stay all enforcement proceedings pending
receipt of the aforementioned written reply. Appeal of any final judicial order
entered pursuant to this chapter may be taken in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.128 OPERATING UPSET DEFENSE.
   (A)   "Upset" defined. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is an unintentional and
temporary non-compliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An UPSET does not include
non-compliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
   (B)   Use of upset as an affirmative defense. An upset shall constitute an
affirmative defense to an action brought for non-compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards if the requirements of division (C) below are met.
   (C)   Elements of defense. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative
defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs or other relevant evidence, that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the
Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days):
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of non-
compliance;
         (b)   The period of non-compliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of the non-compliance.
   (D)   Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (E)   Variability of judicial determination. Users will have the opportunity
for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement
action brought for non-compliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
   (F)   Reduction; loss or failure user's treatment facility.
      (1)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.
      (2)   This requirement applies in the situation where, among other
things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost
or fails.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.129 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS DEFENSE.
   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for non-compliance with the general prohibitions or the specific
prohibitions of this code if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason
to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, would cause pass through or interference, and that either:
   (A)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference; or
   (B)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference,
was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.130 BYPASS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
user's treatment facility.
      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage
to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. severe property damage does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   (B)   When bypass may be permitted. A user may allow any bypass to occur
which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but
only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation.
These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of divisions (C) and (D) of
this section.
   (C)   Notice to the Superintendent.
      (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the Superintendent, at least ten days before the date of
the bypass, if possible.
      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the Superintendent of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and
its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if
the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The Superintendent may waive the written report on
a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
   (D)   Circumstances in which bypass may be allowed.
      (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Superintendent may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under division (C) above.
      (2)   The Superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects; if the Superintendent determines that it will
meet the three conditions listed in division (D)(1) of this section.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.131 FALSIFYING INFORMATION UNLAWFUL.
   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or who falsifies,
tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished by the
imposition of a civil penalty.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.132 PROPERTY DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to criminal prosecution.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007) Penalty, see §
59.999
§ 59.133 INSPECTION; RIGHT OF ACCESS; SAFETY RULES.
   (A)   Inspections. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of
the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The Superintendent or his or her representatives
shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical,
chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or
waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   Safety rules. While performing the necessary work on private
properties referred to in division (A) above, the Superintendent or duly
authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to
the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the
company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation,
except as these may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain safe conditions.
   (C)   Easements. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of
the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the
easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
§ 59.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   General violations.
      (1)   Any person found to be violating or failing to comply with any of
the provisions of this subchapter shall be served by the city with a written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for its satisfactory correction. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations.
      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the stated time
limit shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to a fine. Each day in which any violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Violations; recovery of costs; remedies not exclusive.
      (1)   Civil penalties.
         (a)   If a user is found to have violated a provision of this chapter,
the user shall be subject to a fine of up to $2,500 for the first violation
thereof, and $7,500 for each subsequent violation. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
         (b)   The Superintendent may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court
costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred
by the city.
         (c)   In determining the amount of fine, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent
of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation,
any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by
the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice
requires.
         (d)   The issuance of a citation for an ordinance violation and the
seeking of a fine against the user shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
         (e)   The city may also seek enforcement so that the requirements of
this chapter through administrative or judicial enforcement proceeding under
I.C. 13-30-3.
      (2)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies provided for in this section
are not exclusive. The Superintendent may take any, all or any combination of
these actions against a non-compliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment
violations will generally be in accordance with the city's Enforcement Response
Plan. However, the Superintendent is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any non-compliant user.
      (3)   Recovery of costs incurred by the authority. Any discharger
violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who discharges or causes a
discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs
the Authority's wastewater disposal system, shall be liable to the Authority
for any expense, loss or damage caused by that violation or discharge. Refusal
to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter
enforceable under provisions of this section and of this code.
      (4)   Criminal prosecution. A user who willingly or negligently violates
any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement may be prosecuted
under I.C. Title 13 and/or I.C. Title 35.
         (a)   A user who willingly or negligently introduces any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a Class D felony and be subject to a penalty per day
per violation. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action
for personal injury or property damage available under state law.
         (b)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other
documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter,
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies,
tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor and be punished by a fine per violation, per day.
(Ord. 733, passed 12-10-2007)
CHAPTER 60: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Section
   
60.01   Construction standards adopted by reference
§ 60.01 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The construction standards heretofore developed by the city are hereby
incorporated by reference to this chapter.
   (B)   Two copies of the incorporated construction standards are available on
file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer of the city for public inspection.
   (C)   Violation of the construction standards shall be subject to the
penalty provided in §
10.99 of the Ligonier City Code, which provides in part:
      (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation that violates any provision of
this Code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall upon
conviction be subject to the following:
         (a)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and
         (b)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for the second subsequent violation.
      (2)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed on each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The city, by mandatory injunction in the Noble Circuit Court against
the owner, or possessor of real estate upon which an improvement is made or
placed in violation of the construction standards, may require the removal of
said improvement erected in violation of said construction standards or the
removal of any use or condition in violation of the construction standards.
(Ord. 860-2015, passed 2-9-2015)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
         
71.   BICYCLES
         
72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
         
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
         
74.   PARKING SCHEDULES
         
75.   GOLF CARTS
         76.   UTV REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.001   Definitions
   
70.002   Application
   
70.003   Uniformity of interpretation
   
70.004   Effect of headings
   
70.005   Short title
   
70.006   Chapter not retroactive
   
70.007   Effect of partial invalidity
Traffic Administration
   
70.020   Duty of Chief of Police and deputies
   
70.021   Records of traffic violations
   
70.022   Police Department to investigate accidents
   
70.023   Traffic accident studies
   
70.024   Traffic accident reports
   
70.025   Police Department to submit annual traffic safety report
   
70.026   Emergency traffic control
   
70.027   Chief of Police to designate method of identifying funeral processions
   
70.028   Street Commissioner to be Traffic Engineer
   
70.029   Local disaster emergency declarations and travel advisories
Enforcement of and Obedience to Traffic Regulation
   
70.040   Authority of Chief of Police and Fire Department officials
   
70.041   Required obedience to traffic regulations
   
70.042   Certain non-motorized traffic to obey traffic regulations
   
70.043   Use of coaster, roller skates and the like
   
70.044   Public employees to obey traffic regulations
   
70.045   Authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.046   Written reports of accidents
   
70.047   When driver is unable to report
   
70.048   Written accident reports confidential
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.060   Authority to install traffic-control devices
   
70.061   Manual and specifications for traffic-control devices
   
70.062   When official traffic-control devices are required for enforcement
purposes
   
70.063   Interference with official traffic-control devices
   
70.064   Presumption of legality
   
70.065   Street Commissioner to designate crosswalks and establish safety zones
   
70.066   Traffic lanes
Speed and Other Specific Traffic Regulations
   
70.080   State speed laws applicable
   
70.081   Speed in alleys
   
70.082   Regulation of off-road vehicles
   
70.083   Turning movements
   
70.084   One-way streets and alleys
   
70.085   Stop and yield intersections
   
70.086   Yield right-of-way at alley exit
   
70.087   Yield streets
Miscellaneous Driving Rules
   
70.100   Stop when traffic obstructed
   
70.101   Driving through funeral or other procession
   
70.102   Drivers in a procession
   
70.103   Funeral processions to be identified
   
70.104   When permits are required for parades and processions
   
70.105   Boarding or alighting from vehicles
   
70.106   Unlawful riding
   
70.107   Driving upon a sidewalk
   
70.108   Containment of loads
   
70.109   Unattended motor vehicle
   
70.110   No passing zone upon certain streets
Pedestrians' Rights and Duties
   
70.125   Crossing at right angles
   
70.126   Obedience of pedestrians to railroad signals
 
   
70.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Whenever any
words and phrases used herein are not defined herein, but are defined in the
state laws regulating the operation of vehicles, any definition therein shall
be deemed to apply to those words and phrases used herein, except when the
context otherwise requires.
(1998 Code, § 8-1)
   ABANDONED and ABANDONMENT. Defined by the Indiana Code.
(1998 Code, § 8-2)
   ALLEY. A street intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or
buildings in urban districts and not intended for the purpose of through
vehicular traffic.
(1998 Code, § 8-3)
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, police
vehicles and ambulances as are operated by or for health and hospital
corporations pursuant to I.C. 9-21-20; provided, however, that ambulances and
other vehicles which are owned by persons, firms or corporations other than
hospitals and are used in emergency services, may be designated as emergency
vehicles, if those vehicles are authorized to operate as such by the Public
Service Commission of the state.
(1998 Code, § 8-4)
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKER. Includes an automobile wrecking and parts business.
(1998 Code, § 8-5)
   BICYCLE. Any foot propelled vehicle, irrespective of the number of wheels in
contact with the ground.
(1998 Code, § 8-6)
   BUREAU. The Bureau of Motor Vehicles of the state.
(1998 Code, § 8-7)
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a street when
50% or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 500 feet or more is
occupied by building in use for business.
(1998 Code, § 8-8)
   COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of the Bureau.
(1998 Code, § 8-9)
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
street measured from the curbs, or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway, regardless of the presence of pavement markings; and/
or
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
(1998 Code, § 8-10)
   DISPOSAL AGENT. Any firm or individual engaged in business as a scrap metal
processor or automobile wrecker.
(1998 Code, § 8-11)
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
(1998 Code, § 8-12)
   HOLIDAY. The following days of the year which are designated as holidays:
the first day of January, commonly known as New Year's Day; the last Monday of
May, commonly known as Memorial Day; July 4, commonly known as Independence
Day; the first Monday of September, commonly known as Labor Day; the fourth
Thursday of November, commonly known as Thanksgiving Day; and December 25,
commonly known as Christmas Day.
(1998 Code, § 8-13)
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any
other angle may come in conflict; and/or
      (2)   The junction of any alley with a street shall not constitute an
INTERSECTION.
(1998 Code, § 8-14)
   LOADING ZONE. A space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the
loading or unloading of passengers or property.
(1998 Code, § 8-15)
   OFFICER or POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(1998 Code, § 8-16)
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Eastern Standard Time.
(1998 Code, § 8-17)
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices
not inconsistent with this act placed or erected, by authority or a public body
or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
(1998 Code, § 8-18)
   OWNER. The last known record title holder to a vehicle according to the
records of the Bureau under the provisions of I.C. 9-13-2-121.
(1998 Code, § 8-19)
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise of passengers.
(1998 Code, § 8-20)
   PARKING SPACE or PARKING PLACE. A designated portion of the surface of a
street of sufficient length and depth to accommodate a vehicle of reasonable
dimensions to be parked. The designated portion shall be specified and marked
off as provided in this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 8-21)
   PARTS. All component parts of a vehicle which are in a state of disassembly,
or are assembled with other vehicle component parts, but which in their state
of assembly, do not constitute a complete vehicle.
(1998 Code, § 8-22)
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
(1998 Code, § 8-23)
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
(1998 Code, § 8-24)
   PRIVATE PREMISES. All privately owned property which is not classified
within the definition of public premises.
(1998 Code, § 8-25)
   PUBLIC AGENCY. That which is assigned the local responsibility for removal,
storage and disposal of abandoned vehicles by ordinance of the Common Council.
(1998 Code, § 8-26)
   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park or
other state, county or municipally owned property.
(1998 Code, § 8-27)
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a street not
comprising a business district, when the property on the street for a distance
of 500 feet or more, is in the main improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business.
(1998 Code, § 8-28)
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the street.
(1998 Code, § 8-29)
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
(1998 Code, § 8-30)
   SCRAP METAL PROCESSOR. An establishment having facilities for processing
iron, steel or nonferrous scrap and whose principal product is scrap iron and
scrap steel or nonferrous scrap for sale for remelting purposes.
(1998 Code, § 8-31)
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for use by
pedestrians.
(1998 Code, § 8-32)
   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in,
receiving or discharging passengers.
(1998 Code, § 8-33)
   STATE LAW. Indiana laws regulating and relating to motor vehicles and their
operation.
(1998 Code, § 8-34)
   STOP. Complete cessation from movement when required.
(1998 Code, § 8-35)
   STOP or STOPPING. Any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, when prohibited, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic-control sign or signal.
(1998 Code, § 8-36)
   STREET. The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
(1998 Code, § 8-37)
   TOWING SERVICE. A business organized for the purpose of moving or removing
disabled motor vehicles and once removed, to store or impound the motor
vehicles.
(1998 Code, § 8-38)
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, vehicles, bicycles and other conveyances, either
singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel.
(1998 Code, § 8-39)
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
(1998 Code, § 8-40)
   VEHICLE. A device for transportation by land, water or air; and includes
mobile equipment with provisions for transport of an operator.
(1998 Code, § 8-41) (Ord. 447, passed 2-28-1984)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, see I.C. 9-13-2
   Motor vehicle regulations, see I.C. 9-13-2-1 et seq.
§ 70.002 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this title relating to the operation of vehicles refer
exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon streets and municipally operated
parking lots except where a different place is specifically referred to in a
given section.
(1998 Code, § 8-180) (Ord. 447, passed 2-28-1984)
§ 70.003 UNIFORMITY OF INTERPRETATION.
   This title shall be so interpreted and construed as to effect its general
purpose to make uniform the laws of the city.
(1998 Code, § 8-181) (Ord. 447, passed 2-28-1984)
§ 70.004 EFFECT OF HEADINGS.
   Subchapter, section and division headings contained in this title shall not
be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning
or extent of the provisions of any subchapter, section or division hereof.
(1998 Code, § 8-182) (Ord. 447, passed 2-28-1984)
§ 70.005 SHORT TITLE.
   This title may be known and cited as the City Traffic Ordinance.
(1998 Code, § 8-183) (Ord. 447, passed 2-28-1984)
§ 70.006 CHAPTER NOT RETROACTIVE.
   (A)   This title shall not have a retroactive effect.
   (B)   It shall not apply to any traffic accident, cause of action arising
out of a traffic accident or judgment arising therefrom, or violation of the
motor vehicle ordinance of this city occurring prior to the effective date of
this title.
(1998 Code, § 8-184) (Ord. 447, passed 2-28-1984)
§ 70.007 EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   If any part of parts of this title are for any reason held to be invalid,
the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this .
(1998 Code, § 8-185) (Ord. 447, passed 2-28-1984)
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
§ 70.020 DUTY OF CHIEF OF POLICE AND DEPUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and deputies to enforce the
street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state laws, make arrests
for traffic violations, investigate accidents, cooperate with official(s) of
the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways to
improve traffic conditions, and carry out those duties specially imposed upon
the Chief of Police and deputies by the traffic ordinances of this city.
(1998 Code, § 8-45)
§ 70.021 RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The Police Department shall keep a record of all violations of
the traffic ordinances of this city or of the state vehicle laws of which any
person has been charged together with a record of the final disposition of all
the alleged offenses. The record shall be so maintained as to show all types of
violations and the total of each.
      (2)   The record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and
from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most
recent five-year period.
   (B)   All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be
serially numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall be kept
available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.
   (C)   All the records and reports shall be public records.
(1998 Code, § 8-46)
§ 70.022 POLICE DEPARTMENT TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and deputies to investigate
traffic accidents and arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons
charged with violations of law causing or contributing to the accidents.
(1998 Code, § 8-47)
§ 70.023 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.
   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
Police Department shall cooperate with city officials in conducting studies of
the accidents and determining remedial measures.
(1998 Code, § 8-48)
§ 70.024 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   The Police Department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic
accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed
alphabetically by location. The reports shall be available for the use and
information of city officials.
(1998 Code, § 8-49)
§ 70.025 POLICE DEPARTMENT TO SUBMIT ANNUAL TRAFFIC SAFETY REPORT.
   (A)   The Police Department shall annually prepare a traffic report which
shall be filed with the City Council.
   (B)   The report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city
as follows:
      (1)   The number of traffic accidents the number of persons killed, the
number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data;
      (2)   The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent
data on the safety activities of the Police Department; and
      (3)   Any plans and recommendations of the Police Department for future
traffic safety activities.
(1998 Code, § 8-50)
§ 70.026 EMERGENCY TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   The Chief of Police is authorized to temporarily place official
control devices when required by an emergency.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall notify the Mayor of his or her actions as
soon thereafter as practicable.
(1998 Code, § 8-51)
§ 70.027 CHIEF OF POLICE TO DESIGNATE METHOD OF IDENTIFYING FUNERAL
PROCESSIONS.
   The Chief of Police shall approve types of pennants or other identifying
insignias to be displayed upon, or other methods to be employed to identify the
vehicles in funeral processions.
(1998 Code, § 8-52)
§ 70.028 STREET COMMISSIONER TO BE TRAFFIC ENGINEER.
   The Street Commissioner shall serve as the Traffic Engineer in addition to
his or her other functions.
(1998 Code, § 8-53)
§ 70.029 LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY DECLARATIONS AND TRAVEL ADVISORIES.
   (A)   Title. This section shall be known as the Local Disaster Emergency
Declaration Ordinance of the City of Ligonier Indiana, and shall apply to all
roads, streets, highways or right-of-ways maintained by the city Street
Department (“streets”). The mandatory provisions of this section and of any
local disaster emergency issued pursuant to this section, including the
prohibitions on travel, and the penalties for violating those prohibitions
shall not apply to a county road maintained by Noble County nor to a state
highway maintained by the Indiana Department of Transportation.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   The Mayor, after consultation with the Chief of Police, and the
Street Department Superintendent, if available, or the respective
representative designated by each person as the person to consult in his or her
absence for the purpose of recommending a declaration of local disaster
emergency, may declare a local disaster emergency which may also contain a
“warning level” travel advisory by executive order when, in the Mayor’s
judgment, such order would be appropriate under I.C. 10-14-3-29 and in the best
interest of the public safety and welfare of the residents of the City of
Ligonier, Indiana.
      (2)   If, with or without the issuance of a declaration of local disaster
emergency, the Mayor determines that conditions require an “advisory” or
“watch” level of travel advisory, the Mayor may issue an “advisory” or a
“watch” travel advisory.
      (3)   Pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-29.5, a “warning” level travel advisory
may be issued only after or as a part of a declaration of local disaster
emergency. Such emergency shall continue in effect until the Mayor, and/or
officials or their respective designees who declared the emergency thereafter
determine an emergency no longer exists and terminate the emergency order.
      (4)   The Mayor may declare a “warning” level travel advisory upon his or
her determination that the conditions are appropriate for the issuance of a
local disaster emergency under I.C. 10-14-3-29, and the further determination
that the criteria set forth in division (C) below have been met.
   (C)   Local travel advisories. A local travel advisory shall be declared in
accordance with I.C. 10-14-3-29.5 and this section. The purpose of a local
travel advisory is to keep the citizens of the City of Ligonier Indiana,
informed of the weather and city street conditions, and to assist the Ligonier
Street Department in the cleaning of city streets by eliminating stranded
vehicles.
      (1)   Advisory level travel advisory. This level may be declared when
routine travel or activities may be restricted in areas of the city because of
a hazardous situation; citizens should use caution or avoid these areas.
Schools and businesses may begin to implement their emergency action plans.
      (2)   Watch level travel advisory. This level may be declared when
conditions are threatening to the safety of the public. Only essential travel
is recommended (i.e., to and from work, emergency situations, and the like). At
this level, emergency action plans should be implemented by businesses,
schools, government agencies and other organizations.
      (3)   Warning level travel advisory. This level may be declared when
streets have become impassable and the Ligonier Street Department is not able
to keep the streets clear due to extreme weather conditions such as a severe
snow fall, high drifts or blizzard like conditions are present. Travel may be
restricted to emergency management workers ONLY, and essential emergency travel
by members of the public as the Mayor may further direct, such as privately
employed health care workers. Further restrictions that the Mayor deems
necessary may be included within the local disaster declaration.
   (D)   Publication. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or
terminating a local disaster emergency shall be given prompt and general
publicity and shall be filed promptly in the office of the Clerk of the City of
Ligonier pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-22(b)(2). Publication and broadcast of an
advisory, watch or warning level travel advisory shall be made or caused to be
made by the Mayor or such other officials designating the level of travel
advisory using a press release to all law enforcement agencies, fire
departments, hospitals and news media in the city. The declaration shall be
promptly forwarded to the Indiana Department of Homeland Security, and shall be
kept on file by the Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Ligonier.
   (E)   Exemptions. Vehicles which shall be exempt from the travel and parking
restrictions imposed in a travel advisory pursuant to this section shall
include medical assistance, law enforcement, Fire Department, emergency
management, public utility, and fuel hauling vehicles, and employees of any of
the above exempt services, if engaged in performing their respective duties.
Any other vehicles violating this section or any of the parking restrictions
contained in local declaration of disaster emergency or a “warning” travel
advisory are subject to removal by towing or other means at the expense of the
owner of the vehicle, when such towing and/or removal is deemed necessary by a
duly authorized representative of either the Ligonier Street Department, or the
Ligonier Police Department.
(1998 Code, § 8-54) (Am. Ord. 803-2011, passed 12-12-2011) Penalty, see §
70.999
ENFORCEMENT OF AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATION
§ 70.040 AUTHORITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and deputies or officers
as are assigned by the Chief of Police, to enforce all street traffic laws of
this city and all of the state vehicle laws.
   (B)   The Chief of Police and deputies, or officers as are assigned by the
Chief of Police, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal
in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, the Chief of
Police and deputies may direct traffic as conditions may require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
   (C)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the Chief of Police and deputies or officers in directing
traffic in the immediate vicinity.
(1998 Code, § 8-58)
§ 70.041 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   It is unlawful and a municipal ordinance violation for any person to do any
act forbidden, or fail to perform any act required, in this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 8-59) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.042 CERTAIN NON-MOTORIZED TRAFFIC TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   Every person propelling a pushcart, riding an animal, or driving any animal
drawn vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this
title except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can
have no application.
(1998 Code, § 8-60)
§ 70.043 USE OF COASTER, ROLLER SKATES AND THE LIKE.
   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, skateboards, in-line skates or similar device shall go upon any
roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk. When so crossing, the
person shall be granted all the rights and be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians.
(1998 Code, § 8-61) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.044 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this title shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles
owned or operated by the United States, this state, this city or any political
subdivision of the state, subject to the specific exceptions as are set forth
in this chapter or in the state vehicle code. The provisions of this title
shall not apply to person, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually
engaged in work in a street but shall apply to a person and vehicles when
traveling to or from work.
(1998 Code, § 8-62)
§ 70.045 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or when responding to, but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may park
or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title.
   (B)   The foregoing provision shall not relieve the drive of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to park or stand with due regard for the safety
of all person, nor shall the provision protect the driver from the consequences
of his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(1998 Code, § 8-63)
§ 70.046 WRITTEN REPORTS OF ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle, which is in any manner involved in an
accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to an
apparent extent of $100 or more shall, within five days after the accident,
forward a written report of the accident to the office of the Chief of Police
or a copy of any report filed with the state police.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable when the
accident has been investigated at the scene by the Chief of Police or deputy/
officer while the driver was present there at.
(1998 Code, § 8-64)
§ 70.047 WHEN DRIVER IS UNABLE TO REPORT.
   Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report of an
accident, as required in §
70.046 above, and the driver is not the owner of the vehicle, then the owner of
the vehicle involved in the accident shall, within five days after learning of
the accident, make the report not made by the driver.
(1998 Code, § 8-65)
§ 70.048 WRITTEN ACCIDENT REPORTS CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   All written accident reports made by drivers, owners or occupants of
vehicles involved in accidents, as required in §§
70.046 and
70.047 above, shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting, and
shall be for the confidential use of the Chief of Police or other governmental
agencies having use of the records for accident prevention purposes, except
that the Chief of Police may disclose the identity of a person involved in an
accident when the identity is not otherwise known, or when the person denies
his or her presence at the accident.
   (B)   No report shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal,
arising out of any accident, except that the Chief of Police shall furnish upon
demand of any person who has, or claims to have, made to the Chief of Police,
solely to prove a compliance or a failure to comply with the requirements that
such a report be made to the Police Department.
(1998 Code, § 8-66)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.060 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The Street Commissioner, or his or her Department, shall place and
maintain official traffic-control devices when and as required under the
traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of those
ordinances.
   (B)   It may place and maintain additional official traffic-control devices
as it may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the traffic
ordinances of this city and the state vehicle law.
(1998 Code, § 8-68)
§ 70.061 MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the Indiana
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. All signs
and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall be uniform as to
type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected,
and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this title, shall be
official traffic-control devices.
(1998 Code, § 8-69)
Statutory reference:
   Traffic-control devices, see I.C. 9-21-4-1 et seq.
§ 70.062 WHEN OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES ARE REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT
PURPOSES.
   No provisions of this title for which official traffic-control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and
place of the alleged violation, an official device is not in proper position
and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever
a particular section does not state that official traffic-control devices are
required, that section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or
in place.
(1998 Code, § 8-70)
§ 70.063 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   No person shall without lawful authority, attempt to or in feet alter,
injure, deface, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any
part thereof.
(1998 Code, § 8-71) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.064 PRESUMPTION OF LEGALITY.
   (A)   Whenever official traffic-control devices are placed in positions
approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, those devices
shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of
lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent
evidence.
   (B)   Any official traffic-control device placed pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining
to those devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this
chapter unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
(1998 Code, § 8-72)
§ 70.065 STREET COMMISSIONER TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS AND ESTABLISH SAFETY
ZONES.
   The Street Commissioner is authorized at the direction of the Common
Council, to designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway crosswalks at intersections where in its opinion
there is a particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at other
places as it may deem necessary.
(1998 Code, § 8-73)
§ 70.066 TRAFFIC LANES.
   The Street Commissioner is authorized at the direction of the Common
Council, to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway under
the jurisdiction of the city.
(1998 Code, § 8-74)
SPEED AND OTHER SPECIFIC TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 70.080 STATE SPEED LAWS APPLICABLE.
   The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable
upon the streets within this city, except as this chapter, as authorized by
state law, declares and determines, upon the basis of an engineering and/or
traffic investigation, that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon
specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so determined
when signs are in place giving notice thereof.
(1998 Code, § 8-78) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Speed limits, see I.C. 9-21-5-1 et seq.
§ 70.081 SPEED IN ALLEYS.
   Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance
with state law, the maximum lawful speed limit in an alley shall be ten mph,
and no person shall drive a vehicle in an alley in excess of the limit.
(1998 Code, § 8-79) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.082 REGULATION OF OFF-ROAD VEHICLES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      HIGHWAY, STREET or RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire width between the boundary
lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
      OFF-ROAD VEHICLE. A motor driven vehicle capable of cross country travel
without benefit of a road or trail on or immediately over water, land, snow,
ice, marsh, swampland or other natural terrain. It includes but is not limited
to a multi-wheeled drive or low pressure tire vehicle, amphibious machine,
ground effect, air cushioned vehicle, three wheeler, four wheeler or other
means of transportation deriving motive power from a source other than muscle
or wind.
      PARK. Any property located within the city, designated by its Board of
Works and/or Park Board as a public park.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Land and waters which are owned or leased or subject to
the control of the city or any of its municipal boards.
(1998 Code, § 8-85)
   (B)   Off-track vehicle operation on public highways, rights-of-way and
public parks. A person shall not operate off-road vehicle on a public highway,
street or right-of-way thereof or upon a public or private parking lot, or upon
a park or park lands within the city limits, not specifically designated for
the use of off-road vehicles, except under the following conditions and
circumstances.
      (1)   The vehicle may be operated on a public right-of-way adjacent to
the traveled portion of a public highway or street if there is sufficient width
to operate at a reasonable distance off and away from the traveled portion and
in a manner so as to not endanger life or property, provided the operation is
for the purposes of going to or corning back from outside the corporate limits
of the city by the shortest route.
      (2)   A duly constituted law enforcement officer of the city may
authorize the use of an off-road vehicle on the public highway, streets or
parks within his or her jurisdiction during emergencies when conventional motor
vehicles cannot be used for transportation due to snow or other extreme highway
conditions.
      (3)   A person under the age of 14 shall not operate an off-road vehicle
without immediate supervision of a person 18 years of age or older except on
land owned or under the control of the person or his or her parents or legal
guardian.
      (4)   No off-road vehicle shall be operated within the corporate limits
of the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except in times of
duly designated emergencies.
      (5)   All off-road vehicles shall observe all speed limits and shall not
be ridden in a reckless or unsafe manner.
      (6)   All off-road vehicles operated pursuant to provisions of this
section shall be required to obey all traffic-control devices.
      (7)   No off-road vehicles shall be driven upon the sidewalks within the
city.
(1998 Code, § 8-86) (Ord. 464, passed 2-10-1986) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.083 TURNING MOVEMENTS.
   (A)   Authority to place devices altering normal course for turns. The City
Council is authorized to place official traffic-control devices, within or
adjacent to intersections, indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning at those intersections. The course to be traveled as so indicated may
conform to, or be other than as prescribed by law.
(1998 Code, § 8-90)
   (B)   Limitations on turning around. The City Council is authorized to
determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at those intersections. The
making of those turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on
the signs, or they may be removed when those turns are permitted.
(1998 Code, § 8-91)
§ 70.084 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys. The City Council is
authorized to determine and designate one-way streets or alleys and shall place
and maintain official traffic-control devices giving notice thereof. No
designation shall be effective unless the devices are in place.
(1998 Code, § 8-95)
   (B)   Signage. The City Street Department is authorized and directed to post
one-way traffic signs and one-way "Do Not Enter" signs as appropriate to notify
the motoring public of the one-way flow of traffic.
(1998 Code, § 8-97)
   (C)   Compliance required. No person shall operate or cause to be operated a
vehicle contrary to the one-way traffic flow.
(1998 Code, § 8-98) (Ord. 525, passed 10-12-1992)
§ 70.085 STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Intersections where stop or yield is required. The City Council is
authorized to determine and designate intersections where a particular hazard
exists and to determine:
      (1)   Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such
intersection, in which event it shall have erected a stop sign at every place
where a stop is required; or
      (2)   Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a
different street at the intersection, in which event it shall have erected a
yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required.
(1998 Code, § 8-104)
   (B)   Multi-way stop intersections. When signs are erected giving notice
thereof, all streets at the following intersections shall be stop streets.
Drivers of all vehicles shall stop, as required by state law, before entering
the described intersection.
(1998 Code, § 8-105)
   (C)   Stop streets. When signs are erected giving notice thereof the streets
at the following intersections shall be stop streets. Drivers of all vehicles
on those street(s) shall stop, as required by state law, before entering the
described intersection.
(1998 Code, § 8-106)
§ 70.086 YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY AT ALLEY EXIT.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter a street from an alley shall yield
the right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians approaching on the street.
(1998 Code, § 8-108)
§ 70.087 YIELD STREETS.
   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, these streets at the following
intersections shall be yield streets. Drivers of all vehicles on these streets
shall yield the right-of-way, as required by state law, before entering the
described intersection.
(1998 Code, § 8-110)
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
§ 70.100 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
(1998 Code, § 8-115) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.101 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION.
   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles
are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not apply at intersections
where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers.
(1998 Code, § 8-116) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.102 DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION.
   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is practicable and safe.
(1998 Code, § 8-117)
§ 70.103 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED.
   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such
by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other
identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and
designated by the Chief of Police.
(1998 Code, § 8-118)
§ 70.104 WHEN PERMITS ARE REQUIRED FOR PARADES AND PROCESSIONS.
   No procession or parade except funeral processions, the United States Armed
Forces, the military forces of this state and the forces of the Chief of Police
and Fire Department shall occupy, march or proceed along any street, except in
accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and other regulations as
are set forth which may apply.
(1998 Code, § 8-119) (Ord. 447, passed 2-8-1984) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Funeral processions, see I.C. 9-21-13-1 et seq.
§ 70.105 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while the vehicle is in
motion.
(1998 Code, § 8-120) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.106 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion not designed or
intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
(1998 Code, § 8-121) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.107 DRIVING UPON A SIDEWALK.
   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area, except
upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
(1998 Code, § 8-122) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.108 CONTAINMENT OF LOADS.
   Any person hauling stone, oil, rubbish or any other material shall see that
the vehicle shall be of adequate dimensions and tight, so that none of the
material shall fall from the vehicle. Any material falling from a vehicle shall
be promptly removed from the street by the driver who shall be responsible for
any damage done.
(1998 Code, § 8-123) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.109 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit the motor
vehicle to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the
ignition and removing the key from the ignition.
(1998 Code, § 8-124) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.110 NO PASSING ZONE UPON CERTAIN STREETS.
   It is determined that upon the basis of traffic evaluation, certain
thoroughfares and streets in the city should have restrictions upon the act of
passing placed upon them.
(1998 Code, § 8-125) Penalty, see §
70.999
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
§ 70.125 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   Except where otherwise indicated by a crosswalk or other official traffic-
control devices, a pedestrian shall cross a roadway at right angles to the
roadway or by the shortest route to the opposite side.
(1998 Code, § 8-128)
§ 70.126 OBEDIENCE OF PEDESTRIANS TO RAILROAD SIGNALS.
   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or
barrier at a railroad grade crossing while the gate or barrier is closed or is
being opened or closed.
(1998 Code, § 8-129) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
70.084(C) shall have judgment entered against them in a sum not to exceed $500
plus costs.
(1998 Code, § 8-99)
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
70.060 through
70.066,
70.085 through
70.087,
70.125 and
70.126 shall be fined upon conviction a fine of $15 for each violation.
(1998 Code, § 8-172)
   (D)   Any person violating any provisions of §
70.029 or the vehicle use or parking restrictions contained in a local
declaration of disaster emergency or a “warning” travel advisory shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation and may be fined any sum not to exceed $100
and such sum shall be enforceable in any court of law, duly authorized by
Indiana state law, and in addition to such fine the court shall be authorized
to direct the violator to repay the city any monetary losses or expenses
incurred in the incident.
(Ord. 447, passed 7-23-1990; Ord. 525, passed 10-12-1992; Ord. 803-2011, passed
12-12-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Penalty provisions, see I.C. 9-30-2 through 9-30-14
CHAPTER 71: BICYCLES
Section
   
71.01   Effect of regulations
   
71.02   Traffic regulations apply to persons riding bicycles
   
71.03   Parking bicycles
   
71.04   Riding on sidewalks
   
71.05   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
71.06   Attaching bicycle to poles
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is a municipal ordinance violation for any person to do any act
forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter.
   (B)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(1998 Code, § 8-132) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this chapter, except as to special regulations in this chapter and
except as to those provisions of this chapter which, by their nature, can have
no application.
(1998 Code, § 8-133)
§ 71.03 PARKING BICYCLES.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb, or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or
against a building, or at the curb in a manner so as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(1998 Code, § 8-134) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
   (B)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, that person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and give an audible signal
before overtaking and passing the pedestrian.
(1998 Code, § 8-135) Penalty, see §
71.99
Cross-reference:
   Pedestrians' rights and duties, see §§
70.125 and
70.126
§ 71.05 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing
a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use the path and shall not use the roadway.
(1998 Code, § 8-136) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 ATTACHING BICYCLE TO POLES.
   (A)   Any person may park near, and secure to, any publicly owned pole or
post for a period of not more than 12 consecutive hours, unless an official
traffic control device or any applicable law or ordinance prohibits parking or
securing bicycles at that location.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be secured to any tree, fire hydrant, or police or
fire call box.
   (C)   No bicycle shall be secured in any manner so as to impede the normal
and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic.
(1998 Code, § 8-137) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $25 plus court costs.
(1998 Code, § 8-138)
CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
   
72.01   Angle parking
   
72.02   Parking not to obstruct traffic
   
72.03   Restricted in alleys
   
72.04   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
72.05   Obedience to parking signs or markings
   
72.06   Truck and bus parking restricted
   
72.07   Standing or parking prohibited off roadway
   
72.08   Standing or parking prohibited at alleys
   
72.09   Standing in loading zone
   
72.10   City Council to designate loading zones
   
72.11   Driving or parking of motor vehicles in the front yard
 
   
72.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Labor Day Festival Regulations, see
Chapter 100
Statutory reference:
   Parking regulation, see I.C. 9-21-16-1 et seq.
§ 72.01 ANGLE PARKING.
   (A)   The City Council shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall
be permitted and mark or sign the streets.
   (B)   Angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal aid or state
highway within this city.
(1998 Code, § 8-142) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.
   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley in a
manner or under conditions so as to leave available less than ten feet of the
width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
(1998 Code, § 8-144) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 RESTRICTED IN ALLEYS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or
park a vehicle in any alley for a period of time longer than is necessary for
the loading or unloading of passengers or freight.
   (B)   No vehicle shall stand or park in any alley for any purpose so as to
leave available less than eight feet of the width of the alley for the free
movement of traffic or if less than eight feet of the width of the alley is
available, the operator of the parked or standing vehicle shall immediately
move it upon the approach of another vehicle.
(1998 Code, § 8-145) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of
displaying the vehicle for sale, greasing or repairing the vehicle except
repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(1998 Code, § 8-146) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 OBEDIENCE TO PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS.
   In those locations that have been officially signed or marked for parking on
the streets or in municipal parking lots, no person shall park or stand a
vehicle other than within any markings and at the orientation indicated by the
signs or markings.
(1998 Code, § 8-147) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 TRUCK AND BUS PARKING RESTRICTED.
   (A)   Residential district. No person owning, leasing, possessing or
operating a truck, trailer, bus, recreational vehicle, tractor or tractor and
trailer, taller, wider and longer than a conventional station wagon or pickup
truck shall be permitted to park the same upon any street or alley within the
residential district of the corporate limits of the city. However, the vehicles
may park for a sufficient time to make deliveries or pick up merchandise,
provided the parking does not interrupt the regular flow of traffic and does
not create a hazard for the safety of others.
   (B)   Business District. In the business district, no such truck, bus or
recreational vehicle shall park upon any street or alley within the corporate
limits of the city longer than one hour. However, those vehicles may park for a
sufficient time to make deliveries or pick up merchandise in the regular course
of business, provided the parking does not interrupt the regular flow of
traffic and does not create a hazard for the safety of others and provided such
parking complies with all other parking regulations in force in the city.
   (C)   Permission. Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (A) or (B)
above, the truck or bus may park upon a street in a business or residential
district after obtaining written permission from the Police Department, which
shall stipulate the location and length of time the vehicle may be parked.
(1998 Code, § 8-148)
§ 72.07 STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED OFF ROADWAY.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on a street other than on the
roadway or paved shoulder.
(1998 Code, § 8-149) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALLEYS.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on a street in any manner which
would restrict full access to any alley.
(1998 Code, § 8-150) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.09 STANDING IN LOADING ZONE.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or
materials, in any place marked as a loading zone during hours and days when the
regulations applicable to the curb loading zone are effective, and then only
for a period not to exceed three minutes for passengers or 20 minutes for
materials.
(1998 Code, § 8-155) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 CITY COUNCIL TO DESIGNATE LOADING ZONES.
   The City Council is authorized to determine the location of loading zones
and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating
the hours and days during which the provisions of this section are applicable.
(1998 Code, § 8-156)
§ 72.11 DRIVING OR PARKING OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN THE FRONT YARD. 
   (A)   Front yard defined. For purposes of this section, the term FRONT YARD
shall mean the area between a city street right-of-way line and the nearest
foundation of a residential building, with the area extending laterally to the
side lot lines of the lot upon which the residential building is located upon.
The front yard of a residential building is typically that area between the
city street that serves at the building's physical or mailing address and the
nearest foundation of the building. The FRONT YARD of a corner lot, that is a
lot that adjoins two separate city street rights-of-way, shall include the area
that encompasses the front yard, as defined above, together with the area
between the right-of-way line of the second city street and the nearest
foundation of the residential building on the corner lot.
   (B)   Person defined. For purposes of this section, the term PERSON shall
include the individual who drove or placed the motor vehicle in the front yard
in violation of this section, the registered owner of the motor vehicle, as
well as the owner(s) of the residential property and the lessee(s) thereof.
However, for purposes of enforcement and the imposition of penalties under this
section, only one citation may be issued for each violation of this section.
   (C)   Driving or parking prohibited. It shall be a violation of this section
for a person to drive on, or to park a motor vehicle on the front yard of a
residential dwelling in the city.
   (D)   Enforcement. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
section, any law enforcement officer or the city's zoning and code enforcement
office is empowered to enter upon any premises upon which a motor vehicle is
parked in violation of this section. City law enforcement officers and the
zoning and code enforcement officer are hereby authorized to issue citations
for violations of this section.
(Ord. 898-2017, passed 1-23-2017)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
72.01 through
72.10 shall be fined upon conviction a fine of $15 for each violation.
   (C)   A person who is found to have violated §
72.11 for the first time shall be fined in the sum of $50. If the person has a
previous adjudication for the violation of §
72.11, and the current violation occurred within 365 days of the date of the
prior violation, then upon the second adjudication for the violation of §
72.11, that person shall be fined in the sum of $100. If the person has two or
more prior adjudications for the violation of §
72.11, regardless of when the prior violations occurred, then upon the third or
subsequent; adjudication for the violation of §
72.11, the person shall be fined in the sum of $300. Each day that a violation
of §
72.11 exists, or is permitted to exist, shall constitute a separate violating
of §
72.11.
(Ord. 711, passed 2-13-2006)
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Section
   
73.01   Traffic schedules adopted by reference
§ 73.01 TRAFFIC SCHEDULES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The traffic schedules of the city are hereby adopted by reference and set
out as fully as if set out at length herein.
CHAPTER 74: PARKING SCHEDULES
Section
   
74.01   Parking schedules adopted by reference
§ 74.01 PARKING SCHEDULES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The parking schedules of the city are hereby adopted by reference and set
out as fully as if set out at length herein.
CHAPTER 75: GOLF CARTS
Section
   
75.01   Definitions
   
75.02   Operation of a golf cart
   
75.03   Operator
   
75.04   Financial responsibility
   
75.05   Time of operation
   
75.06   Place of operation
   
75.07   Occupants
   
75.08   Traffic rules
   
75.09   Slow moving vehicle sign
   
75.10   Registration
 
   
75.99   Penalty
§ 75.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   GOLF CART. A four-wheeled motor vehicle originally and specifically designed
and intended to transport one or more individuals and golf clubs for the
purpose of playing the game of golf on a golf course, and which is powered by a
battery or internal combustion motor.
   DRIVERS LICENSE. A valid license to operate a motor vehicle issued by
Indiana or any other state.
   FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Liability insurance coverage on a golf cart in an
amount not less than required by Indiana law for motor vehicles operated on
public highways in the State of Indiana.
(Ord. 903-2017, passed 6-26-2017)
§ 75.02 OPERATION OF A GOLF CART.
   The operation of a golf cart within the city is strictly prohibited unless
the golf cart is operated, insured, and equipped in full compliance with this
chapter.
(Ord. 903-2017, passed 6-26-2017)
§ 75.03 OPERATOR.
   Only persons over 16 years of age and holding a valid driver's license may
operate a golf cart.
(Ord. 903-2017, passed 6-26-2017)
§ 75.04 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   The operator or owner of a golf cart must show financial responsibility when
operating a golf cart. Written proof of financial responsibility must be
available on the golf cart or carried by the operator at all times.
(Ord. 903-2017, passed 6-26-2017)
§ 75.05 TIME OF OPERATION.
   Golf carts shall not be operated on any city street between one-half hour
after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise. At all times, any vehicle
operated pursuant to this chapter shall have brake lights and turn signals (one
on each side of the rear and front of the vehicle), which are visible from a
distance of 500 feet.
(Ord. 903-2017, passed 6-26-2017)
§ 75.06 PLACE OF OPERATION.
   Golf carts may be operated on city streets, alleys, and parking lots. Golf
carts may not be operated on sidewalks.
(Ord. 903-2017, passed 6-26-2017)
§ 75.07 OCCUPANTS.
   The number of occupants in a golf cart shall be limited to the number of
persons for whom factory seating is installed and provided on the golf cart.
The operator and all occupants shall be seated in the golf cart and no parts of
the bodies of the operator or any occupant shall extend outside the perimeter
of the golf cart while the golf cart is being operated.
(Ord. 903-2017, passed 6-26-2017)
§ 75.08 TRAFFIC RULES.
   The operator of the golf cart shall comply with all traffic rules and
regulations adopted by the State of Indiana and the city which govern the
operation of the motor vehicles. No golf carts shall be permitted on State Road
5 or U.S. Highway 33, except for purposes of crossing same. Such crossings are
to be made at a 90° angle to the roadway.
(Ord. 903-2017, passed 6-26-2017)
§ 75.09 SLOW MOVING VEHICLE SIGN.
   All golf carts must display on the back of the golf cart a "slow moving
vehicle" sign of the same type required under Indiana law.
(Ord. 903-2017, passed 6-26-2017)
§ 75.10 REGISTRATION.
   All golf carts to be operated on the public streets and alleys shall be
registered with the city and the owner thereof shall pay an annual registration
fee. All registrations expire December 31 of each year. The registration forms
are available in the Office of the Ligonier City Police and the registration
fee shall be paid to the Police Clerk through the Office of the Ligonier City
Police. Upon the effective date of this chapter, the registration fee shall be
$25 annually. At the time of registration, the owner shall present proof of
insurance insuring property damage and personal liability coverage for injury
or damage property of others and of personal injury to other persons. Prior to
the issuance of the registration by the City Police Clerk, the golf cart shall
be inspected by the Police Chief, or his designee, to ensure compliance with
the terms of this chapter. All provisions of this chapter apply to owner
operated golf carts as well as those leased or rented from a vendor.
(Ord. 903-2017, passed 6-26-2017)
§ 75.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class "C"
infraction and a violation of the Ligonier City Code. An owner, lessee, or
operator may be cited to the Ligonier City Ordinance Violation Bureau by the
issuance of an Indiana Uniform Traffic Ticket. A first time violation shall be
subject to a $50 fine. A second violation shall be subject to a $75 fine. A
third and subsequent violation shall be subject to a $100 fine. The failure to
pay the fine through the Ligonier City Ordinance Bureau may result in any
citation being referred to the Noble County Superior Court Division II for
prosecution. The definition of a first, second, and third offense shall be as
set forth in §
36.01.
(Ord. 903-2017, passed 6-26-2017)
CHAPTER 76: UTV REGULATIONS
Section
   
76.01   UTVs on city streets
   
76.02   Registration
   
76.03   Insurance
   
76.04   Operation of UTVs
 
   
76.99   Penalty
§ 76.01 UTVS ON CITY STREETS.
   Subject to the regulations contained in this chapter, UTVs, as defined
herein, are hereby allowed on the streets of the city, excluding state
highways, subject to the conditions set forth in this chapter. Three wheelers
and four wheelers, designed for use by a single driver or do not provide for
side by side seating, are not UTVs and are not allowed on the streets of the
city.
(Ord. 1023-2025, passed 7-28-2025)
§ 76.02 REGISTRATION.
   UTVs must be registered annually with the city by the Police Department to
operate on city streets. To register, each operator must present a VIN, the
make and model number of the UTV side-by- side vehicle, proof of address and
contact phone number, proof of insurance, and proof of registration through the
Department of Natural Resources. Each vehicle will be visibly inspected for
compliance with all Indiana laws and local ordinances. Inspections shall occur
at the Police Department at a date and at a time to be determined by the Police
Chief or his or her designee and posted at the Police Department. Upon
registration and inspection, the operator will be provided with a sticker or
decal specific to that vehicle. The sticker or decal provided by the Police
Department shall always be displayed prominently on the vehicle while on city
streets.
(Ord. 1023-2025, passed 7-28-2025)
§ 76.03 INSURANCE.
   UTV operators must have proof of valid insurance covering his or her vehicle
in an amount greater than or equal to the Indiana state automotive insurance
minimums, as set forth under I.C. 9-25- 4-5, when operated on city streets.
(Ord. 1023-2025, passed 7-28-2025)
§ 76.04 OPERATION OF UTVS.
   All UTV operators on city streets must comply with the following:
   (A)   Passengers on all other UTVs are limited to the number of passenger
seats on the vehicle. Any passenger under the age of 18 years of age shall wear
a safety helmet in accordance with Indiana State law;
   (B)   No UTVs vehicles are permitted on city streets from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.; and
   (C)   UTVs must travel single file on city streets.
(Ord. 1023-2025, passed 7-28-2025)
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure to abide by any of the above conditions when a UTV is in use
on city streets shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Fines and
penalties for violations of this chapter are as follows:
      (1)   First violation: $100;
      (2)   Second violation: $250 and a 60-day suspension from using a UTV on
city streets;
      (3)   Third and subsequent violations: $500 fine and a lifetime
suspension from using a UTV on city streets;
   (B)   Any conviction for criminal trespass involving a UTV, subsequent to
the passage of this chapter, shall result in an automatic lifetime suspension
from the operation of a UTV on city streets;
   (C)   The violation of a 60-day or lifetime suspension shall result in a
$1,000 fine for each offense;
   (D)   All fines shall be paid through the city, or they may be contested in
court; and
   (E)   Court costs, as set by the state schedule, and applicable attorney's
fees shall apply to all cases unsuccessfully contested in court.
(Ord. 1023-2025, passed 7-28-2025)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   ASSEMBLIES AND PARADES
         
91.   PARKS AND RECREATION
         
92.   HEALTH AND SAFETY
         
93.   FAIR HOUSING
         
94.   ANIMAL REGULATIONS
         
95.   NOISE REGULATIONS
         
96.   GENERAL NUISANCES
         
97.   PROPERTY NUISANCES
         
98.   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
         
99.   ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC NUISANCES
         
100.   LABOR DAY FESTIVAL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 90: ASSEMBLIES AND PARADES
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Permit required
   
90.03   Exceptions
   
90.04   Application for issuance of permit
   
90.05   Findings required for issuance of permit
   
90.06   Conditions applicable to issuance of permit
   
90.07   Prior application
   
90.08   Notice of issuance or denial
   
90.09   Appeal procedure
   
90.10   Duty of permittee
   
90.11   Revocation of permit
   
90.12   Permit fees
   
90.13   Public conduct
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Labor Day Festival Regulations, see
Chapter 100
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVITY. A parade or public meeting or assembly.
   FUNERAL PROCESSION. A single direct movement from a mortuary or church to
the place of burial of a human body, under direction of an authorized funeral
director.
   PARADE. A march or procession of any kind.
   PUBLIC MEETING or ASSEMBLY. A planned or organized gathering of a group of
persons, or any ceremony, show, exhibition or pageant which may reasonably be
expected to result in the gathering of a group of persons, upon any public
street, park or other public grounds.
(1998 Code, § 4-40) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 90.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to hold, manage, conduct, aid, participate in,
form, start or carry on any parade or public meeting or assembly, as defined in
this chapter, in or upon any public street, park or other public grounds in the
city unless and until a permit to conduct the meeting, assembly or parade has
been obtained in compliance with the provisions of this chapter except as
herein provided.
(1998 Code, § 4-41) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
   (A)   Funeral procession;
   (B)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its function; or
   (C)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, providing the activity is authorized by the school
district and is under the immediate direction and supervision of the school
authorities authorized by the school district to approve and supervise the
activity.
(1998 Code, § 4-42) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 90.04 APPLICATION FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Application for permits under this chapter must be filed with the
Chief of Police not less than 45 days in advance of the proposed activity. Late
applications may be accepted if filed sufficiently in advance of the date of
the proposed activity to enable the Chief of Police to determine that the
activity will meet the requirements set forth in §
90.05 below.
   (B)   The application shall be in writing and shall give the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the
permit. If the activity is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
any organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and the authorized head of the organization shall be stated;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
directly in charge of and responsible for the activity;
      (3)   The purpose of the activity;
      (4)   The date, time and location or route of the proposed activity;
      (5)   The approximate number of persons who will participate in the
activity and the number and kind of vehicles, equipment and animals which will
be used;
      (6)   Plans for the assembly and dispersal of the parade, including times
and locations thereof;
      (7)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the streets proposed to be traversed;
      (8)   A statement as to whether a permit has been requested or obtained
from any other city within which the activity shall commence, terminate or
occur in part; and
      (9)   Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find
reasonably necessary to a determination of the findings required by §
90.05.
(1998 Code, § 4-43) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 90.05 FINDINGS REQUIRED FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police shall request the Clerk-Treasurer to issue a permit as
provided for hereunder when from a consideration of the application and from
other information as may otherwise be obtained he or she finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of the activity will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic;
   (B)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles will not unduly
interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to,
areas where the activity will take place or areas contiguous to the area;
   (C)   The conduct of the activity will not unduly interfere with the
movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire, or the movement of other
emergency equipment;
   (D)   The conduct of the activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury
to persons or property; and
   (E)   The activity is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising the
goods, wares or merchandise of a particular business establishment or vendor.
(1998 Code, § 4-44) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 90.06 CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police shall have authority to impose conditions as are
necessary to ensure that all of the findings mentioned in §
90.05 above shall exist during the continuation of the activity. Conditions to
the issuance of any permit shall be set forth in the permit.
(1998 Code, § 4-45) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 90.07 PRIOR APPLICATION.
   If a prior application shall have been made for an activity proposed to be
held at the same time or place, the Chief of Police may refuse approval of the
later application. In case of the refusal, he or she shall forthwith send the
applicant a written notice that he or she may apply for an alternate time and
place.
(1998 Code, § 4-46) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 90.08 NOTICE OF ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   The Chief of Police shall act upon the permit application within 15 days of
the filing thereof. If he or she disapproves of the application, he or she
shall mail to the applicant within that 15-day period notice of the denial and
the reason for it.
(1998 Code, § 4-47) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 90.09 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit to the
Town Council. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the Town Clerk-Treasurer
within two days after receipt of notice of the denial. The Town Council shall
act upon the appeal at its next meeting following receipt of the notice of
appeal.
(1998 Code, § 4-48) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 90.10 DUTY OF PERMITTEE.
   (A)   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all terms and conditions of
the permit and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
   (B)   The written permit obtained pursuant to this chapter shall be carried
by the person heading or leading the activity for which the permit was issued.
(1998 Code, § 4-49) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police may revoke any permit issued hereunder upon the failure
of the permittee to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit if the
activity, because of the manner in which it is being conducted, or for any
other reason, is jeopardizing those elements of the public safety or welfare
set forth in §
90.05 above.
(1998 Code, § 4-50) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 90.12 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   The fee for a permit under this chapter shall be $25 payable upon
issuance of the permit. No permit shall be issued until the fee payable under
this chapter has been paid in full.
   (B)   A permittee hereunder shall reimburse the city for the actual costs of
public safety services including, but not limited to, Fire and Police
Department services rendered to the permittee during the permittee's activity.
Reimbursement shall be paid to the city within 30 days after the receipt of a
billing statement issued by the Clerk-Treasurer for the city.
(1998 Code, § 4-51) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 90.13 PUBLIC CONDUCT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to unreasonably obstruct, impede or
interfere with any parade or public meeting or assembly or with any person,
vehicle or animal participating in such a parade, meeting or assembly for which
a permit has been granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably
necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or
part thereof consisting of the route of a parade. The Chief of Police shall
post signs to that effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or
leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof.
(1998 Code, § 4-53) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates this chapter shall be liable
for court costs and shall be fined in a dollar amount that shall not exceed
$2,500.
(1998 Code, § 4-52) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
CHAPTER 91: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Administration
   
91.01   Authority to operate
   
91.02   Department of Parks and Recreation; Board
   
91.03   Governing state law
   
91.04   Master plan
Rules and Regulations; Fees
   
91.15   Definitions
   
91.16   Alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
91.17   Park and instruction fees
   
91.18   Park information
   
91.19   Rules and regulations
 
   
91.99   Penalty
ADMINISTRATION
§ 91.01 AUTHORITY TO OPERATE.
   The city may establish, aid, maintain and operate public parks, playgrounds
and recreation facilities and programs.
(1998 Code, § 5-1)
§ 91.02 DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION; BOARD.
   The Department of Parks and Recreation is organized under I.C. 36-10-3 and
is also addressed in §
32.02 of this code.
(1998 Code, § 5-2)
§ 91.03 GOVERNING STATE LAW.
   The City Board of Parks and Recreation is addressed in §
32.02 of this code. The City Parks and Recreation Board meets regularly on the
third Monday of each month at 6:30 p.m. in the Sports and Rec Center.
(1998 Code, § 5-3)
§ 91.04 MASTER PLAN.
   The City Parks and Recreation Master Plan 1994 to 1998 adopts as its
official plan for the growth and development of parks and recreation
opportunities in the city over the next five years. The Parks and Recreation
Board is committed to an annual review and update of the goals and objectives
of this Master Plan. A copy of the Master Plan is available for public
inspection in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer during regular business
hours.
(1998 Code, § 5-4)
Statutory reference:
   Authorizes cities to establish and maintain park facilities, see I.C. 36-10-
2-2
RULES AND REGULATIONS; FEES
§ 91.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. The compound C2H50H, known as ethyl-alcohol, high graded oxide of
ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process
produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. A liquid or solid, which is or contains alcohol and
which is fit for human consumption and which is reasonably likely, or intended,
to be used as a beverage.
   CONTAINER. A receptacle in which an alcoholic beverage is immediately
contained and with which the alcoholic beverage contained in it is in immediate
contact.
   PARK. Any public park or park located within the corporate boundaries of the
Civil City of Ligonier, Indiana.
   PARK FACILITIES. Any pavilion, structure, building or other facility located
within the corporate boundaries of the city, and operated for a sport or
recreational park or park related use by the city acting through its Park
Board.
   PERSON. A natural person, partnership, firm or corporation.
(1998 Code, § 5-8) (Ord. 471, passed 5-26-1987; Ord. 931-2019, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 91.16 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall possess a container containing an alcoholic beverage within
a park or park facility located in the city.
(1998 Code, § 5-9) (Ord. 471, passed 5-26-1987; Ord. 931-2019, passed 6-17-
2019) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 PARK AND INSTRUCTION FEES.
   Park fees and instruction fees shall be established each year and available
for public inspection at the Park and Recreation Center and the City Clerk-
Treasurer's office.
(1998 Code, § 5-15) (Ord. 931-2019, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 91.18 PARK INFORMATION.
   (A)   Gazebo Park. Gazebo Park is a small park site located on the northeast
corner of Main Street and West Fourth Street, adjacent to the Fire and Police
Station. The park is named for being the location of the town gazebo. Brick
walkways, historical site lighting and landscape pockets of flowers add the
character to the site. It is primarily used as a sitting park and occasionally
events. The park contains approximately 0.2 acres.
(1998 Code, § 5-20)
   (B)   G. Martin Kenney Memorial Park. Kenny Park is a community park
containing approximately 40 acres and Ligonier Sports and Recreation Center,
and can be considered the center of recreational activity in the community.
Basketball, softball, tennis, football/soccer, horseshoes, picnic shelters,
walking/jogging trail and playgrounds attract a wide range of people in the
community.
(1998 Code, § 5-21)
   (C)   Northside Park. Northside Park is located on Jay Street just north of
Mercer Street and consists of approximately 1.2 acres. It functions as a
neighborhood play lot and the facilities consist of a small paved play surface/
basketball court, play equipment and an unimproved ball field with a small
backstop. These facilities are located towards the northwest portion of the
site with the remaining of the land being open space with a few large trees.
(1998 Code, § 5-22)
   (D)   Prentice Park. This park is located on the northwest corner of West
Sixth Street and South Martin Street. It consists of two home lots,
approximately 0.6 acres in size. The park contains a rock with a memorial
plaque in honor of the site. The center of the park contains a historic
fountain with diagonal walks to the perimeter of the park. The fountain is in
disrepair and has been used in recent years as a flower planter. A small area
with play equipment are the only facilities provided in the park. The
arrangement of the large trees may indicate a specific landscape plan was
developed. Attempts should be made to discover the actual history of the site
and incorporate historical aspects in any future renovations.
(1998 Code, § 5-23)
   (E)   Woodlawn Park. Woodlawn Park is located on the northwest corner of
Lincolnway West and Bridge Street and is the second largest park at 16 acres.
The park is ideally located on a gently rolling, wooded site with direct access
to the Elkhart River. The park has been developed to accommodate family and
group activities with a Scout Cabin, picnic shelters and play equipment. The
only open space is used for baseball and volleyball. Adequate parking is a
major item which affects the use of the park. A gravel road meanders throughout
the site; however, the only parking is on the grassed area along the roadside.
There is limited parking areas adjacent to the baseball field.
(1998 Code, § 5-24)
   (F)   Wood Triangle Park. Wood Triangle Park is the smallest of all the
parks and consists entirely of a strip of land between the right-of-way of two
intersecting streets: Cavin Street and Lincolnway South. The park has no
function for recreation purposes but has a pleasing aesthetic value to the
city's entrance. The site has been developed around a historic fountain and
street clock with landscaping.
(1998 Code, § 5-25)
   (G)   Intent to comply with ADA. The Ligonier Parks Department expresses its
intent to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
(1998 Code, § 5-26) (Res. passed 3-19-1992; Ord. 931-2019, passed 6-17-2019)
§ 91.19 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The following areas in Kenney Park will be closed to the public
from October 1 to April 30:
         (a)   Softball/basement diamonds;
         (b)   Restrooms;
         (c)   Parking lots;
         (d)   The playground will be open from daylight to dark year round.
      (2)   The track located at Kenney Park will be open 24 hours a day.
      (3)   Woodlawn Park shall be open from daylight to dusk. This provision
shall not be applicable to individuals or groups renting Woodlawn Cabin.
      (4)   Madden Park shall be open from daylight to dark.
      (5)   All other parks shall be open from daylight to dark.
   (B)   No shoes with cleats are permitted in Kenney Park except on baseball
diamonds.
   (C)   Parking on the grass is not allowed in any park, except as designated
by signage.
   (D)   No vendors are permitted to operate within the parks without a permit
from the Ligonier Park Department and City and County Health Departments.
   (E)   Smoking is prohibited where designated by signage.
   (F)   No posters are permitted on park property.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to toss, drop, throw away, deposit
or otherwise discard ashes, coals, used matches or smoking materials upon
grounds, in water, or in trash containers located within a city park.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, wound, hunt, trap, shoot,
throw rocks or missiles at, chase, molest or remove any feral mammal, reptile,
amphibian or bird, or the young of any such mammal, or the eggs or young of any
such reptile, amphibian or bird, within a city park, or to knowingly buy,
receive, have in his or her possession, sell or give away any such mammal,
reptile, amphibian, bird or egg so killed or taken within any city park.
   (I)   The improper use of refuse disposal receptacles and excavating are
prohibited. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person
to bring refuse (as that term is defined by I.C. 35-45-3-2(b)) into any park
and to deposit the refuse within the park in a park refuse disposal receptacle.
   (J)   It shall be unlawful for any person within any park to:
      (1)   Disobey an order of, or interfere with the duty of a Ligonier Parks
Employee, credentialed Park Board Member, or City Police Officer.
      (2)   Disobey or disregard the notices, prohibitions, instructions or
directions posted on any park sign. This includes, but is not limited to, the
rules and regulations for shelters, pavilions, playground areas, recreation
centers or facilities.
      (3)   Solicit alms, subscriptions or contributions without the prior
written permission of the Park Board.
      (4)   Distribute any materials advertising or promoting any commercial
product without the prior written permission of the Park Board.
      (5)   Photograph any portion of park property for promotion or sale of
any commercial product, or commercial event, without the written permission of
the Park Board.
      (6)   Pitch or maintain a tent or other improvised shelter for the
purpose of overnight camping without a permit issued by the Director of the
Ligonier Parks Department.
   (K)   Vehicle use restrictions:
      (1)   The maximum speed of any vehicle operated within a park boundary is
limited to ten miles per hour. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
vehicle in excess of this speed limit.
      (2)   No person shall cause or permit any vehicle under his or her
control to obstruct traffic or access to gates.
      (3)   No person shall operate a vehicle within any park area except upon
roadways or other areas specifically designated for vehicle traffic.
      (4)   No motorized vehicles are allowed on the track located at Kenney
Park.
      (5)   No person shall cause a vehicle to enter or leave any park area
except at established entrances or exits.
      (6)   No person shall park a vehicle in any park area not designated for
designed for parking.
   (L)   The following are limitations on access and use of park areas/
facilities:
      (1)   Any use of any park area or facility outside the posted access
hours is prohibited without a written permit issued by the Director of the
Ligonier Parks Department.
      (2)   No vehicle shall be operated or left in a park area outside the
posted access hours without a written permit issued by the Director of the
Ligonier Parks Department. Any vehicle left on park premises after hours
without such authorization may be towed from the park without further notice to
the owner or operator. The registered owner will be responsible for any towing
and storage fees.
      (3)   No person shall use or occupy any park shelter or facility while
posted as reserved for some specific organized function or group of persons
unless such has been authorized to do so by the responsible person designated
in the written reservation agreement.
   (M)   The following are the limitations on animals. No domestic animals,
other than service animals (as the same are defined in I.C. 35-46-3-11.5), are
allowed in athletic, youth activity areas, or baseball and/or softball
diamonds, designated by signage.
   (N)   Scheduling. All public and organizational events must be scheduled
through the Ligonier Parks Department.
   (O)   No skateboards and rollerblades shall be permitted in picnic areas or
upon paved or finished basketball courts or tennis courts.
   (P)   (1)   Any violations of the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $200 and not more than $2,000. Each day a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation of this section.
      (2)   The violator may admit the violation at the Ligonier Ordinance
Violation Bureau and pay the following fines:
         (a)   Five dollars for the first violation;
         (b)   Twenty dollars for the second violation within a calendar year;
and
         (c)   Fifty dollars for a third violation within a calendar year.
(Ord. 741, passed 11-24-2008; Ord. 920-2018, passed - -; Ord. 931, passed 6-17-
2019)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
91.16, and is found guilty hereof, shall be liable for a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $500.
(1998 Code, § 5-10) (Ord. 471, passed 5-26-1987)
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
   
92.01   City's authority
   
92.02   Offenses against health, order and decency
   
92.03   Resisting official action
§ 92.01 CITY'S AUTHORITY.
   (A)   City's authority to regulate. The city may regulate the conduct, or
use or possession of property which might endanger the public health, safety or
welfare of its citizens.
(1998 Code, § 6-1)
   (B)   Preservation of public peace and order. The city may establish,
maintain and operate a police and law enforcement system to preserve public
peace and order and may provide facilities and equipment for that system.
(1998 Code, § 6-2)
   (C)   Authority to regulate air and sound. The city may regulate the
introduction of any substance or odor into the air, or any generation of sound.
(1998 Code, § 6-3)
   (D)   Authority to regulate public gatherings. The city may regulate public
gatherings, such as shows, demonstrations, fairs, conventions, sporting events
and exhibitions.
(1998 Code, § 6-4)
   (E)   Authority to establish police and law enforcement systems. The city
may establish, maintain and operate a police and law enforcement system to
preserve public peace and order and may provide facility and equipment for that
system.
(1998 Code, § 6-5)
   (F)   Authority to establish firefighter and fire prevention system. The
city may establish, maintain and operate a firefighting and fire prevention
system and may provide facilities and equipment for that system.
(1998 Code, § 6-6)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish a firefighting system, see I.C. 36-8-2-3
   Authority to establish a police and law enforcement system, see I.C. 36-8-2-
2
   Authority to preserve public peace and order, see I.C. 36-8-2-2
   Authorization of regulation of air and sound, see I.C. 36-8-2-8
   Pollutant control, see I.C. 36-7-12-1
   Regulation of conduct and property for reasons of public health safety and
welfare, see I.C. 36-8-2-4
   Regulation of public gatherings, see I.C. 36-8-2-9
§ 92.02 OFFENSES AGAINST HEALTH, ORDER AND DECENCY.
   All offenses against public health, order or decency not addressed by this
code shall be governed by applicable state statute.
(1998 Code, § 6-7)
Statutory reference:
   Offenses, see I.C. 35-45-1-1 et seq.
§ 92.03 RESISTING OFFICIAL ACTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to knowingly or intentionally
interfere, or attempt to impede or interfere with any city official or employee
in the performance of their official duties.
(1998 Code, § 6-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 93: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
93.01   Policy
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Applicability
   
93.04   Sale or rental of housing
   
93.05   Residential real estate-related transactions
   
93.06   Provision of brokerage services
   
93.07   Interference, coercion or intimidation
   
93.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
   
93.09   Exemptions
   
93.10   Administration
   
93.11   Enforcement
§ 93.01 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitution limits, fair
housing throughout the city.
(1998 Code, § 6-12) (Ord. 559, passed 12-18-1995)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who:
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that the person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
   DISABILITY.
      (1)   With respect to a person:
         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of the person's major life activities;
         (b)   A record of having such an impairment; or
         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment.
      (2)   The term does not include the current illegal use of or addiction
to a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
93.04,
93.05,
93.06,
93.07 or
93.08.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families,
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
   FAMILIAL STATUS. Discrimination on the basis of familial status means
discrimination because the person is (1) pregnant; (2) domiciled with an
individual under the age of 18 years of age in regard to whom the person is (a)
the parent or legal custodian or (b) has the written permission of the parent
or legal custodian for domicile with that person; or (3) in the process of
obtaining legal custody of an individual younger than 18 years of age.
   FAMILY. An individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9) or individuals having familial
status as that term is defined in this section.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in cases under U.S.C. Title 11, receivers and fiduciaries.
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy the premises not owned by the occupant.
(1998 Code, § 6-13) (Ord. 559, passed 12-18-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Applicable state law, see I.C. § 22-9.5-1
   Resisting a law enforcement officer, see I.C. § 35-44.1-3-1
§ 93.03 APPLICABILITY.
   Subject to the provisions of §
93.09 below, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of
housing set forth in §
93.04 below shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) below;
   (B)   Nothing in §
93.04 below (other than division (C)) shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three single-family houses at
any one time; provided that in the sale of the single-family house by a private
individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or who was not
the most recent resident of the house prior to the sale, the exemption shall
apply only to one such sale within any 24-month period. The private individual
owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or reserved on his or her
behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale
or rental of more than three single-family houses shall be excepted from
application of this section only if the house is sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson, or any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of
any broker, agent or salesperson, or person; and
         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
93.04 below, but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other professional assistance
as necessary to perfect or transfer this title.
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of the living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions
involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
      (3)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended
for occupancy by, or occupied by five or more families.
(1998 Code, § 6-14) (Ord. 559, passed 12-18-1995)
§ 93.04 SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   As made applicable by §
93.03 above, and except as exempted by §
93.03(B) above and §
93.09 below, it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial
status, HIV-positive status or national origin;
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
familial status, HIV-positive status or national origin;
   (C)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published
any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on
race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, HIV-positive status or
national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination;
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status, HIV-positive status or national origin that any
dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when the dwelling is
in fact so available;
   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion,
sex, disability, familial status, HIV-positive status or national origin; and
   (F)   (1)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability
of:
         (a)   That buyer or renter;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with the dwelling, because of a disability of:
         (a)   That person;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, DISCRIMINATION includes:
         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the disabled person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by
that person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full
enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a modification on
the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services, when the accommodations may be necessary to afford the
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months after
September 13, 1988, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a
manner that:
            1.   The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons;
            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
disabled persons in wheelchairs; and
            3.   All premises within the dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
               a.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
               b.   Light, switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
               c.   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and
               d.   Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
      (4)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American
National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and
usability for physically disabled people (commonly cited as "ANSI A 117.1")
suffices to satisfy the requirements of division (F)(3)(c)1 above.
      (5)   Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made available
to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health
or safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
(1998 Code, § 6-15) (Ord. 559, passed 12-18-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.05 RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, disability, familial status, HIV-positive status or national
origin.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED
TRANSACTION means any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, disability, HIV-positive
status or familial status.
(1998 Code, § 6-16) (Ord. 559, passed 12-18-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.06 PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers'
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her
in the terms or conditions of the access, membership or participation, on
account of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, HIV-
positive status or national origin.
(1998 Code, § 6-17) (Ord. 559, passed 12-18-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
93.03,
93.04,
93.05 or
93.06 above.
(1998 Code, § 6-18) (Ord. 559, passed 12-18-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   (A)   Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat
of force, willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to
injure, intimidate or interfere with:
      (1)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status, HIV-positive status or national origin and because
he is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or
contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or
occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service;
organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings;
      (2)   Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate the
person or any other person or any class of persons from:
         (a)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, disability, familial status, HIV-positive status or national
origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities; or
         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage the citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, disability, familial status, HIV-positive status or national
origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities
described in division (A)(1) above, or participating lawfully in speech or
peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate.
   (B)   Shall be fined not more than $2,500. Each day a violation occurs shall
be considered a separate violation.
(1998 Code, § 6-19) (Ord. 559, passed 12-18-1995)
§ 93.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to those persons,
unless membership in the religion is restricted on account of race, color or
national origin.
   (B)   Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact
open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of the lodgings to its members
or from giving preference to its members.
      (1)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply with
respect to housing for older persons.
      (2)   As used in this section, HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS means housing:
         (a)   Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary
of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the State Civil
Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program);
         (b)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or
older; or
         (c)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55
years of age or older per unit.
(1998 Code, § 6-20) (Ord. 559, passed 12-18-1995)
§ 93.10 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for administering this Act shall be
in the City Council.
   (B)   The City Council may delegate any of these functions, duties and
powers to employees or boards of the city.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies shall administer their programs
and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner
affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with
the City Council to further those purposes.
(1998 Code, § 6-21) (Ord. 559, passed 12-18-1995)
§ 93.11 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Several avenues of relief are available for aggrieved persons.
Remedies are available through actions commenced through the State Civil Rights
Commission, the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development and through
private actions.
   (B)   The City Council, or the City Council's designee, shall provide
information on remedies available to any aggrieved person requesting the
information.
(1998 Code, § 6-22) (Ord. 559, passed 12-18-1995)
CHAPTER 94: ANIMAL REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Running at large prohibited
   
94.02   Fees and boarding expenses
   
94.03   Nuisance created by dog or cat
Domestic Animals
   
94.15   Definitions
   
94.16   Animals prohibited
   
94.17   Enforcement
   
94.18   Vicious dogs
Animal Care
   
94.30   Adequate shelter, food and water to be provided
   
94.31   Medical care
   
94.32   Enclosures to be kept in sanctuary condition
   
94.33   Fastening of animals
   
94.34   Abandonment
   
94.35   Enforcement
   
94.36   Interference with enforcement
   
94.37   Return of animal to owner
   
94.38   Animal control worker defined
 
   
94.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   No person owning, harboring or keeping a dog or cat shall permit the dog or
cat to run at large within the limits of the city.
(1998 Code, § 6-108) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.02 FEES AND BOARDING EXPENSES.
   (A)   Any dog or cat found running at large upon the streets, alleys,
commons, lots or lands in the city, shall be captured and restrained by persons
acting under the direction of the Common Council or the Board of Public Works
and Safety.
   (B)   The dogs or cats shall be held for a period of at least ten days,
after which time the dogs or cats shall be destroyed, sold or given to the
Humane Society of Noble County. However, the owner or any other responsible
person may, within the ten-day period or until the animal is destroyed, sold or
given to the Humane Society of Noble County, reclaim the dog or cat by the
payment of a $50 capture fee, plus $10 per day for boarding expenses.
(1998 Code, § 6-109) (Ord. 718, passed 9-25-2006; Ord. 735, passed 4-28-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Licensing and taxation of dogs, see I.C. 6-9-39
   Running at large, see I.C. 15-17-8-8
§ 94.03 NUISANCE CREATED BY DOG OR CAT.
   It shall be unlawful for a person who owns, harbors or keeps a dog or cat
within the corporate limits of the city and which dog or cat:
   (A)   Barks, whines or otherwise makes noise audible beyond the boundaries
of the property harboring the dog or cat and which noise persists or continues;
   (B)   Molests or disturbs pedestrians or passing vehicles;
   (C)   Attacks other animals;
   (D)   Damages public property;
   (E)   Damages private property not owned by the person so harboring the dog
or cat;
   (F)   Habitually defecates on property owned by someone other than the
person harboring the dog or cat;
   (G)   Habitually eats or otherwise destroys the plants, shrubs or similar
landscaping on property owned by a person someone other than the person
harboring the dog or cat; and/or
   (H)   Fails to confine a vicious animal to the owner's property in a safe
manner shall be guilty of creating a nuisance.
(1998 Code, § 6-110) (Ord. 678, passed - -2003)
DOMESTIC ANIMALS
§ 94.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLASS ONE ANIMALS. Includes all horses, ponies, cows, goats, swine, sheep,
poultry, all related types of such animals and poultry, and the offspring
thereof, and/or any animal weighing 200 pounds or more. CLASS ONE ANIMALS shall
not include any animals which are harbored or kept within the city limits for
exhibition purposes for any period not to exceed two weeks of any six-month
period.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Cattle, calves, horses, colts, mules, swine, sheep, goats,
cats, dogs, poultry and other birds, and all related types and off-spring of
the animals.
   OWNER. The person, or persons, firm or corporation owning less than 25
contiguous acres within the city limits, which keeps, owns or provides quarters
for class one animals.
(1998 Code, § 6-115) (Ord. 662, passed 8-12-2002)
§ 94.16 ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   All class one animals shall be prohibited from being harbored or kept in any
place within the city limits of the city.
(1998 Code, § 6-116)
§ 94.17 ENFORCEMENT.
   This subchapter shall be enforced by the City Building Code and Zoning
Administrator.
(1998 Code, § 6-117) (Ord. 662, passed 8-12-2002)
§ 94.18 VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      VICIOUS DOG. Any dog:
         (a)   That has, without provocation, attacked or bitten a human being
or other animal on public or private property;
         (b)   That by its behavior or physical condition constitutes an
immediate and serious physical or health threat to human beings or animals;
         (c)   Has a history, documented with a public agency, of biting or
attacking humans or domestic animals; or
         (d)   With a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, or
cause injury, or otherwise threaten or endanger the safety of humans or other
domestic animals.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   This section shall not apply to animals being transported through
the city limits of the City of Ligonier, within a 30-minute time period.
      (2)   No dog shall be declared to be a vicious dog if the injury or
damages were sustained by a person who, at the time, was teasing, tormenting,
abusing, or assaulting the dog, or if the dog was protecting a human being, or
its owner’s or custodian’s property from attack by another animal or by a human
being.
   (C)   Police dogs. This section shall not apply to a dog utilized, or being
trained to be utilized, by the Police Department as a police dog.
   (D)   Prohibition against harboring. No person shall harbor, keep or
maintain within the city limits any vicious dog. Any dog whose owner or
custodian is issued a citation for violation of this section shall be impounded
as directed by the city Police Department until disposition of the charges.
Moreover, the owner or custodian of any dog found to be vicious in the trial of
the charge of harboring a vicious dog, or by plea to such a charge, shall be
prohibited from returning that dog to the City of Ligonier, or keeping the dog
within the city.
   (E)   Reimbursement of expenses by owner or custodian. In the event that the
dog alleged to be vicious is impounded, and the dog is found to be vicious in
the trial of a charge of harboring a vicious dog, or by plea to such a charge,
then the owner or custodian thereof shall reimburse the city any costs or
expenses of impoundment and transportation of the animal incurred by or
assessed against the city.
(Ord. 802-2011, passed 12-12-2011) Penalty, see §
94.99
ANIMAL CARE
§ 94.30 ADEQUATE SHELTER, FOOD AND WATER TO BE PROVIDED.
   A person who owns, possesses, harbors or has control over a domestic animal,
including dogs and cats, within the corporate limits of the city shall comply
with the terms of this subchapter including the following provisions.
   (A)   No person shall confine or allow his or her animal to remain outdoors
for more than two hours without access to appropriate shelter from the elements
such as the cold, precipitation, sun and wind.
   (B)   Between November 1 and March 31, or whenever the real or effective
(i.e., wind chill) temperature is 32°F or lower, any domestic animal left
outdoors for more than one hour shall be provided with appropriate shelter from
the elements such as the cold, precipitation and wind. Outdoor shelter for an
animal shall consist of a roof, enclosed sides and a doorway, and the shelter
shall have bedding such as cedar shavings, straw or other non-absorbent
material in sufficient quantity for insulation against coldness and dampness.
Bedding shall be kept dry. If there is no artificial heat source, an animal's
shelter shall be small enough to allow the animal to warm the interior of the
structure and maintain its body heat but large enough to permit normal postural
adjustments.
   (C)   An animal shall at all times have access to fresh, potable drinking
water, and shall be provided with nutritional food in adequate amounts.
(Ord. 719, passed 9-25-2006) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.31 MEDICAL CARE.
   All animals shall be provided with adequate and sufficient medical care in
addition to required vaccinations.
(Ord. 719, passed 9-25-2006) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.32 ENCLOSURES TO BE KEPT IN SANCTUARY CONDITION.
   All enclosures for animals, whether kept inside or outdoors, and all other
areas in which an animal is kept, whether in a pen, tied, tethered, hitched,
leashed or enclosed by a fence, shall be kept in a sanitary condition. A person
responsible for an animal shall regularly, or as often as necessary to prevent
odor or health and sanitation problems, maintain the animal's area in a clean
and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 719, passed 9-25-2006) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.33 FASTENING OF ANIMALS.
   No animal shall be hitched, tied, tethered or fastened by any rope, chain or
cord that is directly attached to the animal's neck. Animals that must be tied,
tethered, hitched or fastened to restrain them must wear a properly fitted
collar or harness made of leather or nylon, but not a choker type collar. This
is not to prohibit the proper use of choker collars in the training of animals.
Any animal tied, tethered or hitched shall be on a tether not less than 15 feet
in length, positioned so it shall not tangle, and the tether shall not weigh
more than one-eighth the weight of the animal or five pounds, whichever is
less. An animal may not be tethered more than ten hours at a time and not more
than 12 hours in any 24-hour period.
(Ord. 719, passed 9-25-2006) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.34 ABANDONMENT.
   No person shall abandon or cause to be abandoned any domestic animal within
the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 719, passed 9-25-2006) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.35 ENFORCEMENT.
   City law enforcement officers or animal control workers are hereby
authorized to issue citations for violations of this subchapter.
(Ord. 719, passed 9-25-2006)
§ 94.36 INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner with a police
officer or animal control worker while they are discharging their duties in the
enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 719, passed 9-25-2006) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.37 RETURN OF ANIMAL TO OWNER.
   Before any animal lawfully seized is returned to the owner of the animal,
the owner shall provide evidence that the animal has received all required
vaccinations, that the vaccinations are current, and that all taxes applicable
to the animal have been paid.
(Ord. 719, passed 9-25-2006) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.38 ANIMAL CONTROL WORKER DEFINED.
   The term ANIMAL CONTROL WORKER shall include, but not be limited to, the
City Code Enforcement officer and any person authorized by the City Board of
Public Works and Safety to enforce the animal control ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 719, passed 9-25-2006)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   When any nuisance (as described in §
94.03) is shown to exist the City Police Department, by an officer thereof,
shall have the duty of immediately notifying the person or persons permitting
the nuisance to remove or abate the nuisance within 24 hours of the notice. In
the event the nuisance is not abated within 24 hours after notice is given, the
person or persons harboring the nuisance shall have committed an ordinance
violation and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $300.
(1998 Code, § 6-110)
   (C)   Any owner or person violating the provisions of §§
94.15 through
94.17 shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation and be subject to a fine
of not less than $10 or more than $300. Each day of violation shall constitute
a separate offense.
(1998 Code, § 6-118)
   (D)   A person in violation of §§
94.30 through
94.38 shall be fined an amount of $100 for each day the violation continues or
is permitted to continue for a first violation. A person who commits a second
violation of §§
94.30 through
94.38 within 365 days of the date of a prior violation shall be fined an amount
of $250 for each day the violation continues or is permitted to continue. A
person who commits a third or subsequent violation of §§
94.30 through
94.38 within 365 days of the date of a prior violation shall be fined $500 for
each day the violation continues or is permitted to continue.
   (E)   Any person found guilty of violating §
94.18 shall be fined a fine of $100 per day. Each day that §
94.18 is violated constitutes a separate violation thereof subject to an
additional $100 per day.
(Ord. 678, passed - -2003; Ord. 719, passed 9-25-2006; Ord. 802-2011, passed
12-12-2011)
CHAPTER 95: NOISE REGULATIONS
Section
   
95.01   Declaration of public policy
   
95.02   Noise that emanates from private property
   
95.03   Noise that emanates from public property
   
95.04   Exemptions
   
95.05   Descriptive headings
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC POLICY.
   The making of noise which is unreasonably loud, or which is unreasonable
because of the place, time or use of the noise, in violation of this chapter,
shall constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord. 725, passed 5-14-2007) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.02 NOISE THAT EMANATES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Unreasonable noise prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person, after having
been warned to desist, to make or assist in making any noise tending to
unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of persons in the vicinity thereof,
unless the making and continuing of the same cannot be prevented, or is
necessary for the protection or preservation of property, or of the health,
safety, life or limb of some person.
      (2)   It shall be a defense to this chapter that noise consists of speech
or other communications, of gathering with others to hear or observe the speech
or communication, or gathering with others to picket or otherwise express any
non-violent manner a position on social, economic, political or religious
questions.
   (B)   Enumeration of certain prohibited acts.
      (1)   The following acts, uses or noises, among others, subject to the
specific exemptions provided herein, are declared to be unreasonable noise in
violation of this chapter.
      (2)   This enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
         (a)   Using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated
any machine or device for the producing or reproducing a sound in a manner so
as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet or comfort of the neighboring
inhabitants, after having been warned to desist; and
         (b)   Using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated
any machine or device whether producing or reproducing a sound on any public
right-of-way adjacent to any school, church, court or governmental building,
while the same are in use, which unreasonably interferes with the workings with
the institution, after having been warned to desist.
(Ord. 725, passed 5-14-2007) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.03 NOISE THAT EMANATES FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person shall play, use operate or permit to be played, used or operated,
any machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, if it is
located in or on any of the following:
   (A)   Any public property, including any public right-of-way, highway,
building, sidewalk, park or thoroughfare, if the sound generated is audible at
a distance of 30 feet from its source; or
   (B)   Any motor vehicle on a public right-of-way, highway or public space if
the sound generated is audible at a distance of 30 feet from the device
producing the sound.
(Ord. 725, passed 5-14-2007) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Sound emitted from sirens of authorized emergency vehicles;
   (B)   Lawn mowers, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.;
   (C)   Burglar alarms or other warning devices when properly installed on
publicly or privately owned property, providing the cause for the alarm or
warning device sound is investigated and turned off within a reasonable period
of time;
   (D)   Attendant noise connected with the actual performance of athletic or
sporting events and practices related to them;
   (E)   The emission of sound for the purposes of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency, or for the performance of emergency work;
   (F)   Sounds associated with normal conduction of a legally established non-
transient business when the sounds are customary, incidental and within the
normal range appropriate for the use;
   (G)   Noise from church bells, and governmental public address systems
including those operated by the city; and
   (H)   In the case of motor vehicles, where the noise is the result of a
defective or modified exhaust system, if the cause is repaired or otherwise
remedied within seven calendar days.
(Ord. 725, passed 5-14-2007)
§ 95.05 DESCRIPTIVE HEADINGS.
   The descriptive headings used herein are for convenience only and in no way
limit or enlarge the scope or meaning of the language hereof.
(Ord. 725, passed 5-14-2007)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, upon adjudication
thereof, shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than $500 for each offense.
   (B)   Each day any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 725, passed 5-14-2007)
CHAPTER 96: GENERAL NUISANCES
Section
Vegetation Regulations
   
96.01   Burning prohibited
   
96.02   Reserved
   
96.03   Removal of storm-damaged trees required
Miscellaneous Regulations
   
96.30   Depositing snow on sidewalks, streets and alleys prohibited
   
96.31   Weeds and rank vegetation
Abandoned Motor Vehicles
   
96.45   State provisions adopted
   
96.46   Enforcement
   
96.47   Definitions
   
96.48   Removal to scrap yard or storage areas
   
96.49   Disposal of vehicle
   
96.50   Charges for towing and storage
   
96.51   Liability of owner
   
96.52   Abandoned Vehicle Fund
 
   
96.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Abandoned vehicles as a public nuisance, see I.C. 9-22-1-1 through 9-22-1-32
   Definition of "abandoned vehicles", see I.C. 9-13-2-1
VEGETATION REGULATIONS
§ 96.01 BURNING PROHIBITED.
   The owner or occupant of premises located within the city shall not burn any
material, specifically including but not limited to leaves, trash, paper,
furniture or debris, within the city limits. The only material allowed to be
burned within the city limits is natural wood. Such burning of natural wood
shall only be in a noncombustible container that is sufficiently vented to
induce adequate primary combustion and that has enclosed sides and a bottom.
Such burning of natural wood may not be done during unfavorable meteorological
conditions such as high winds or unusually dry conditions. Any allowed burning
of natural wood must be attended at all times by the owner or occupant.
(1998 Code, § 6-64) (Ord. passed 11-27-1989; Ord. 1024-2025, passed 8-25-2025)
Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.02 RESERVED.
§ 96.03 REMOVAL OF STORM-DAMAGED TREES REQUIRED.
   In the event of storm damage to trees, the owner or occupant of the premises
may provide for the disposal of the damage, or the owner or occupant of the
premises shall:
   (A)   Cut the damaged limbs into sections of ten feet or less; and
   (B)   Remove the sections to the front yard of the premises and locate them
immediately next to the street within two calendar days of the occurrence of
the storm damage for removal by the City Street Department.
(1998 Code, § 6-70) (Ord. 491, passed 11-14-1988) Penalty, see §
96.99
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
§ 96.30 DEPOSITING SNOW ON SIDEWALKS, STREETS AND ALLEYS PROHIBITED.
   Any person who cleans or clears their property or driveway of snow or other
accumulation, and deposits the same on a public way, sidewalk, street or alley
within the city limits shall be in violation of this section.
(1998 Code, § 6-78) (Ord. 161, passed 1-27-1969)
§ 96.31 WEEDS AND RANK VEGETATION.
   (A)   Unlawful growth. The owner of any lot or parcel of land within the
city shall, at least once during each of the months of April, May, June, July,
August and September, remove all weeds and rank vegetation of any kind growing
upon the property.
   (B)   Notice to remove. Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-10.1-1, the Board of Public
Works and Safety shall require the owners of real property in the city to cut
and remove weeds or other rank vegetation growing on that property. A five-day
written notice to remove the vegetation shall be issued by the Clerk-Treasurer
and served by a law enforcement officer upon the landowner if he or she is a
resident or by certified mail addressed to his or her last known address if he
or she is a nonresident.
   (C)   Removal costs.
      (1)   If the landowner fails to remove the vegetation within the time
prescribed, the city shall remove the vegetation. The Clerk-Treasurer shall
make a certified statement of the actual cost incurred by the city in the
removal. The statement shall be delivered to the owner of the property by a law
enforcement officer of the city or by registered mail, and the owner shall then
make payment to the Clerk-Treasurer.
      (2)   If the landowner fails to pay the amount within ten days after
receiving the statement, a certified copy of the statement of costs shall be
filed in the office of the Auditor of the county in which the property is
located.
      (3)   The Auditor shall place the amount claimed on a tax duplicate
against the property affected by the work and the amount shall be collected as
taxes are collected and shall be disbursed to the General Fund of the city.
(1998 Code, § 6-180) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Removal of weeds and rank vegetation, see I.C. 36-7-10.1-1 et seq.
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 96.45 STATE PROVISIONS ADOPTED.
   Except as otherwise modified herein, this subchapter specifically adopts the
provisions of I.C. 9-22-1-1 through 9-22-1-32 inclusive, as may be amended from
time to time, including all rules adopted by the State Bureau of Motor Vehicles
under I.C. 4-22-2 to administer I.C. 9-22-1-1 et seq.
(Ord. 656, passed 3-25-2002)
§ 96.46 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Police Department and the City Building Department are each
designated the public agency and each department is authorized to carry out the
provisions of this subchapter or the provisions of I.C. 9-22-1-1 through I.C.
9-22-1-32, and a regular member of the City Police Department and the City
Building Inspector are the officers of their respective departments that are
authorized to carry out the provisions of this subchapter and the provisions of
I.C. 9-22-1-1 through I.C. 9-22-1-32.
(Ord. 656, passed 3-25-2002)
§ 96.47 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   Includes any of the following:
         (a)   A vehicle located on public property illegally;
         (b)   A vehicle left on public property continuously without being
moved for three days;
         (c)   A vehicle located on public property in such a manner as to
constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic on a public right-of-way;
         (d)   A vehicle that has remained on private property without the
consent of the owner, or the person in control of the property, for more than
48 hours;
         (e)   A vehicle from which the engine, transmission or differential
has been removed or that is otherwise partially dismantled or inoperable and
left on public property;
         (f)   A vehicle that has been removed by a towing service or public
agency upon request of an officer enforcing a statute or ordinance if the
vehicle once impounded is not claimed or redeemed by the owner or his or her
agent within 20 days of its removal; or
         (g)   A vehicle that is at least three model years old, is
mechanically inoperable, and is left on private property continuously for more
than 20 days in a location visible from public property.
      (2)   A vehicle which does not bear a current valid license plate and is
continuously left on private property in view of the public for more than 20
days shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle is mechanically inoperable.
      (3)   A vehicle is not considered to be abandoned if it is housed in a
garage or other building, is contained in a fenced area which blocks the
vehicle from public view, or is under a secure car cover for less than 90 days
in the aggregate (the tacking of subsequent 90 day or less periods so that the
aggregate amount of time the car has been covered exceeds 90 days shall not be
permitted).
      (4)   A vehicle otherwise fitting within the definition of abandoned
vehicle shall not be considered an abandoned vehicle if it is:
         (a)   A vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or
constructed for operation on privately owned raceways;
         (b)   A vehicle stored as property of a member of the armed forces of
the United States who is on active duty assignment;
         (c)   A vehicle located on a vehicle sale lot;
         (d)   A vehicle located upon property licensed or zoned as an
automobile scrap yard; or
         (e)   A vehicle registered and licensed under I.C. 9-18-12 (before its
expiration) as an antique vehicle.
   VEHICLE. An automobile, motorcycle, truck, trailer, semi-trailer, tractor,
bus, school bus, recreational vehicle or motorized bicycle.
(Ord. 656, passed 3-25-2002; Ord. 677, passed 6-23-2003)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 9-18 expired 12-31-2016 by P.L.198-2016, Sec. 262.
§ 96.48 REMOVAL TO SCRAP YARD OR STORAGE AREAS.
   Pursuant to the authority granted in I.C. 9-22-1-13(b):
   (A)   If in the opinion of the officer the market value of the abandoned
vehicle or parts is less than $500, the officer may immediately dispose of the
vehicle to an automobile scrap yard. A copy of the abandoned vehicle report and
photographs relating to the abandoned vehicle shall be forwarded to the State
Bureau of Motor Vehicles. The original record and photographs of the vehicle or
parts shall be retained for a period of at least two years; or
   (B)   (1)   If, in the opinion of the officer, the market value of the
abandoned vehicle or parts is at least $500, the officer, before placing a
notice tag on the vehicle or parts, shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain
the person who owns the vehicle or parts or who may be in control of the
vehicle or parts.
      (2)   After 72 hours, the officer placing a notice tag shall require the
vehicle or parts to be towed to a storage area.
(Ord. 656, passed 3-25-2002)
§ 96.49 DISPOSAL OF VEHICLE.
   Except as provided in §
96.48(A) above, if the person who owns or holds a lien upon a vehicle does not
appear within 20 days after the mailing of a notice under I.C. 9-22-1-19, the
agency may sell the vehicle or parts by either of the following methods:
   (A)   The vehicle or parts shall be sold to the highest bidder at a public
sale. Notice of the sale shall be given under I.C. 5-3-1, except that only one
newspaper insertion at least one week before the public sale is required; or
   (B)   The unit may sell the vehicle or parts as unclaimed property under
I.C. 36-1-11. The 20-day period for the property to remain unclaimed is
sufficient for a sale under this option.
(Ord. 656, passed 3-25-2002)
§ 96.50 CHARGES FOR TOWING AND STORAGE.
   The charges to be allowed for towing and storage of abandoned vehicles shall
not exceed the following: towing/impoundment: $75; storage: $12 per day.
(Ord. 656, passed 3-25-2002)
§ 96.51 LIABILITY OF OWNER.
   In addition to the owner's liability for all costs incidental to the
removal, storage and disposal of the abandoned vehicle as provided for in I.C.
9-22-1-4, the owner shall also be liable for the city's reasonable attorney
fees arising from the removal, storage and disposal of the abandoned vehicle.
(Ord. 656, passed 3-25-2002)
§ 96.52 ABANDONED VEHICLE FUND.
   (A)   There is created an abandoned vehicle fund which shall be used to pay
for the cost of removal and storage of abandoned vehicles not claimed by the
person who owns or holds a lien on the vehicle. In addition, the proceeds from
the sale of an abandoned vehicle or parts received by the city shall be placed
in this account. The costs incurred by the city in administering this chapter
shall be paid from the fund.
   (B)   The City Council shall, pursuant to I.C. 9-22-1-27, appropriate
sufficient moneys to this fund to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Any
money remaining in the fund at the end of the year remains in the fund and
shall not revert to the general fund pursuant to the authority of I.C. 9-22-1-
27.
(Ord. 656, passed 3-25-2002)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions set forth in §
96.01 and is found guilty hereof shall be liable for a fine of $25 and that
each day that a violation continues, it shall constitute a separate offense.
(1998 Code, § 6-65)
   (C)   If any person, corporation or entity shall violate §
96.02, it shall be fined the sum of $25 for each and every violation thereof.
(1998 Code, § 6-67)
   (D)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
96.03 and is found guilty hereof shall be liable for a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $100, and that each day that a violation continues, shall
constitute a separate offense.
(1998 Code, § 6-71)
   (E)   The person shall be fined in a sum not less than $10 nor more than
$300, for each offense (described in §
96.30).
(1998 Code, § 6-79)
(Ord. 160, passed 5-27-1968; Ord. 161, passed 1-27-1969; Ord. 491, passed 11-
14-1988; Ord. passed 11-27-1989; Ord. 513, passed 12-23-1991)
CHAPTER 97: PROPERTY NUISANCES
Section
   
97.01   Specific uses declared to be nuisances
   
97.02   Exceptions (excluded areas)
   
97.03   Temporary permits and fees
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 SPECIFIC USES DECLARED TO BE NUISANCES.
   (A)   Any act of any person or group within the city whereby the health or
life of any person may be endangered, injured or impaired, or any disease may,
directly or indirectly, be caused by the act, any property may be endangered,
injured or damaged, or if any condition or use of the premises or building
exteriors is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to
cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood
in which the premises are located is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
unlawful.
   (B)   Nuisances also include, but are not limited to the keeping or
depositing on or scattering over the premises of any of the following:
      (1)   Lumber, junk, trash, waste, garbage or debris;
      (2)   Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as, but
not limited to, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers;
      (3)   Permitting pools of water or other liquids to accumulate and remain
upon the premises so as to become stagnant, foul to undesirable insects, or to
be of unsightly appearance;
      (4)   The maintenance of any of the above objects or similar objects upon
the premises so as to cause the premises to be unsanitary or a fire menace by
allowing any offensive or unsafe matter including, but not limited to weeds to
grow, accumulate or otherwise occupy or remain upon the premises;
      (5)   The maintenance of any objects or condition on the premises, other
than excluded areas, which will attract, harbor or encourage the breeding of
rats, snakes, bees or other vermin;
      (6)   The use of any premises within the city, or the maintenance of
activity within the city which is contrary to any city ordinance or the city
zoning ordinance, which ordinance is incorporated fully herein by this
reference;
      (7)   Any owner, lessor, or possessor of any premises who keeps or
maintains the premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in the value
of other property in the neighborhood by visual pollution or otherwise; and
      (8)   Abandoned or unused automobiles, automobile parts or used tires on
residential real estate.
(Ord. 769-2010, passed 11-8-2010) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.02 EXCEPTIONS (EXCLUDED AREAS).
   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to any person, firm, or
corporation lawfully engaged in the junk business, the garage, body shop or
other vehicle repair business, auto sale business, or other lawful business in
an properly zoned area in which automobiles or vehicles are kept stored or
parked as an incident to conduct such business.
(Ord. 769-2010, passed 11-8-2010)
§ 97.03 TEMPORARY PERMITS AND FEES.
   Any person, firm, or corporation not engaged in a business as provided in §
97.02 who shall own or have in possession on any premises owned or controlled
by him or her, them or it any motor vehicle kept parked or stored in view of
the public for the purpose of being repaired or for providing parts for another
vehicle may obtain a temporary permit for the purpose of repair or providing
parts from the Clerk of the City of Ligonier, valid for a period not to exceed
15 days upon payment of a fee of $10 which fee shall not be renewable.
(Ord. 769-2010, passed 11-8-2010)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, on
conviction, be fined a fine of not less than $100 per day, nor more than $2,500
per day, with each day a violation occurs to be considered a separate offense,
provided however that the person violating this chapter may admit the violation
before the Ligonier Ordinance Violation Bureau. In those cases, a person will
be fined a fine of $25 for the first offense, a fine of $50 for the second
offense (as the term “second offense” is defined in the section of the code
creating the Ordinance Violation Bureau), and $100 for the third offense (as
the term “third offense” as defined in the section of the code creating the
Ordinance Violation Bureau). In the event a person does not admit the violation
within ten days of its occurrence in accordance with this section, of if a
person shall deny the violation of the chapter, or if the violation is a fourth
or subsequent violation, the violation will be prosecuted in the manner that
ordinances are customarily enforced.
(Ord. 769-2010, passed 11-8-2010)
CHAPTER 98: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Section
   
98.01   Synthetic cannabinoid
 
   
98.99   Penalty
§ 98.01 SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to use, possess,
purchase, attempt to purchase, sell, publicly display for sale or attempt to
sell, give, or barter any one or more of the following chemicals within the
boundaries of the city.
      (1)   2-[(1 R,3 S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol {'
{'}also known as CP 47,497 and its C6, C7, C8, and C9 homologues{'}'}.
      (2)   (6aR,10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-l-ol {'{'}also known as HU-210{'}'}.
      (3)   Naphthalen-l-yl-(l-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone {'{'}also known as 1
Pentyl-3-(l-naphthoyl) indole or JWH-018{'}'}.
      (4)   Naphthalen-l-yl-(l-butylindol-3-yl)methanone {'{'}also known as 1-
Butyl-3-(l-naphthoyl)indole or JWH-073{'}'}
   (B)   This section shall be enforced by the Ligonier Police Department. If
any of the substances listed in division (A) of this section are found in the
possession of any person, they may be confiscated and destroyed by law
enforcement officials.
   (C)   It is not an offense under division (A) of this section if the person
was acting at the direction of an authorized law enforcement agent to enforce
or ensure compliance with this law prohibiting the sale of the aforementioned
substance.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any person who commits any act
described in this section pursuant to the direction or prescription of a
licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act. This
section likewise does not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for a medical
purpose or dental purpose.
(Ord. 762-2010, passed 8-23-2010) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   Any business found to be in violation of this chapter will be subject to a
civil fine of $2,500. Any person found in violation of this chapter will be
guilty of a civil fine not to exceed $1,000.
(Ord. 762-2010, passed 8-23-2010)
CHAPTER 99: ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
   
99.01   Purpose and intent
   
99.02   Definitions
   
99.03   Application
   
99.04   Prohibited activity
   
99.05   Enforcement
   
99.06   Notice to abate
   
99.07   Inspection
   
99.08   Abatement by city on governmental property
   
99.09   Violations and cost of enforcement
   
99.10   Property owner or occupant’s rights to object to notice to abate
   
99.11   Adoption of state law
 
   
99.99   Penalty
§ 99.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to protect the
public safety, health and welfare, and enhance the environment for the people
of the people of the city, by making it unlawful to allow an environmental
public nuisance, to exist.
(Ord. 788-2011, passed 6-13-2011)
§ 99.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A right-of-way other than a street, road, crosswalk or easement,
designed for the special accommodation of the property it reaches.
   CITY. The City of Ligonier Indiana.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC NUISANCE.
      (1)   Any growth of weeds, grass or other rank vegetation on private or
governmental property which is neglected, disregarded or not cut, mown, or
otherwise removed and/or which has attained a height of eight inches or more.
      (2)   Any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush on private or
governmental property.
      (3)   Any poison ivy, ragweed or other poisonous plant, or plants
detrimental to health, growing on any private or governmental property.
      (4)   Property which has been allowed to become a health or safety
hazard, or which has accumulated litter or waste products, unless specifically
authorized under existing laws and regulations.
   EXCLUDED PROPERTY.
      (1)   All land which is cultivated for gross profit in compliance with
the Ligonier Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   A natural or developed forest which does not create an unusual
threat to health or safety for adjacent landowners.
      (3)   Vacant, open/or undeveloped lands or fields which are located more
than 300 feet from occupied property within a zoning district other than a
residence district.
      (4)   Cultivated trees.
      (5)   Cultivated shrubs.
      (6)   Flowers or decorative ornamental plants in the cultivation.
   GOVERNMENTAL PROPERTY. All real estate within the city which is owned,
leased, controlled or occupied by the United States, the state, or any
political subdivision thereof, excluding however, areas such as interior
fields, river bank properties, and wooded lots that are maintained as natural
sites by such political entity and all areas within public rights-of-way
located between a public sidewalk and the curb of the public street, roadway,
highway, or alley directly associated with said public street, roadway, highway
or alley.
   INSPECTOR. The Code Enforcement Officer or an individual designated to make
environmental nuisance public inspections by the Code Enforcement Officer.
   OWNER. Any one or more of the following;
      (1)   The owner of owners in fee simple of a parcel of real estate
including the life tenant or tenants if any;
      (2)   The record owner or owners as reflected by the most current records
in the township assessors’ office of the township in which the real estate is
located; or
      (3)   The purchaser or purchasers of such real estate under any contract
for the conditional sale thereof.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. All real estate within the city except governmental
property. All real estate within public rights-of-way located between a public
sidewalk and the curb of the public street, roadway, highway, or alley directly
associated with said public street, roadway, highway or alley.
   TRAFFIC HAZARD. Any environmental public nuisance that is potentially
dangerous to the existing traffic at the intersection in question, as it may
block or prohibit the view of any oncoming traffic. This includes TRAFFIC
HAZARDS which might be found in alleys that either impede the flow of traffic
or pedestrians in the alley, or create a dangerous condition to traffic in the
alley. Vegetation will be deemed to impede traffic when it grows into the alley
beyond the utility poles. If the inspector finds a violation pursuant to such
definition of TRAFFIC HAZARD, he or she shall be authorized to waive the five
days grace period provided for herein, and abate the problem as soon as
possible.
   WEEDS OR OTHER RANK VEGETATION. Includes the following:
      (1)   Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense);
      (2)   Johnson grass and Sorghum alumum (Sorghum halepense);
      (3)   Bur cucumber (Sicyos angulantus);
      (4)   Shattercane (Sorghum bicolor);
      (5)   Purple loosestrife;
      (6)   Multiflora rose;
      (7)   Garlic mustard;
      (8)   Ragweed;
      (9)   All other plants which are poisonous or detrimental to human health
or which may be determined to be noxious by the Indiana legislature or by rule
of the Indiana Department of Natural Resources or Indiana Department of
Agriculture; and
      (10)   Grass in excess of eight inches tall, excluding ornamental
grasses.
(Ord. 788-2011, passed 6-13-2011)
§ 99.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Each department or agency of the United States, the State of Indiana,
or any other political subdivision thereof, shall be required to keep
governmental property free from environmental public nuisances.
   (B)   Each owner of private property shall be required to keep that private
property free from environmental public nuisances.
(Ord. 788-2011, passed 6-13-2011) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.04 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner of private property or governmental
property to allow an environmental public nuisance to exist on that property,
except on excluded property.
(Ord. 788-2011, passed 6-13-2011) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the city’s Code Enforcement Officer, or person
designated by him or her, including but not limited to a police officer, to
enforce the provisions of this chapter, and upon a determination that a
violation of this chapter exists, the enforcing officer shall ascertain the
name and mailing address of the owner of the property and a description of the
property where the violation exist.
(Ord. 788-2011, passed 6-13-2011)
§ 99.06 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   (A)   With regard to private property, the Inspector shall cause a written
notice to abate to be served upon the owner of the property in question,
granting that owner a minimum of seven calendar days in which to remove the
environmental nuisance. This notice shall be served by a law enforcement
officer, by certified mail to the owner, or by a “notice” placard conspicuously
posted on the property which contains the following information: the address of
the property, the date of the notice, the address and the telephone number of
the office of the Inspector, and a warning that if the environmental public
nuisance is not removed within seven calendar days after posting, the city will
abate the nuisance and seek recovery of the actual costs (as determined herein)
involved in the removal of the nuisance. The notice will also contain a short
and plain statement of the owner’s or occupant’s right to object to the notice
and the manner and time for making such objection.
   (B)   The Inspector, after posting a notice to abate, shall serve on the
owner of the subject property a copy of the notice by regular first class
United States mail, postage prepaid, and provided further that any failure to
give such written notice shall not constitute a defense to any action to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   After an initial notice of violation of this chapter, as provided by
certified mail, or other service, under this section, a continuous abatement
notice may be posted on the subject property at the time of the subsequent
violation instead of by certified mail or equivalent service required under
this section. A continuous abatement notice shall serve as notice to the real
property owner that each subsequent violation during the same year for which
the initial notice of violation was provided may be abated by the city or its
contractors.
(Ord. 788-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 816-2012, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 99.07 INSPECTION.
   Following the expiration of the period given in the notice to abate, the
Inspector shall visually inspect the property to determine whether an
environmental public nuisance exists. If any environmental public nuisance
exists at the time of the inspection, action shall be taken to abate that
nuisance in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 788-2011, passed 6-13-2011)
§ 99.08 ABATEMENT BY CITY ON GOVERNMENTAL PROPERTY.
   Where the Inspector determines that a violation of this chapter exists on
governmental property and threatens the health and safety of the people of the
city, the Inspector may direct the city to immediately enter upon the premises
and remove the environmental public nuisance.
(Ord. 788-2011, passed 6-13-2011)
§ 99.09 VIOLATIONS AND COST OF ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Citation for violation. If the Inspector finds that an environmental
public nuisance exists on private property and has not been abated as directed
in the written notice to abate, the Inspector may cause a citation for
violation of this chapter to be issued to the offending property owner.
   (B)   Abatement by city on private property. In addition to the issuance of
a citation for violation of this chapter, the Inspector, may cause the nuisance
to be abated by issuing a request to cure the condition to city employees, or
contract the removal of the nuisance with a private contractor.
   (C)   Responsibility of offender for costs of enforcement. If the city takes
action to abate the nuisance, the city’s Clerk-Treasurer shall make a statement
of the costs incurred in eliminating the environmental public nuisance. The
costs shall include:
      (1)   A $100 equipment set-up fee; and
      (2)   Forty dollars per man-hour incurred to abate the nuisance, with the
time to be billed in increments of one-quarter hour.
   (D)   Failure to pay. If the owner fails to pay the amount within 30 days
after receiving a statement, a copy of the statement of costs shall be filed in
the Office of the Auditor of Noble County for the purpose of placing the amount
claimed on the tax duplicate against the property so that the amount claimed
can be collected as taxes are collected.
(Ord. 788-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 816-2012, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 99.10 PROPERTY OWNER OR OCCUPANT’S RIGHTS TO OBJECT TO NOTICE TO ABATE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a notice to abate, the property owner or occupant
served, or his or her duly authorized representative, may notify the Code
Enforcement Officer of an intent to object to any notice to abate, or any
portion thereof. This correspondence shall be in writing, and shall specify the
street address and legal description of the property involved. Any such
correspondence must be received by the Code Enforcement Officer within five
days after the notice to abate is given as provided herein.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such correspondence objecting to the notice to abate,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall provide copies of the same to the Mayor, who
shall appoint a hearing officer therefor. The hearing officer shall conduct a
hearing on the objection within ten days of his or her appointment.
   (C)   No further action shall be pursued against that owner to abate the
environmental public nuisance unless the objection to the notice to abate is
overruled by the hearing officer.
(Ord. 788-2011, passed 6-13-2011)
§ 99.11 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   It is the express intent of this chapter to adopt I.C. 36-7-10.1-3.
(Ord. 788-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 816-2012, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, any owner or occupant violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not less than
$25 nor more than $250, provided however, that the person violating this
chapter may admit the violation before the Ligonier Ordinance Violation Bureau.
In such cases a person will be fined a fine of $25 for the first offense, a
fine of $50 for the second offense (as the term “second offense” is defined in
§
36.01), and $100 for the third (as the term “third offense” is defined in §
36.01).
   (B)   In the event a person does not admit the violation with ten days of
its occurrence in accordance with this section, or if a person shall deny the
violation of the chapter, or if the violation is the fourth or subsequent
violation, the violator will be prosecuted in the manner that ordinances are
customarily enforced.
   (C)   Each day such violation is permitted to continue may be deemed a
separate offense. In addition to any fine imposed herein, the offender shall be
responsible for all costs of abatement including administrative fees, and
attorney fees if applicable.
(Ord. 788-2011, passed 6-13-2011)
CHAPTER 100: LABOR DAY FESTIVAL REGULATIONS
Section
   
100.01   Restricted use of certain streets and sidewalks during Labor Day
weekend
 
   
100.99   Penalty
§ 100.01 RESTRICTED USE OF CERTAIN STREETS AND SIDEWALKS DURING LABOR DAY
WEEKEND.
   From Friday at 5:00 p.m. until Monday evening at 8:00 p.m. of each Labor Day
weekend, there will be no pets, bike riding, rollerblades, skateboards, or
parking allowed upon the following streets and their adjacent sidewalks:
   (A)   Grand Street from Lincolnway West to West Union Street.
   (B)   South Main Street from Lincolnway West to Joy Street.
   (C)   Third Street from Grand Street to State Road 5.
   (D)   Fourth Street from Park Street to the alley midway between South Main
Street and State Road 5.
(Ord. 867-2015, passed 7-27-2015) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined a sum of not less than $100 per day with each day a
violation occurs to be considered a separate offense, provided however that the
person violating this section may admit the violation before the Ligonier
Ordinance Violation Bureau. In cases of said admission, a person will be fined
$25 for the first offense, $50 for the second offense (as the term “second
offense” is defined in the section of the code creating the Ordinance Violation
Bureau of the city), and $100 for the third offense (as the term “third
offense” is defined in the section of the code creating the Ordinance Violation
Bureau of the city). In the event a person does not admit the violation within
ten days of its occurrence in accordance with this section or if a person shall
deny the violation of the ordinance, or if the violation is a fourth or
subsequent violation, the violation will be prosecuted in the manner that
ordinances are customarily enforced.
(Ord. 867-2015, passed 7-27-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Ordinance Violations Bureau, see
Chapter 36
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS
         
111.   GARAGE AND YARD SALES
         
112.   CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES
         
113.   FRANCHISES AND CONTRACTS FOR BUSINESS
CHAPTER 110: HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   License required
   
110.03   Fees and application procedures
   
110.04   Hours restricted
   
110.05   Exemptions
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HAWKER or PEDDLER. Any person or persons who sell or solicit, or offer to
sell or solicit, any goods or services, or items of value, on the streets or
other public places within the city, or by going from house to house, offering
to sell or solicit any goods or services, or procuring orders for future goods
or services from individuals, whether for present or future delivery, shall be
taken and deemed and is declared to be a HAWKER or PEDDLER, and will hereafter
be referred to as a HAWKER.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership or other firm, organization
and association whatsoever.
(1998 Code, § 4-20)
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to exercise the vocation of a
hawker within the limits of the city without having first obtained a license to
do so in the manner by this chapter hereinafter provided.
(1998 Code, § 4-21) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 FEES AND APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   Any hawker shall first make application to the City Clerk-Treasurer at least
30 days prior to the time during which the sale or solicitation shall be made
or procured. The application for permit, which must be filed with the City
Clerk-Treasurer, as aforesaid, shall contain the names and addresses of each
person who shall be upon the streets and ways of the city. The application for
permit shall be accompanied by the sum of $100 to be deposited with and held by
the City Clerk-Treasurer. The earnest money deposited shall be returned 30 days
after any permit granted shall have expired and the last day that the hawker
shall have left the limits of the city, less any damages sustained by the city
or any citizen thereof. Should any citizen of the city register protest to the
Mayor, Common Council or City Clerk-Treasurer concerning the hawker, the hawker
shall be notified and the $100 retained until the dispute is settled. The City
Clerk-Treasurer shall further cause to be made an investigation of the persons,
companies and associations represented by such Hawker so that the welfare of
the citizens of the city might be protected. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall
refuse to issue the permits to any hawkers or group of hawkers which are not
registered with accredited organizations such as the Better Business Bureau and
the like. The application shall further be accompanied by the sum of $5 per
person to be so occupied within the city for each day the hawker shall operate
within the city as a set fee. Upon expiration of the 30-day application period,
the City Clerk-Treasurer shall issue to the hawker a permit designating the
specific days during which they have the privilege of soliciting or selling.
The permit shall clearly state the business, avocation, permission granted to
the hawker, and the length of time for which he or she shall have paid to
solicit in the city.
(1998 Code, § 4-22)
§ 110.04 HOURS RESTRICTED.
   No hawker shall pursue his or her business, avocation, calling or specific
thing for which he or she has a license prior to the hour of 8:00 a.m. nor
after 6:00 p.m. No business shall be conducted on Sunday.
(1998 Code, § 4-23)
§ 110.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Mayor of the city from waiving the
30-day investigation period or from granting a courtesy permit to local,
charitable and/or service organizations. Local, charitable and/or service
organizations which are established and known may be granted permits without
the payment of fees as hereinabove set forth. Permanent area residents with
established route and franchises may obtain a license permit renewable from
year to year on the anniversary date thereof for the sum of $20 upon
application to the City Clerk-Treasurer and the approval of the Common Council
of the city. The application to the City Clerk-Treasurer shall clearly set
forth the business, avocation and calling along with the residence of the
applicant for ten years last preceding the application.
(1998 Code, § 4-24)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any
provision contained in any section thereof, upon conviction shall be fined in
any sum not exceeding $100 for each offense, and each day the person shall
engage in business, avocation, calling or pursuit, requiring a license under
the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(1998 Code, § 4-25) (Ord. 148, passed 7-9-1963)
CHAPTER 111: GARAGE AND YARD SALES
Section
   
111.01   Duration and frequency limitations
   
111.02   Garage and yard sale signs restricted
   
111.03   Consent required
   
111.04   Permit and application fee
   
111.05   Display of license or certificate required
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DURATION AND FREQUENCY LIMITATIONS.
   No person, firm or corporation and no group or groups of persons shall
organize, operate and maintain a yard or garage sale in any residential areas
or on any premises primarily used for residential purposes for any period or
term exceeding three days, and no person, firm, corporation, group or groups of
persons may thus organize, operate or maintain the yard or garage sale more
than four times during any calendar year, not including the two “free” city-
wide garage sale events traditionally held within the city.
(1998 Code, § 4-30) (Ord. 506, passed 6-10-1991; Ord. 1006-2024, passed 2-12-
2024)Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.02 GARAGE AND YARD SALE SIGNS RESTRICTED.
   No person, firm or corporation nor group or groups of persons shall
construct, attach or otherwise display any yard or garage sale sign as
hereinabove defined on any stop sign, street sign, telephone or utility pole or
other permanent installation of any utilities company.
(1998 Code, § 4-31) (Ord. 506, passed 6-10-1991; Ord. 1006-2024, passed 2-12-
2024) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 CONSENT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation, nor group or groups of persons shall
construct, attach, or otherwise install any yard or garage sale sign as
hereinabove defined on any private property of any third person or right-of-way
adjacent thereto, without first obtaining the consent of the owner or occupant
of the real estate or adjacent right-of-way upon which the sign is to be
constructed, attached, or installed. Any such sign shall not be placed more
than five days prior to the sale and shall be removed within three days after
the conclusion of the sale.
(1998 Code, § 4-32) (Ord. 506, passed 6-10-1991; Ord. 1006-2024, passed 2-12-
2024) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 PERMIT AND APPLICATION FEE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to organize, operate or maintain a yard or garage
sale in any residential area as hereinabove related, shall make application at
the office of the Clerk-Treasurer for a permit for the operation and
maintenance of the sale and shall state, in detail, the full name and address
of the persons, firm or group who shall operate the same, the address thereof,
the term or duration thereof the sale, a general description of the items and
articles offered for sale and other information and data as may be pertinent
thereto.
   (B)   One copy of each application shall be forwarded, forthwith, to the
Chief of Police of the Police Department or to the officer who may be delegated
by the Chief to receive the applications.
   (C)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Chief or the officer to
investigate the parking, traffic flow and similar or other health and safety
aspects of the proposed yard or garage sale, and to make reasonable
recommendations or orders as are in the best interests of the public safety of
the citizens and the peace and dignity of the residential area, and to approve,
disapprove or approve as modified the application, all of which investigation
and activity shall be done and accomplished within 48 hours of the receipt of
the application.
   (D)   The fee for the application shall be the sum of $5, which sums shall
be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer upon submission of the application.
(1998 Code, § 4-33) (Ord. 506, passed 6-10-1991)
§ 111.05 DISPLAY OF LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   Upon approval of the application as hereinabove related, the Chief of Police
or other designated Officer shall execute the same and shall issue the license
or other certificate to the applicant, which license or certificate shall be
attached or displayed to the residential premises at which the garage or yard
sale is being operated or maintained and in clear view for public inspection
thereof at all times during the sale.
(1998 Code, § 4-34) (Ord. 506, passed 6-10-1991)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation, or group or groups of persons who shall
violate any provisions of the chapter or fail to comply therewith, or with any
requirements thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99.
(1998 Code, § 4-35) (Ord. 506, passed 6-10-1991; Ord. 1006-2024, passed 2-12-
2024)
CHAPTER 112: CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License required
   
112.03   Application
   
112.04   Application procedure
   
112.05   Zoning restrictions
   
112.06   Liability insurance required
   
112.07   License fees
   
112.08   Hours of operation
   
112.09   Conducting in violation of chapter deemed a nuisance
   
112.10   Exemptions
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CARNIVAL. Includes amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for
the conduct of games of skill, food dispensing facilities and sideshows
presented by traveling companies.
   CIRCUS. Includes performances given by traveling companies on vacant lots
with tents, or some other kind of temporary enclosure, where performances are
given for a fee. Performances may include, but are not limited to: trained
animal acts, races, feats of horsemanship, acrobatics, strength, trapeze acting
or clowns.
(1998 Code, § 4-60) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any carnival or circus which is
open to the public and for admittance to which a fee is charged, without first
obtaining a license from the Office of the City Clerk-Treasurer.
(1998 Code, § 4-61) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Each applicant for a license under this section shall procure from the
office of the City Clerk-Treasurer an application for the license which must be
filed at least 30 days prior to the proposed carnival or circus.
   (B)   The application shall require the applicant to furnish information
including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Legal name of the applicant and position;
      (2)   Present address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (3)   Name and address of the traveling company;
      (4)   Location of the proposed carnival or circus;
      (5)   Zoning of the proposed site;
      (6)   Proposed dates of the circus or carnival to be in the town;
      (7)   Number of sideshows to be included therein; and
      (8)   Date of issuance and number of licenses issued by the city for
vendors associated with the circus or carnival.
(1998 Code, § 4-62) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 112.04 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Each completed application for a license under this section shall be
accompanied by a site plan, drawing or diagram showing the location and the
layout of the proposed carnival or circus, and proof of required public
liability insurance.
   (B)   Upon the filing of a complete application, the same shall be referred
by the City Clerk-Treasurer and thereafter be referred to the following
agencies for review and recommendation:
      (1)   To the Police Department for a background check of the applicant
and for recommendations for crowd and noise control;
      (2)   To the Police Department for review of the parking requirements,
and ingress and egress to the proposed site;
      (3)   To the County Health Department for review of restroom requirements
and litter control;
      (4)   To the Building and Zoning Administrator or his or her designee,
for a review of the zoning of the proposed site and in particular, compliance
with division (B)(5) below; and
      (5)   The Clerk-Treasurer may request or receive inspection reports and
recommendations from any other department or bureau prior to or after issuance
of a license.
   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer may approve each license application, if it meets
the standards of this code.
   (D)   Any applicant may appeal a denial of a license pursuant to the
procedure set forth in §
34.27.
(1998 Code, § 4-63) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 112.05 ZONING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued to any proposed carnival or circus for a
location within 1,000 feet of any of the following zoning use districts as
defined by the Zoning Chapter of this code:
      (1)   R-1 Single-Family Residential District;
      (2)   R-1 Multi-Family Residential District; and
      (3)   S-1 District.
   (B)   No license shall be issued under this section for a location within
1,000 feet of the following:
      (1)   Nursing home, public or private clinics;
      (2)   Public or private schools; or
      (3)   Hospitals or sanitariums.
(1998 Code, § 4-64) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 112.06 LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   No license shall be issued unless the proposed licensee files with the City
Clerk-Treasurer's office a certificate or certificates of insurance indicating
that there is in effect public liability insurance covering any damages arising
out of the use and operation of any and all devices and facilities operated in
connection with the carnival or circus. The insurance shall be in the minimum
amount of $300,000 for each person, and $1,000,000 for each occurrence.
(1998 Code, § 4-65) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 112.07 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   The fee for the issuance of a license under this section shall be $220
for the first day of operation and $125 for each subsequent day of operation.
   (B)   All other license requirements of this code shall be complied with by
vendors proposing to do business at the carnival or circus.
(1998 Code, § 4-66) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 112.08 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   In no event shall a carnival or circus begin before 10:00 a.m., nor shall it
continue past 11:00 p.m.
(1998 Code, § 4-67) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.09 CONDUCTING IN VIOLATION OF CHAPTER DEEMED A NUISANCE.
   Any carnival or circus operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall be unlawful and declared a public nuisance.
(1998 Code, § 4-68) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.10 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to carnivals or circuses
connected with and exhibited upon the grounds used by a county fair association
during the time any association is conducting a county fair in the city.
(1998 Code, § 4-70) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject,
upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $400 and not more than $2,500. The
violation of any provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense
for each day the violation may exist.
(1998 Code, § 4-69) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
CHAPTER 113: FRANCHISES AND CONTRACTS FOR BUSINESS
Section
   
113.01   Ordinance and/or agreement required for services
   
113.02   Mutual aid agreements
§ 113.01 ORDINANCE AND/OR AGREEMENT REQUIRED FOR SERVICES.
   (A)   The city may enter into written agreements with various companies to
provide service to the city which shall not exceed four-year terms per
agreement.
   (B)   The agreements may address the term and renewal procedure of the
franchise; use, rental or lease of property; compliance with applicable laws,
indemnification and liability for damages; liability insurance; operational
standards; performance bonds; payments to the city; records and reports; rates;
discontinuance of service procedures; revocation procedures; assignment of
franchise; acceptance of franchise; definitions; and other related areas.
   (C)   The agreements shall be binding upon the parties only after passage of
an appropriate ordinance by the Common Council, with the same being kept on
file in the Clerk-Treasurer's Office.
(1998 Code, § 4-75) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 113.02 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
   Mutual aid agreements may be entered into by the city and other political
entities upon passage of a proper ordinance or approval by the Board of Works
and Safety.
(1998 Code, § 4-76) (Ord. 603, passed 7-27-1998)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
         
131.   CURFEW
         
132.   WEAPONS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Obstruction of public rights-of-way prohibited
   
130.02   Limited exceptions
   
130.03   Sidewalk sales
   
130.04   Role of Board of Public Works and Safety
   
130.05   Enforcement by police
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A person shall not lie, lounge or sit (either directly or on a chair,
box or other object) on any street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, any public
right-of-way; or in any driveway open to the public; or in any doorway,
entranceway or passageway affording entrance or exit by the public into or from
any building, be such building or any establishment therein open for business
or not, nor shall a person congregate with others in those places so as to
physically obstruct by his or her actions or behavior, presence or location,
unimpeded passage by others.
   (B)   A person shall not sit, stand, lie or lounge upon, or hang upon or
from the exterior of any automobile, motorcycle, bus, truck, motor vehicle or
vehicular trailer while the vehicle is stopped or parked, in such a manner as
to physically obstruct by his or her actions or behavior, presence or location,
unimpeded passage by others.
(1998 Code, § 6-85) (Ord. 451, passed 11-26-1984) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 LIMITED EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The prohibition, above, against sitting on the sidewalk and curbs
shall not apply during or immediately prior to any public parade or other
public celebration at the site of the parade or the celebration for which
parade or celebration the proper governmental agency has granted permission.
   (B)   The prohibitions of §
130.01 above shall also not be applicable to individuals sitting on benches
placed upon the sidewalk with the permission of the Common Council of the city.
(1998 Code, § 6-86) (Ord. 451, passed 11-26-1984; Ord. 731, passed 10-22-2007)
§ 130.03 SIDEWALK SALES.
   The prohibitions contained hereinabove in this chapter shall not apply to
personnel of business establishments who, during the sidewalk sale for which a
proper permit has been granted by the city, or for which permission has been
granted by proper governmental agency for the city, may sit on chairs or
benches or the sidewalk adjacent to the establishments during the sale.
(1998 Code, § 6-87) (Ord. 451, passed 11-26-1984)
§ 130.04 ROLE OF BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.
   The Board of Public Works and Safety is empowered to suspend the provisions
of this chapter, or particular prohibitions hereof, generally or in certain
areas only, when, in connection with carnivals, public activities and other
public events, the suspension is warranted in the opinion and discretion of the
Board.
(1998 Code, § 6-88) (Ord. 451, passed 11-26-1984)
§ 130.05 ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE.
   Each and every police officer of the city, is authorized to enforce the
prohibitions of this chapter by issuing a traffic summons to any offender seen
by the officer to be in violation of this chapter; provided, however, that a
violator not a resident of the state may be required to post bond, not to
exceed $50, notwithstanding his or her written promise to appear in court.
(1998 Code, § 6-90) (Ord. 451, passed 11-26-1984)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person violating §
130.01 of this chapter will be fined a fine of $25 for the first offense, a
fine of $50 for the second offense (as the term "second offense" is defined in
Chapter 36 of this code) and $100 for the third offense (as the term "third
offense" is defined in
Chapter 36 of this code). The violations may be admitted before the Ordinance
Violations Bureau within ten days of the alleged violation. Thereafter, the
violation will be prosecuted in the manner that ordinances are customarily
enforced.
   (B)   A person violating any other provision of this chapter shall be fined
an amount not less than $5 and not more than $100.
(1998 Code, § 6-89) (Ord. 451, passed 11-26-1984; Ord. 758-09, passed 9-14-
2009)
CHAPTER 131: CURFEW
Section
   
131.01   Curfew established
   
131.02   Exemptions
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 CURFEW ESTABLISHED.
   It is a curfew violation for a child 15, 16 or 17 years of age to be in a
public place:
   (A)   Between 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday;
   (B)   After 10:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday; or
   (C)   Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday.
(1998 Code, § 6-30) (Ord. 497, passed 9-11-1989) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   It is a curfew violation for a child under 15 years of age to be in a
public place after 10:00 p.m. or before 5:00 a.m. on any day.
   (B)   (1)   It is a defense to a violation under this chapter that the child
was emancipated:
         (a)   Under I.C. 31-37-19-27 or IC 31-6-4-15.7 (before its repeal);
         (b)   By virtue of having married; or
         (c)   In accordance with the laws of another state or jurisdiction;
at the time that the child engaged in the prohibited conduct.
      (2)   It is a defense to a violation under this chapter that the child
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
         (a)   Accompanied by the child's parent, guardian, or custodian;
         (b)   Accompanied by an adult specified by the child's parent,
guardian, or custodian;
         (c)   Participating in, going to, or returning from:
            1.   Lawful employment;
            2.   A school sanctioned activity;
            3.   A religious event;
            4.   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
            5.   An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights
protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or
Article 1, Section 31 of the Constitution of the State of Indiana, or both,
such as freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or
            6.   An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity
that provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the
supervision of one or more adults;
         (d)   Participating in an activity undertaken at the prior written
direction of the child's parent, guardian, or custodian; or
         (e)   Engaged in interstate or international travel from a location
outside Indiana to another location outside Indiana.
(1998 Code, § 6-31) (Ord. 497, passed 9-11-1989) Penalty, see §
131.99
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 31-6 was repealed by P.L.1-1997, Sec. 157.
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   A person violating any prohibition of this chapter shall be fined in the
amount of $25.
(1998 Code, § 6-32) (Ord. 497, passed 9-11-1989)
CHAPTER 132: WEAPONS
Section
   
132.01   Discharge of weapons prohibited
   
132.02   [Reserved]
   
132.03   Definitions
 
   
132.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Local regulations of firearms, see I.C. 35-47-11-1.1 et seq.
§ 132.01 DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other entity to
discharge any BB gun, or pellet gun, or detonate any explosives any place
within the corporate limits of the city, or to assist any other person or
persons to engage in any discharging or detonation thereof, unless the person,
entity or corporation has been granted special permission in advance by the
Board of Public Works and Safety of the city.
(1998 Code, § 6-36) (Ord. passed 11-14-1988; Ord. 800-2011, passed 9-26-2011)
Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.02 [RESERVED].
§ 132.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIREARM. Any weapon that is capable or designed to, or that may readily be
converted to, expel a projectile by means of an explosion.
(1998 Code, § 6-38) (Ord. passed 11-14-1988)
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   Any person engaging in any of the unlawful activities described in §
132.01 shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and upon conviction shall
be fined not less than $25 nor more than $250.
(1998 Code, § 6-39) (Ord. passed 11-14-1988)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
         
151.   STREET EXCAVATION AND OBSTRUCTION
         
152.   UNSAFE BUILDINGS
         
153.   MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS
         
154.   FLOOD PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
         
155.   SUBDIVISIONS
         
156.   ZONING CODE
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Building and Zoning Administrator
   
150.002   Consent to encroach required
   
150.003   Vacations of public property
   
150.004   Numbering of buildings
Building Code
   
150.015   Title
   
150.016   Purpose
   
150.017   Definitions
   
150.018   Scope
   
150.019   Authority
   
150.020   Building permits
   
150.021   Investigations and inspections of construction activities
   
150.022   Enforcement
   
150.023   Adoption of rules by reference
   
150.024   Lifting devices located within a private residence
   
150.025   Effective date
Minimum Maintenance Code
   
150.060   Adoption of existing structures code
   
150.061   Inconsistent ordinances repealed
   
150.062   Additions, insertions and changes
Mobile Home and House Trailer Regulations
   
150.075   Prohibited locations
   
150.076   Permit fees
   
150.077   Variances
 
   
150.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 BUILDING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   Section
32.06 addresses the Office of the Building and Zoning Administrator.
(1998 Code, § 7-1)
§ 150.002 CONSENT TO ENCROACH REQUIRED.
   Any proposed encroachment must be presented to the Common Council for review
and no encroachment shall take place prior to an approved written agreement
approved by the Council.
(1998 Code, § 7-105)
§ 150.003 VACATIONS OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Indiana Code 36-7-3-12 et seq. shall govern the vacation of public property.
(1998 Code, § 7-106)
§ 150.004 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS.
   (A)   The City Building Inspector shall assign to every building its
respective number, subject to the approval of the Plan Commission, and
thereafter, it will be the duty of the owner, tenant, occupant, or agent in
control of or in possession of the building to immediately, at his or her or
their own expense, to secure numbers as described herein and to fasten said
numbers as described herein to the building.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the numbers to be attached to the
building shall be at least three inches in height, painted or mounted in a
conspicuous location on the side of or above the front entrance facing the
street designated in the building's assigned address, or as near thereto as
possible. The numbers shall be maintained in a way such that they are easily
and distinctly read from the public way.
   (C)   If the public way is 75 feet or more from the front entrance of the
building, the numbers shall be six inches tall, or they may be posted no more
than two feet from the right-of-way of the street designated in the building's
assigned address, in which case three inch numbers (or larger) may be used.
   (D)   Numbering in mobile home parks. Numbers shall be posted at the end of
each street. In addition, each unit shall be identified with three inch numbers
mounted in a conspicuous location on the side of or above the front entrance
facing the street, or as near thereto as possible.
   (E)   All house numbers shall be in Arabic numerals; no cursive or other
type of numbering shall be permitted.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, occupant, or agent or
person in possession of any building to refuse to comply with the provisions of
this section within 30 days of having been assigned a number by the City
Building Inspector (with the approval of the Plan Commission), and after notice
shall have been served upon said owner, tenant, occupant, agent, or person in
possession by the Building Inspector setting forth the correct numbering of the
building.
(Ord. 859-2014, passed 1-12-2015) Penalty, see §
150.999
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.015 TITLE.
   This subchapter and all material included herein by reference shall be known
as the Building Code of the city.
(Ord. 700, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 150.016 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the life, public safety, health
and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and shall be construed in such
a manner to effectuate this purpose.
(Ord. 700, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 150.017 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING COMMISSIONER. Includes individuals employed by the City of Ligonier
and are authorized to represent the office of the City Building Code, and
Zoning Administrator.
   CLASS 1 STRUCTURE. Pursuant to I.C. 12-12-1-4 has the following definition:
      (1)   CLASS 1 STRUCTURE means any part of the following:
         (a)   A building or structure that is intended to be or is occupied or
otherwise used in any part by any of the following:
            1.   The public;
            2.   Three or more tenants; and/or
            3.   One or more persons who act as the employees of another.
         (b)   A site improvement affecting access by persons with physical
disabilities to a building or structure described in division (1)(a) above.
         (c)   Any class of buildings or structures that the commission
determines by rules to affect a building or structure described in division (1)
(a) above, except buildings or structures described in divisions (3) through
(6) below.
      (2)   Division (1)(a) above includes a structure that contains three or
more condominium units (as defined in I.C. 32-25-2-9) or other units that:
         (a)   Are intended to be or are used or leased by the owner of the
unit; and
         (b)   Are not completely separated from each other by an unimproved
space.
      (3)   Division (1)(a) above does not include a building or structure
that:
         (a)   Is intended to be or is used only for an agricultural purpose on
the land where it is located; and
         (b)   Is not used for retail trade or is a stand used for retail sales
of farm produce for eight or less consecutive months in a calendar year.
      (4)   Division (1)(a) above does not include a Class 2 structure.
      (5)   Division (1)(a) above does not include a vehicular bridge.
      (6)   Division (1)(a) above does not include a structure that is intended
to be or is occupied solely to provide periodic maintenance or repair of:
         (a)   The structure; or
         (b)   Mechanical or electrical equipment located within and affixed to
the structure.
      (7)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-24, STRUCTURE includes swimming pool.
   CLASS 2 STRUCTURE.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-5, any part of the following:
         (a)   A townhouse or a building or structure that is intended to
contain or contains only one dwelling unit or two dwelling units unless any
part of the building or structure is regularly used as a Class 1 structure.
         (b)   An outbuilding for a structure described in division (1)(a)
above, such as a garage, barn or family swimming pool, unless any part of the
outbuilding is regularly used as a Class 1 structure.
      (2)   Division (1) above does not include a vehicular bridge.
      (3)   For purposes of division (1)(a), TOWNHOUSE means a single-family
dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units in which
each unit:
         (a)   Extends from foundation to roof;
         (b)   Is not more than three stories in height;
         (c)   Is separated from each adjoining unit by:
            1.   Two one-hour fire-resistance rated walls with exposure from
both sides; or
            2.   A common two-hour fire-resistance rated wall; and
         (d)   Has open space on at least two sides.
      (4)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-24, STRUCTURE includes swimming pool.
   CONSTRUCTION. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-7:
      (1)   Fabrication of any part of an industrialized building system or
mobile structure for use at another site;
      (2)   Erection or assembly of any part of a Class 1 or Class 2 structure
at the site where it will be used;
      (3)   Installation of any part of the permanent heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, electrical, plumbing, sanitary, emergency detection, emergency
communication or fire or explosion suppression systems for a Class 1 or Class 2
structure at the site where it will be used;
      (4)   Work undertaken to alter, remodel, rehabilitate or add to any part
of a Class 1 or Class 2 structure; and
      (5)   Work undertaken to relocate any part of a Class 1 or Class 2
structure, except a mobile structure.
   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING SYSTEM. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-14, any part of a
building or other structure that is in whole or in substantial part fabricated
in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the
building site as part of a Class 1 structure, a Class 2 structure or another
building or structure. However, the term does not include a mobile structure or
a system that is capable of inspection at the building site.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-16 has the meaning set forth in
42 U.S.C. § 5402 as it existed on January 1, 2003. This definition is as
follows: MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body
feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 32 or more square feet,
and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical
systems contained therein; except that the term shall include any structure
which meets all the requirements of this definition, except the size
requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and
complies with the standards established under 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq. and
except that the term shall not include any self-propelled recreational vehicle.
   MOBILE STRUCTURE. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-17:
      (1)   MOBILE STRUCTURE. Any part of a fabricated unit that is designed to
be:
         (a)   Towed on its own chassis; and
         (b)   Connected to utilities for year-round occupancy or use as a
Class 1 structure, a Class 2 structure or another structure.
      (2)   The term includes the following:
         (a)   Two or more components that can be retracted for towing purposes
and subsequently expanded for additional capacity; and
         (b)   Two or more units that are separately towable but designed to be
joined into one integral unit.
   PERSON. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-18, an individual, corporation, limited
liability company, partnership, unincorporated association or governmental
entity.
   STRUCTURE. Both Class 1 and Class 2 structures, unless specifically stated
otherwise.
   VEHICULAR BRIDGE. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-26, any bridge that is neither:
      (1)   A pedestrian walkway; nor
      (2)   A passageway for light vehicles; suspended between two or more
parts of a building or between two or more buildings.
(Ord. 700, passed 1-10-2005)
Editor’s notes:
   I.C. 12-12-1-4 was repealed by P.L.64-2002, Sec. 8.
   I.C. 32-1 was repealed by P.L.2-2002, Sec. 128.
§ 150.018 SCOPE.
   (A)   All construction shall be accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-6, this chapter shall not apply to
industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under I.C. 22-
15-4; however, the provisions of this chapter, and the rules promulgated by the
Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission do apply to any construction
related to an industrialized building system or mobile structure not certified
under I.C. 22-15-4.
   (C)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-9, this chapter is not applicable to
regulated amusement devices, regulated boilers, regulated pressure vessels or
regulated lifting devices
(Ord. 700, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 150.019 AUTHORITY.
   The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to administer
and enforce the following:
   (A)   All of the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Variances granted in accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-11; and
   (C)   Orders issued under I.C. 22-12-7.
(Ord. 700, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 150.020 BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   Building permit required. Construction is prohibited unless in
conformity with a valid building permit obtained from the Building Commissioner
prior to commencement of construction.
   (B)   Application for building permit.
      (1)   Any person required to have a building permit shall submit a
complete application to the Building Commissioner.
      (2)   This application shall be submitted on a form prepared by the
Building Commissioner and shall contain the following:
         (a)   Information that the Building Commissioner determines to be
necessary to locate and contact the applicant;
         (b)   A clear and understandable copy of detailed plans and
specifications drawn to scale which indicate in a precise manner the nature and
location of all work to be accomplished;
         (c)   A plot plan drawn to scale; provided, however, the plot plan
shall not be required in the instance where all the construction is to occur
entirely within an existing structure. This plot plan shall reflect the
location of the structure in relation to existing property lines and show
streets, curbs and sidewalks and proposed changes or additions to the streets,
curbs and sidewalks;
         (d)   If required by state law or any rule of the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission, a copy of a design release for the work to be done
that has been issued by the State Building Commissioner and the State Fire
Marshal pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3;
         (e)   Any additional information that the Building Commissioner finds
to be necessary to determine that the construction will conform to all
applicable building laws and will not violate any other applicable ordinances
or laws; and
         (f)   The fee established by ordinance.
      (3)   Application for a building permit shall be made by the person
entitled to obtain the permit or by an employee or agent of that person. The
Building Commissioner may require that the employee or agent provide written
authority to apply for a permit.
      (4)   Minimum inspection required.
Type of Building Minimum Inspection Required
                                                                        Minimum
Type of Building                                                        Inspection
                                                                        Required
Residential:
   1 or 2 family dwelling, detached                                  3
   Apartments, hotels, motels (per unit)                             3
   Manufactured housing                                              3
   Accessory buildings, residential use                              2
   Remodeling/additions decks, porches, sheds, electrical inspection 2
only
   Plumbing
   Swimming pools
   Demolition
   Yard sale
Commercial, industrial and other than residential
   New construction                                                  5
   Remodeling/addition                                               5
   Electrical
   Plumbing
   Demolition
   Signs
   Educational, institutional, and churches                          4
   Portable classrooms                                               2
   Remodeling/additions
   Business, commercial and public building                          5
   Fence
 
   (C)   Issuance of building permit. The Building Commissioner shall issue a
building permit to a person after the person has submitted a complete
application, including any applicable fee, provided that the proposed
construction will conform to all applicable building laws and will not violate
any other applicable ordinances or laws.
   (D)   Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy for any building
or structure shall be issued unless the building or structure was constructed
in compliance with the provisions of this Building Ordinance. It shall be
unlawful to occupy any building or structure unless a full, partial or
temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building
Commissioner.
(Ord. 700, passed 1-10-2005; Ord. 787-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 150.021 INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS OF CONSTRICTION ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   General authority to make inspections and investigations.
      (1)   All construction shall be subject to periodic inspections by the
Building Commissioner irrespective of whether a building permit has been or is
required to be obtained.
      (2)   The Building Commissioner may at any reasonable time go in, upon,
around or about the premises where any structure subject to the provisions of
this chapter or to the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission is located for the purposes of inspection and investigation of the
structure. The inspection and investigation may be made before and/or after
construction on the project is completed for the purposes of determining
whether the structure meets building standards and procedures, and ascertaining
whether the construction and procedures have been accomplished in a manner
consistent with this chapter and the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission.
   (B)   Inspections by Fire Department. The Building Commissioner and the Fire
Department shall work cooperatively to conduct inspections and investigations
to promote compliance with fire safety laws. (The Fire Department has
independent authority to conduct inspections and take enforcement actions under
I.C. 36-8-17.)
(Ord. 700, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 150.022 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Withhold issuance of permits.
      (1)   Whenever an applicant for a building permit or an obtainer of a
building permit owes fees (including checks returned for insufficient funds,
permit fees or inspection fees) to the Building Commissioner the Building
Commissioner may withhold the issuance of subsequently requested permits until
the time that the debt is satisfied.
      (2)   Whenever a person applies for a building permit for a structure
that is not being used or constructed in conformance with applicable provisions
of an applicable zoning ordinance or other ordinance relating to land use, the
Building Commissioner is authorized to withhold the issuance of requested
permits until a time that the property is brought into conformance with
applicable ordinances.
   (B)   Permit revocation. The Building Commissioner may revoke a building
permit when any of the following are applicable:
      (1)   The application, plans or supporting documents contain a false
statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact;
      (2)   The application, plans or supporting documents reflect a lack of
compliance with building standards and procedures;
      (3)   There is failure to comply with this chapter; and/or
      (4)   The structure for which the building permit has been issued is not
being used or constructed in conformance with an applicable zoning ordinance or
other ordinance relating to land use.
   (C)   Stop-work order.
      (1)   The Building Commissioner may issue an order requiring suspension
of the pertinent construction (stop-work order) in accordance with this
section.
      (2)   The stop-work order shall:
         (a)   Be in writing;
         (b)   State with specificity the construction to which it is
applicable and the reason for its issuance;
         (c)   Be posted on the property in a conspicuous place;
         (d)   If practicable, be given to:
            1.   The person doing the construction; and
            2.   To the owner of the property or the owner's agent.
         (e)   The stop-work order shall state the conditions under which
construction may be resumed.
      (3)   The Building Commissioner may issue a stop-work order if:
         (a)   Construction is proceeding in an unsafe manner, including, but
not limited to, in violation of any standard set forth in this chapter or any
state law pertaining to safety during construction;
         (b)   Construction is occurring in violation of this chapter or in
such a manner that if construction is allowed to proceed, there is a reasonable
probability that it will be substantially difficult to correct the violation;
or
         (c)   Construction for which a building permit is required is
proceeding without a building permit being in force.
      (4)   The issuance of a stop-work order shall in no way limit the
operation of penalties provided elsewhere in this chapter.
   (D)   Civil action. Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-4, the city may mitigate a civil
action in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain any person from
violating a provision of this chapter.
   (E)   Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by an order issued under this
chapter shall have the right to petition for review of any order of the
Building Commissioner. Such a person may file a petition using either, or both,
of the following procedures:
      (1)   Appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
         (a)   A person aggrieved by an order issued under this chapter may
appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission, in accordance
with I.C. 22-13-2-7.
         (b)   The Commission may modify or reverse any order issued by the
city that covers a subject governed by I.C. 22-12, I.C. 22-13, I.C. 22-14, I.C.
22-15, a fire safety, or a building rule.
         (c)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission must review
orders that concern a Class 2 Structure if the person aggrieved by the order
petitions for review under I.C. 4-21.5-3-7 within 30 days after the issuance of
the order.
         (d)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission may review
all other orders issued under this Building Ordinance.
         (e)   The review of an order by the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission does not suspend the running of the time period under any
statute in which a person must petition a court for judicial review of the
order.
      (2)   Appeal to an established local administrative body or court. If,
pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-9, the city has established by ordinance to hear
appeals of orders issued under ordinances, then a person aggrieved by an order
may petition for review with this administrative body in accordance with the
ordinance. If no such administrative body exists, then the person may petition
a court for judicial review of the order.
(Ord. 700, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 150.023 ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-3(b), the rules of the State Fire Prevention
and Building Safety Commission as set out in the following I.A.C. Title 675,
Articles are hereby incorporated by reference in this code and shall include
any later amendments to those rules.
      (1)   Article 13 - Building Codes:
         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards; and
         (b)   Indiana Building Code.
      (2)   Article 14 - Indiana Residential Code;
      (3)   Article 16 - Indiana Plumbing Code;
      (4)   Article 17 - Indiana Electrical Code;
      (5)   Article 18 - Indiana Mechanical Code;
      (6)   Article 19 - Indiana Energy Conservation Code;
      (7)   Article 20 - Indiana Swimming Pool Code;
      (8)   Article 22 - Indiana Fire Code;
      (9)   Article 24 - Migrant Day Care Nursery Fire Safety Code; and
      (10)   Article 25 - Indiana Fuel Gas Code.
   (B)   Two copies of the above building rules incorporated by reference are
on file in the office of the clerk for the legislative body for public
inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
   (C)   The Building Commissioner and the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission may grant a variance to the fire safety laws and building laws
adopted in this chapter. Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-7(b), a variance granted by
the Building Commissioner is not effective until it has been approved by Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
(Ord. 700, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 150.024 LIFTING DEVICES LOCATED WITHIN A PRIVATE RESIDENCE.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-22(b)(12), lifting devices, such as elevators
and wheelchair lifts, located within a private residence are not regulated
lifting devices. Therefore, the following standards applicable to lifting
devices located within a private residence are incorporated by reference.
      (1)   Part 5.3, Private Residence Elevators, ANSI/ASME A17.1-2000, Safety
Code for Elevators and Escalators published by the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
      (2)   Part 5.4, Private Residence Inclined Elevators, ANSI/ASME AI7.1-
2000, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators published by the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
      (3)   Section 5, Private Residence Vertical Platform Lifts, ASME A18.1 a,
2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway
Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three
Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
      (4)   Section 6, Private Residence Inclined Platform Lifts, ASME A18. la,
2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1 -1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway
Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three
Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
      (5)   Section 7, Private Residence Inclined Platform Lifts, ASME Al 8.1
a, 2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway
Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three
Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
   (B)   Two copies of the above lifting device standards incorporated by
reference are on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer for the legislative
body for public inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
(Ord. 700, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 150.025 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after the date on
which both of the following have occurred:
   (A)   The City Council has adopted this subchapter; and
   (B)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission of the state has
approved of this subchapter as required by I.C. 22-13-2-5.
(Ord. 700, passed 1-10-2005)
MINIMUM MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 150.060 ADOPTION OF EXISTING STRUCTURES CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer of the city, being marked and designated as "The BOCA National
Existing Structures Code Administrators International, Inc.", be and is adopted
as the Existing Structures Code of the city; for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the BOCA National Existing Structures Code
are referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
subchapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in §
150.062 below.
(1998 Code, § 7-50) (Ord. 490, passed 7-10-1989)
§ 150.061 INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   All the parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed.
(1998 Code, § 7-51) (Ord. 490, passed 7-10-1989)
§ 150.062 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
   The BOCA National Existing Structures Code is amended and revised in the
following respects:
   (A)   Section ES-100.1 (page 1, second line): Civil City of Ligonier.
   (B)   Section E5-110.2 (page 8): The section shall be written so as to read
as follows:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Code
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fixed fine of $50. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with
the terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   Section ES-111.4 (page 9, second line): Insert 30 days.
(1998 Code, § 7-52) (Ord. 490, passed 7-10-1989)
Cross-reference:
   Building Code, see §§
150.015 through
150.025
   Maintenance of sidewalks, see
Chapter 153
   Unsafe Buildings, see
Chapter 152
MOBILE HOME AND HOUSE TRAILER REGULATIONS
§ 150.075 PROHIBITED LOCATIONS.
   Any house trailer, mobile home or any dwelling set upon wheels or so
constructed as to readily adapt to the use of wheels on the highways of this or
any other state, be and they are forbidden within the city limits, or the two-
mile zoning limit of the City Zoning Commission, except as specifically set
forth hereinafter.
(1998 Code, § 7-95)
§ 150.076 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the operation or placing of
house trailers in duly authorized trailer parks, which trailer parks shall be
subject to a permit obtained from the Common Council of the city, with the
endorsement of the Zoning Commission.
   (B)   The trailer park permit shall be granted upon application to the City
Council and shall be at the discretion of the body guided by the City Plan
Commission. The permit may be revoked for cause by the Common Council at any
time subsequent to its issuance. A fee for the permit shall be $2.
(1998 Code, § 7-96)
§ 150.077 VARIANCES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall conflict with the right of the Zoning
Appeal Board to grant a variance upon proper application.
(1998 Code, § 7-98)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   A person violating §
150.004 will be fined $25. Each day that a property is not in compliance with §
150.004 shall be deemed a separate violation of that section. The violations
may be admitted before the Ordinance Violation Bureau within ten days of the
alleged violation. Thereafter the violation will be prosecuted in the manner
that ordinances are customarily enforced.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
150.015 through
150.025 may be subject to a fine in any sum not exceeding $2,500. The
assessment of a monetary penalty shall in no way limit the operation of the
penalties, provided elsewhere in §§
150.001 through
150.003, and
150.015 through
150.025.
(Am. Ord. 859-2014, passed 1-12-2015)
   (D)   Any mobile home or trailer home aforesaid arriving in the city or its
zoning limits to the enactment of §§
150.075 through
150.077 shall be assessed a fine of $10 per day for each and every day the
mobile home or trailer home remains within the zoning limits. Any trailer now
located within the zoning limits of the city which shall change its location
within the zoning limits, shall be deemed a new arrival within the city, and
any right to remain within the city zoning limits is cancelled.
(1998 Code, § 7-97)
(Ord. 700, passed 1-10-2005)
CHAPTER 151: STREET EXCAVATION AND OBSTRUCTION
Section
General Regulations
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   Lights required
   
151.03   Marking of obstruction required
   
151.04   Barricades required
   
151.05   Interference with safety items prohibited
   
151.06   Obstructions prohibited
   
151.07   Compliance required
   
151.08   Permit required
   
151.09   Posting of permit required
   
151.10   Limited exceptions
   
151.11   No permit substitutes permitted
   
151.12   Permit fee
   
151.13   Role of Board of Public Works and Safety
   
151.14   Bond requirements
   
151.15   Times when excavations are prohibited
Specific Regulations
   
151.30   Backfill requirements
   
151.31   Pavement replacement
   
151.32   Concrete or brick pavements
   
151.33   Cement requirements
   
151.34   Hot asphaltic concrete and the like
   
151.35   Temporary patch
   
151.36   Inspections
   
151.37   Board resolutions
   
151.38   Sewer and water connections
   
151.39   Notice required
   
151.40   Tunneling requirements
   
151.41   Maintenance of barricades and danger lights
   
151.42   Cave-ins prohibited
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 151.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Ligonier, Indiana.
   EMERGENCY. Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the existence of which
constitutes danger to the health or welfare of persons or property, or which
may cause or does cause the interruption of a service being furnished by a
public utility doing business in the city and which utility is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission of Indiana.
   PERMIT. The authorization issued by the Board of Public Works and Safety
pursuant to the provisions of the chapter to make an opening or excavation in a
street of the city.
   PERSON. A natural person, partnership, firm or corporation.
   PETITIONER. Any person who makes a "request" for a permit pursuant to the
provisions hereof.
   STREET. Any public street, public highway, public alley, public right-of-way
or a public road any of which is under the jurisdiction of the Board of Public
Works and Safety of the city.
(1998 Code, § 7-58)
§ 151.02 LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person making any excavation in any street in the city shall mark
and designate the excavation by a light or lights; placed at the excavation
during all hours of darkness during the existence of the excavation.
   (B)   The light or lights shall be placed at the points where the excavation
approaches the traveled portion of the street and lit and they shall be kept
burning during all hours of darkness.
   (C)   The type of light or lights to be used for this purpose is to be
designated by the Board of Public Works of the city or the designated
representative.
(1998 Code, § 7-59) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.03 MARKING OF OBSTRUCTION REQUIRED.
   Any person placing any obstruction in any street while constructing or
repairing any building or other structure, or while improving or repairing the
street, or in laying any conduits, wires, pipes, mains or sewers, shall mark
the obstruction during the hours of darkness while the obstruction exists by a
light or lights so placed as to indicate the obstruction to any person passing
along the street.
(1998 Code, § 7-60) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.04 BARRICADES REQUIRED.
   Any person making any excavation or placing any building material or
obstruction in any street, shall in addition to the light or lights required by
the preceding §§
151.02 and
151.03 above, guard the excavation or obstruction by barriers or barricades in
a manner as to warn travelers of the existence of the excavations or
obstructions and to prevent pedestrians and vehicles from falling in the
excavations or going upon the obstructions.
(1998 Code, § 7-61) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.05 INTERFERENCE WITH SAFETY ITEMS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to take, remove, destroy or in any
manner interfere with any light, barrier or barricade placed at any excavation
or obstruction as required by this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 7-62) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.06 OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person by any means or in any manner to
collect together vehicles or any substance or materials so as to obstruct the
free passage or use of any street.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person making an
obstruction under any building permit or under any right granted by any
provision of this code, any chapter or legal authority.
(1998 Code, § 7-63) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.07 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do, cause or permit to be done any
digging, cutting or excavating into or upon any street, or into or through any
pavement thereon in the city except in accordance with and as provided in this
chapter.
(1998 Code, § 7-64) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.08 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No opening or excavation shall be made under the provisions of this
chapter until a permit therefor has been duly granted as provided in this
chapter.
   (B)   The work for which the permit is granted must be started within 30
days of the issuance of the permit or it shall become void.
(1998 Code, § 7-65)
§ 151.09 POSTING OF PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the site of the
work, until the time as the work is completed.
   (B)   In the case of an emergency, the person making a cut shall, before
making the cut, obtain preliminary approval from the Street Commissioner of the
city.
   (C)   Upon obtaining the preliminary approval, the person making the cut may
commence, provided, however, that on the first day that the Clerk-Treasurer's
office is open following the making of a cut, the person shall be required to
apply for a permit, which, when issued, shall be effective retroactive to the
date the excavation was started.
(1998 Code, § 7-66)
§ 151.10 LIMITED EXCEPTIONS.
   No permit shall be required for the setting or erection of a utility pole, a
guy wire, an anchor or street light standard by a public utility doing business
in the city, which utility is subject to the jurisdiction of the Utilitory
Regulatory Commission.
(1998 Code, § 7-67)
§ 151.11 NO PERMIT SUBSTITUTES PERMITTED.
   No other permit is issued pursuant to any other chapters of the city, shall
be construed to be a substitute for the permit required under this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 7-68)
§ 151.12 PERMIT FEE.
   Any person desiring to make an opening or excavation contemplated by this
chapter shall pay to the City Clerk-Treasurer for the permit required, the sum
of $25.
(1998 Code, § 7-69)
§ 151.13 ROLE OF BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.
   Any person desiring to make any opening or excavation contemplated by this
chapter shall file with the Board of Public Works and Safety, or its designated
representative, a request which shall definitely state the location of the
proposed opening and the purpose of the same.
(1998 Code, § 7-70)
§ 151.14 BOND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   At the time of making the request under the provisions of the
preceding section, the person desiring to make any opening or excavation shall
also file a bond payable to the city in a sum of $5,000, or, as the Board of
Public Works and Safety may designate.
   (B)   The bond shall be filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer and shall be
conditioned to save the city harmless from any loss, cost or damage by reason
of the proposed work and that the same shall be done in all respects in
conformity with the requirements of this code and all other chapters of the
city regulating the same; provided, however, that a single or continuing bond
may be given to embrace all work of the petitioner for a period of time between
the date of execution of the same and January 1, which bond shall be in the
penal sum of $5,000.
   (C)   Provided, further, however, that any public utility operating under
the jurisdiction of the Utilitory Regulatory Commission of Indiana may give an
indemnifying agreement in lieu of the bond.
(1998 Code, § 7-71)
§ 151.15 TIMES WHEN EXCAVATIONS ARE PROHIBITED.
   No digging, cutting or excavating into or upon any street, or into or
through any pavement thereon in the city shall be made between November 1 and
April 1 other than in the case of an emergency, and provided, however, that
procedures hereinabove contained in §
151.09 above are complied with.
(1998 Code, § 7-72)
SPECIFIC REGULATIONS
§ 151.30 BACKFILL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety deems it necessary to establish a
firm policy for the backfilling of excavation and replacement of pavement
disturbed as a result of making an opening or excavation in any street, these
specifications are set forth and the compliance herewith shall be a requirement
of obtaining a permit for the opening or excavation as set forth in the city
code. It shall be the obligation of any person, firm or corporation obtaining a
permit for an opening or excavation in the public right-of-way to backfill the
excavation and replace the pavement as set forth in these specifications.
Deviations from these specifications shall only be made upon approval by the
City Engineer.
   (B)   All excavations under pavement shall be backfilled with a reasonably
clean granular material with good compact qualities. The materials shall be
placed in layers not to exceed six inches in depth. Each layer shall be
thoroughly tamped with a vibratory type mechanical tamper. Special care shall
be taken in filling around sewers, water pipes, gas lines and the like, to the
earth at the same height on both sides to avoid shirting of the pipe line. No
removed paving materials or debris shall be used in backfilling the excavation.
Excavations not under a pavement may be backfilled with virgin material removed
from the excavation, by approval of the Board of Public Works or its designated
representative.
(1998 Code, § 7-73)
§ 151.31 PAVEMENT REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   All pavement shall be replaced with a type of construction equal to or
better than that which is removed as approved by the City Street Commissioner.
   (B)   All cuts in concrete pavement shall be first outlined with a saw cut
not less than one to one and one-half inch.
(1998 Code, § 7-74)
§ 151.32 CONCRETE OR BRICK PAVEMENTS.
   (A)   Concrete used in the replacement of concrete or brick pavements not
presently surfaced with an asphaltic material shall consist of not less than
six bags of air entrained Type 1A Portland Cement per cubic yard. Slump shall
not exceed three inches.
   (B)   Coarse aggregate shall be limestone or blast furnace slag. No natural
gravel aggregate will be allowed. Brick pavements will be replaced with eight
inches of concrete except in some residential streets, where the city may
require the brick to be replaced.
(1998 Code, § 7-75)
§ 151.33 CEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Where concrete that has an asphaltic concrete surface is replaced, Type 1
Portland Cement shall be used and the concrete shall be finished flush with the
surface of the existing concrete and the asphaltic surface replaced.
(1998 Code, § 7-76)
§ 151.34 HOT ASPHALTIC CONCRETE AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   All asphaltic and oil type pavements shall be replaced with a hot
asphaltic concrete surface conforming to § D3, Hot Asphaltic Concrete Base,
Binder and Surface of the latest State Highway Standard Specifications.
   (B)   The thickness of the pavement shall be equal to that which existed but
not less than three inches. Nor less than eight inches of Coarse Aggregate
Class A or B, Size No. 53, § K3 of the State Highway Specifications shall be
placed under any asphaltic concrete patch unless a concrete base is necessary.
   (C)   Asphalt placed over a concrete patch shall be cut back six inches
around the concrete patch so that the two joints are off-set.
(1998 Code, § 7-77)
§ 151.35 TEMPORARY PATCH.
   (A)   If it is not possible, due to weather conditions, for the contractor
to replace the pavement within 14 days following completion of the work a
coarse aggregated base eight inches thick and a cold asphaltic surface shall be
applied and maintained as a temporary patch until permanent repairs can be
made.
   (B)   In no case shall a temporary patch be maintained more than six months
before permanent repairs are made.
(1998 Code, § 7-78)
§ 151.36 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall require periodic inspection
of all pavement repairs. If for any reason within a period of one year there is
an indication of settlement of the repaired area of deterioration of the paving
material the person taking out the permit shall be required to make the
necessary repairs as specified by the city.
   (B)   The failure of the permittee to make the repairs will result in the
bonding company being required to make the necessary repairs.
(1998 Code, § 7-79)
§ 151.37 BOARD RESOLUTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Board of Public Works and Safety, upon the
firing of a petition and approved bond, to issue to the petitioner a permit to
make the excavation and do the work, and the permit shall describe the kind and
location of the same; provided, however, that the Board of Public Works and
Safety shall also have the authority to refuse to issue a permit for an
excavation where the Board deems the work not to be in the best public interest
or the contractor by past performances has indicated that he or she cannot
perform the work in accordance with the specifications. The Board of Public
Works and Safety may, by resolution duly passed by a majority of the Board,
authorize and empower, or its designated representative to issue any permits,
all as provided for in this chapter, and to determine the amount of the bond
required.
(1998 Code, § 7-80)
§ 151.38 SEWER AND WATER CONNECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Board of Public Works and Safety, in connection
with all work contemplated by this chapter, through its duly authorized agents,
to assist in determining the proper location for water and sewer or other
connections to be made.
(1998 Code, § 7-81)
§ 151.39 NOTICE REQUIRED.
   Within 48 hours after the work requiring the excavation has been properly
completed, the person holding a permit under the provisions of this chapter,
shall give notice to the Board of Public Works and Safety or its authorized
agent, that the opening has been filled and the pavement replaced.
(1998 Code, § 7-82)
§ 151.40 TUNNELING REQUIREMENTS.
   In all cases of excavating under street or railway tracks, tunneling may be
permitted if the method and operations are approved by the Board of Public
Works and Safety and the Street Commissioner.
(1998 Code, § 7-83)
§ 151.41 MAINTENANCE OF BARRICADES AND DANGER LIGHTS.
   All the proper barricades and danger lights shall be maintained by the party
to whom the permit was issued under the provisions of this subchapter until the
opening has been repaired.
(1998 Code, § 7-84) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.42 CAVE-INS PROHIBITED.
   Any person making excavation or causing the same to be made in pavements or
adjacent to pavement shall so protect the sides of the excavation that the
adjoining soil shall not cave in. It shall be unlawful for any person to
excavate so as to undermine or injure any adjoining pavements.
(1998 Code, § 7-85) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions herein shall, upon conviction
thereof, in addition to any action taken upon the bond prior to this chapter,
be punished by a fine of not more than $500 and each day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(1998 Code, § 7-86)
CHAPTER 152: UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Section
   
152.01   Unsafe building law established
   
152.02   State law incorporated by reference
   
152.03   Public nuisance
   
152.04   Role of Building and Zoning Administrator
   
152.05   Compliance
   
152.06   Unsafe building defined
   
152.07   Substantial property interest
   
152.08   Workmanlike manner required
   
152.09   Unsafe building fund
   
152.10   Violation
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 UNSAFE BUILDING LAW ESTABLISHED.
   By the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9, there is established the City Unsafe
Building Law.
(1998 Code, § 6-94) (Ord. 455, passed 5-29-1990)
§ 152.02 STATE LAW INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Indiana Code 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28 is incorporated by reference
in the City Unsafe Building Law.
   (B)   All proceedings within the city for inspection, repair and removal of
unsafe buildings shall be governed by the law and the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   In the event the provisions of this chapter conflict with the
provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28, then the provisions of the state
statute shall control.
(1998 Code, § 6-95) (Ord. 455, passed 5-29-1990)
§ 152.03 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   All buildings or portions thereof within the city which are determined after
inspection by the Building Commissioner to be unsafe as defined in this chapter
are declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
(1998 Code, § 6-96) (Ord. 455, passed 5-29-1990)
§ 152.04 ROLE OF BUILDING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Building and Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to administer
and to proceed under the provisions of the law in ordering the repair or
removal of any buildings found to be unsafe as specified therein or as
specified hereafter.
(1998 Code, § 6-97) (Ord. 455, passed 5-29-1990)
§ 152.05 COMPLIANCE.
   Wherever in the building regulations of the city or the City Unsafe Building
Law, it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or subject to
the direction of the Building and Zoning Administrator or any other officer of
the city, this shall be construed to give the officer only the discretion of
determining whether the rules and standards established by ordinance have been
complied with; and no provisions shall be construed as giving any officer
discretionary powers as to what the regulations or standards shall be, power to
require conditions not prescribed by ordinance, or to enforce ordinance
provisions in an arbitrary or discretionary manner.
(1998 Code, § 6-98) (Ord. 455, passed 5-29-1990)
§ 152.06 UNSAFE BUILDING DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The description
of an unsafe building contained in I.C. 36-7-9-4 is supplemented to provide
minimum standards for building condition or maintenance in the city, by adding
the following definition.
   UNSAFE BUILDING. Any building or structure which has any or all of the
conditions or defects hereinafter described, provided that the conditions or
defects exist to the extent that life, health, property or safety of the public
or its occupants are endangered:
      (1)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway or other means of exit is not
of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and
adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;
      (2)   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or
other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to
not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;
      (3)   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof,
due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working
stress or stresses allowed for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or
location;
      (4)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, tornado, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the
structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before
the catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements for new buildings of
similar structure, purpose or location;
      (5)   Whenever any portion, member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fail, to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage;
      (6)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or is not
so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a
wind pressure of one-half of that specified for new buildings of similar
structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted
for the buildings;
      (7)   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or
settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have
materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case
of similar new construction;
      (8)   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because
of:
         (a)   Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
         (b)   Faulty construction;
         (c)   The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the
ground necessary for the purpose of supporting the building;
         (d)   The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or
         (e)   Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
      (9)   Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;
      (10)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base;
      (11)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation,
shows 33% more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or
50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, enclosing or outside
walls or coverings;
      (12)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire,
wind, tornado, earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated
so as to become:
         (a)   An attractive nuisance to children; or
         (b)    Freely accessible to persons for the purpose of committing
unlawful acts.
      (13)   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or
is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition
applicable to the building or structure provided by the building regulations of
this city, or of any law or ordinance of this or the city relating to the
condition, location or structure of buildings.
      (14)   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected
in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances has in any non-supporting
part, member or portion less than 50% or in any supporting part, member or
portion less than 66% of the:
         (a)   Strength;
         (b)   Fire-resisting qualities or characteristics; or
         (c)   Weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law
in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy
in the same location.
      (15)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the Building Commissioner of the
city or the County Board of Health to be unsanitary, unfit for human
habitation, or in such a condition that it is likely to cause sickness or
disease.
      (16)   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire-resistive construction is determined by the Fire Chief to be a
fire hazard.
      (17)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure on a site after
the demolition or destruction of the building or whenever any building or
structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute
the building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
(1998 Code, § 6-99) (Ord. 455, passed 5-29-1990)
§ 152.07 SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST.
   The definition of substantial property interest set forth in I.C. 36-7-9-
2 is incorporated by reference herein as if copied in full.
(1998 Code, § 6-100) (Ord. 455, passed 5-29-1990)
§ 152.08 WORKMANLIKE MANNER REQUIRED.
   All work for the reconstruction, repair or demolition of buildings and other
structures shall be performed in a good workmanlike manner according to the
accepted standards and practices in the trade. The provisions of the building
laws, as defined in I.C. 22-12-1-3, adopted as rules of the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission, shall be considered standard and acceptable
practice for all matters covered by this chapter or orders issued pursuant to
this chapter by the Building and Zoning Administrator of the city.
(1998 Code, § 6-101) (Ord. 455, passed 5-29-1990)
§ 152.09 UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.
   An Unsafe Building Fund is established in the operating budget of the city
in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-14.
(1998 Code, § 6-102) (Ord. 455, passed 5-29-1990)
§ 152.10 VIOLATION.
   No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sub-lessee or
occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises, or
cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or any order issued by the Building and Zoning
Administrator.
(1998 Code, § 6-103) (Ord. 455, passed 5-29-1990) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or I.C. 36-7-9-28 shall
commit a Class C infraction for each day the violation continues.
(1998 Code, § 6-103) (Ord. 455, passed 5-29-1990)
CHAPTER 153: MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS
Section
   
153.01   Definition
   
153.02   Conformance required
   
153.03   Permit required
   
153.04   Width and grade
   
153.05   Subgrade
   
153.06   Forms
   
153.07   Concrete
   
153.08   Expansion joints
   
153.09   Placing concrete
   
153.10   Driveways
   
153.11   Alley crossing
   
153.12   Inspection and acceptance
   
153.13   Building and repair of sidewalks
   
153.14   Disposition of dirt and old material
   
153.15   Tampering with grade stakes
   
153.16   Appeal
   
153.17   Designation of Administrator
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SIDEWALK. A pedestrian footway along the side of a street, alley or other
public way.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
Cross-reference:
   Depositing snow on sidewalks, streets and alleys prohibited, see §
96.30
   Street excavation and obstruction, see
Chapter 151
§ 153.02 CONFORMANCE REQUIRED.
   All sidewalks made new, replaced or repaired within the city shall be made
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the grades, plans,
profiles and specifications adopted by the Board of Public Works and Safety
that are not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
§ 153.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person desiring or required to build, replace or repair any
sidewalk within the city before doing so or commencing any construction work
thereon shall file an application for a permit with the Clerk-Treasurer to be
transmitted by the Clerk-Treasurer to the Street Department, which application
shall be signed by the owner or agent of the abutting property where the
sidewalk is to be built, replaced or repaired. A form of permit application
shall be prepared by the Street Department and approved by the Board of Public
Works and Safety. The Street Department Superintendent shall approve all permit
applications.
   (B)   A permit fee of $25 shall be paid by the property owner to the Clerk-
Treasurer at the time application is made.
§ 153.04 WIDTH AND GRADE.
   (A)   All sidewalks shall be constructed a minimum of five feet in width,
except in case of the continuation of an already constructed sidewalk which is
less than five feet in width; but in no event to be constructed less than four
feet in width.
   (B)   If the sidewalk under construction is a gap between already
constructed sidewalks in the same block, it shall be constructed according to
the width of the wider sidewalk adjoining to the new sidewalk, four inches in
thickness, and "One Coarse Concrete" according to the specifications adopted by
the Board of Public Works and Safety.
   (C)   The surface of any walks when completed shall have a "slip-resistant"
texture or "broom finish", and shall have a slope of one-quarter of an inch to
the foot toward the center of the street. All sidewalks shall be laid with the
inner edge on the property line, unless by special permit from the Board of
Public Works and Safety.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
§ 153.05 SUBGRADE.
   (A)   The subgrade shall be constructed to the required depth below the
finished surface in accordance with the plans and specifications provided by
the Street Department and shall be thoroughly compacted to a firm smooth
surface.
   (B)   All soft or spongy places not affording a suitable subgrade must be
removed and replaced with a suitable material and compacted according to the
city's specifications.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
§ 153.06 FORMS.
   (A)   The forms for sidewalks shall be of metal or wood, straight and free
from warp and of sufficient strength to resist springing during the process of
depositing concrete against them. If the forms are made of wood, they shall be
of two-inch surfaced plank.
   (B)   If the forms are made of metal, they shall be of approved section. The
forms shall be of the full depth of the walk and shall be securely staked,
braced and held firmly to required line and grade. All forms shall be
thoroughly cleaned and oiled before concrete is placed against them.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
§ 153.07 CONCRETE.
   (A)   Type.
      (1)   Every cubic yard of concrete in place shall contain approximately
1.50 barrels of cement. The fine aggregate shall be concrete sand No. 14 and
shall meet State Highway Commission Standard Specifications. The coarse
aggregate shall be Concrete Aggregate "L" No. 5, and shall meet the State
Highway Commission Standard Specifications.
      (2)   The concrete shall consist of one part of the best Portland Cement,
two parts of fine aggregate and three parts of coarse aggregate accurately
measured. Water for use with cement in concrete shall be free from oil, acid,
injurious alkali and/or vegetable matter.
   (B)   Mixing.
      (1)   The aggregate, cement and water shall be thoroughly mixed in an
approved batch mixer so designed, constructed and operated that a thorough
mixing of the materials is assured and the consistency of all batches is the
same. All of the material shall remain in the drum of the mixer for a period of
not less than two minutes, during which time the drum shall revolve not less
than 14 nor more than 20 revolutions per minute. The entire contents of each
batch shall be removed from the drum before the materials for the succeeding
batch are placed therein.
      (2)   The volume of material mixed per batch shall not exceed the
manufacturer's rating or a rating approved by the Associated General
Contractors of America.
      (3)   If the actual construction work of the sidewalk is being done by
the property owner himself or herself, the mixing may be done by hand providing
the workmanship meets the specifications so set out in this subchapter.
   (C)   Consistency. The consistency of the concrete shall be measured as
described in Tentative Method of Test for Consistency of Portland Cement,
A.S.T.M. Serial Designation D 138-32T. The slump shall not be less than one
inch nor more than three inches.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
§ 153.08 EXPANSION JOINTS.
   (A)   Expansion joints shall be placed at intervals not to exceed 25 feet.
The preformed filler to be used in the expansion joints shall be composed of a
durable elastic compound of mineral or vegetable matter.
   (B)   The thickness shall not be less than one-half inch, the length shall
be equal to the sidewalk width and the width shall not be less than the
thickness of the sidewalk.
   (C)   Preformed filler of one inch thickness shall be placed where the
sidewalk joins with any curb or curb gutter.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
§ 153.09 PLACING CONCRETE.
   (A)   The subgrade of sidewalks shall be wetted before the concrete is
placed therein. The concrete shall be deposited within the forms upon the
wetted subgrade to such a depth that after being compacted it shall be to the
full thickness required. It shall be leveled off and tamped sufficiently to
bring the mortar to the surface after which it shall be finished smooth and
even by means of a wood float.
   (B)   The edges shall be rounded with an edger having a radius of one-fourth
inch. Transverse joints shall be cut with a jointer having a radius of one-
quarter inch at intervals not greater than the width of the sidewalk being
constructed, unless otherwise directed by the Street Department. When
completed, the sidewalk shall be covered with wet burlap, straw or sisalkraft
paper and kept wet for a period of not less than 48 hours.
   (C)   No concrete work shall be done during freezing weather. Whenever there
is danger that the temperature shall reach the freezing point, sufficient straw
or other suitable material shall be added to the covering material to prevent
freezing of the concrete before it is thoroughly cured.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
§ 153.10 DRIVEWAYS.
   Where driveways are to be built across the sidewalk space, they shall
conform to the sidewalk grade and shall be six inches in depth and of the same
quality and material as specified for sidewalks.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
§ 153.11 ALLEY CROSSING.
   All sidewalk alley crossings shall be constructed of concrete six inches
thick, of the same finish and material as specified for walks, and will be
concave or straight as may be ordered by the Street Department.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
§ 153.12 INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE.
   The material for all sidewalks hereafter built or repaired in the city shall
be inspected and approved by the Street Department before being used, and all
sidewalks made new or repaired shall be done under the supervision of the
Street Department who shall inspect and report on the same before approval and
acceptance.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
§ 153.13 BUILDING AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   In determining whether any sidewalk is out of repair so as to render
the same unsafe, unfit or inconvenient for passage by pedestrians, the Street
Department Superintendent shall use the following criteria in determining the
need for initiating a replacement request:
      (1)   Any vertical separation greater than one inch between sidewalk
blocks or portions of block;
      (2)   Any sidewalk block which ponds water due to improper drainage or
insufficient slope;
      (3)   Any sidewalk block which has an area exceeding 50% of cracked or
broken concrete and does not already fit conditions in divisions (A)(1) or (2)
above;
      (4)   Missing sections;
      (5)   Areas where no sidewalk has previously been placed; and
      (6)   No sidewalk block made at the time of the original construction
shall be cut in order to save a part of the original block at the time of
repair. The entire block shall be replaced.
   (B)   Whenever in the opinion of the Street Department Superintendent a new
sidewalk should be built or when any sidewalk within the city is or becomes out
of repair so as to render the same unsafe, unfit or inconvenient for passage by
pedestrians, the Street Department Superintendent shall give written notice to
the owners of the abutting property of the need for a new sidewalk or the
defect in the existing sidewalk. If the owner's address is unknown, or the real
estate is vacant or unoccupied, then the Street Department shall post a copy of
the notice on the property in a conspicuous place.
      (1)   The notice shall require the property owner to build or repair the
sidewalk within 30 days from the date of service of the notice.
      (2)   In the event the sidewalk is not installed, repaired, relaid or
replaced as directed within 30 days, then the Street Department Superintendent
shall request a resolution from the Board of Public Works and Safety ordering
the sidewalk improved as provided by the laws of the state and any other
provisions of this code, and the Board of Public Works and Safety shall take
action as shall be deemed proper after giving the property owner ten days prior
written notice of the consideration of the resolution.
      (3)   For the purpose and within the purview of this chapter, the
determination of the Board of Public Works and Safety as to the necessity for
the repair, relaying or replacing of any sidewalks to render the same safe, fit
or convenient for passage by pedestrians, shall be conclusive so far as the
city and property owner are concerned.
      (4)   If the owner fails to build or repair any sidewalk, after the Board
of Public Works and Safety has given the property owner written notice of the
adoption of a resolution requiring the building or repair of the sidewalk
within not less than 30 days after the notice is given, then the city may
proceed to build or repair the walk and the costs, charges and expenses thereof
shall be charged against the owner of the property and shall be collected in
the same manner as assessments for street improvements.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
§ 153.14 DISPOSITION OF DIRT AND OLD MATERIAL.
   Whenever any sidewalk shall have been ordered built, repaired, relaid or
replaced, the property owner shall remove the excavated dirt together with all
old material within five days from the completion of the work. It shall be the
duty of the property owner, at all times while building, repairing, relaying or
replacing any sidewalk, to see to it that the stakes indicating the grade of
the same have not been tampered with.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
§ 153.15 TAMPERING WITH GRADE STAKES.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to tamper with or in any
way interfere with any grade stake for any sidewalk or to deface or disturb any
walk while in process of construction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined according to the penalty provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.16 APPEAL.
   Any person adversely affected by a decision of the Street Department or its
Superintendent may appeal the decision within 30 days thereof to the Board of
Public Works and Safety. Any person adversely affected by a decision of the
Board of Public Works and Safety may appeal the decision within 30 days thereof
to the Circuit Court of the county.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
§ 153.17 DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Unless otherwise directed by the Board of Public Works and Safety, the
city hereby designates the Street Department and its Superintendent for the
purposes of implementing this chapter and the Street Department Superintendent
shall have principal responsibility for enforcing this chapter.
   (B)   The Board of Public Works and Safety may from time to time re-
designate the Administrator of this chapter and all references herein to the
Street Department or the Superintendent thereof in that case shall be modified
accordingly.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Street Department Superintendent to
enforce these regulations and to bring any violations or lack of compliance to
the attention of the Board of Public Works and Safety who may then direct the
City Attorney to file a complaint against the person and prosecute the alleged
violation.
   (B)   The Board of Public Works and Safety by mandatory injunction in the
Circuit Court of the county against the owner or possessor of the real estate,
may require the removal of a sidewalk or structure erected in violation of this
chapter, or the removal of any use or condition in violation of this chapter.
   (C)   A condition of sidewalk that violates this chapter shall be treated as
if it were a common nuisance, and the owner or possessor of the structure, land
or premises upon which the use is maintained shall be liable for the nuisance.
   (D)   Any person whether owner and/or possessor, who shall violate, or who
permits or allows a violation, of any of the provisions of this chapter, or who
fails to comply therewith or with any requirements thereunder shall, upon
complaint filed in any court of the county and upon judgment finding the
violation, be fined not less than $25 and not more than $500, and each day that
the violation or non-compliance shall be permitted to exist, shall constitute a
separate violation.
   (E)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary,
and in addition and supplementary to other provisions of this chapter, if the
Board of Public Works and Safety or the city is required to utilize the
services of the city's Attorney or any other attorney in investigating a
possible violation of this chapter or enforcing the provisions of this chapter
before any board or court (including appeals), and such investigation results
in a determination that a violation has occurred, or if the Board of Public
Works and Safety or city is successful in its enforcement of this chapter by
way of suit, appeal or other appropriate proceeding, the respondent, defendant
or party investigated for a violation shall pay the city's reasonable attorney
fees and all costs related to the investigation of the violation and/or the
enforcement of this chapter, unless the attorney fees or costs are specifically
waived by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
   (F)   As to any appeal from a decision of the Board of Public Works and
Safety, costs may not be allowed against the Board of Public Works and Safety
unless it appears to the court that the Board acted with gross negligence or in
bad faith in making the decision brought up for review.
   (G)   The Street Department Superintendent or any person or persons
assisting the Street Department Superintendent in the application and
enforcement of this chapter is hereby authorized to go onto private property
for the purpose of conducting inspections required by this chapter or any order
of the Board of Public Works and Safety, or required to determine if this
chapter is being violated, or required to enforce this chapter. The inspection
or inspections shall occur at reasonable times and shall be conducted in a
manner so as not to disturb the peace.
(Ord. 644, passed 8- -2001)
CHAPTER 154: FLOOD PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
   
154.01   Adoption by reference
§ 154.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The flood regulations contained in Ord. 862-2015are hereby adopted by
reference and set out as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 862-2015, passed 2-23-2015)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Policy
   
155.003   Purpose
   
155.004   Definitions
   
155.005   Authority and jurisdiction
   
155.006   Enactment
   
155.007   Interpretation, conflict
   
155.008   Saving provision
   
155.009   Amendments
   
155.010   Conditions
   
155.011   Resubdivision of land
   
155.012   Vacation of plats
   
155.013   Variances
   
155.014   Enforcement
Application and Approval Procedures
   
155.025   General procedures
   
155.026   Major and minor subdivisions; sketch plan application procedure;
primary approval
   
155.027   Major subdivisions
   
155.028   Minor subdivisions
   
155.029   Exempt divisions
Requirements for Improvements, Reservations and Design
   
155.040   General improvements
   
155.041   Lot improvements
   
155.042   Streets
   
155.043   Drainage and storm sewers
   
155.044   Water facilities
   
155.045   Sewerage facilities
   
155.046   Sidewalks, curbs and pedestrian access
   
155.047   Utilities
   
155.048   Public uses
   
155.049   Preservation of natural features and amenities
   
155.050   Nonresidential subdivisions
   
155.051   Design Review Committee
Assurance for Completion of Improvements
   
155.065   Improvements and performance bond
   
155.066   Inspection of public improvements
   
155.067   Maintenance of public improvements
   
155.068   Issuance of improvement location permits
Specifications for Documents to be Submitted
   
155.080   Sketch plan
   
155.081   Preliminary plat
   
155.082   Construction plans
   
155.083   Final subdivision plat
   
155.084   Exempt divisions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall hereafter be known and cited as the Subdivision
Ordinance of Ligonier, Indiana.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.002 POLICY.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to consider the
subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat as
subject to the official Comprehensive Plan and related policies, such as those
embodied in the city's Zoning Ordinance for the orderly and efficient
development of the city and jurisdictional area.
   (B)   Land to be subdivided shall be of such a character that it can be
developed without peril to health or peril from flood, fire or other menace,
and land shall not be subdivided until having access and until improvements and
proper provision have been made for drainage, water, sewerage, other necessary
new public improvements such as schools, parks, recreation facilities and
transportation facilities adequate for serving the subdivision. Private wells
and septic systems in lieu of public water and sewer facilities are allowable
only in the jurisdictional area or where permitted under the Zoning Ordinance
and approved by the County Health Department.
   (C)   Both existing and proposed public facilities serving the subdivision
shall be properly related and conform to the official Comprehensive Plan,
related policies and implementation programs including the official map, Zoning
Ordinance, Housing and Building Codes.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.003 PURPOSE.
   (A)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general
welfare of the city and the jurisdictional area.
   (B)   To guide the future development and renewal of the city and the
jurisdictional area in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and related
policies.
   (C)   To provide for the safety, comfort and soundness of the buildings,
structures and related open spaces.
   (D)   To protect the compatibility, character, economic stability and
orderliness of all development through reasonable design standards.
   (E)   To guide public and private policy and action to provide adequate and
efficient public and private facilities, the most aesthetically pleasing and
beneficial interrelationship between land uses, conserve natural resources such
as natural beauty, woodlands, open spaces and energy both during and after
development.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.004 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Please refer to §
156.004 for definitions of key terms.
   (B)   The meanings of these terms are the same in both the Subdivision
Ordinance and Zoning Ordinance, unless context clearly indicates otherwise.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.005 AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.
   (A)   This chapter, which was enacted pursuant to state home rule and
planning enabling legislation (I.C. 36-1-3-4 and the 36-7-4-700 series, as
amended) authorizes the Plan Commission to review and approve or disapprove
plats for subdivision throughout the city's jurisdiction which show lots,
blocks or sites with or without new streets or highways. This, authority
extends to the development or resubdivision of undeveloped portions of already
recorded plats.
   (B)   No improvement location permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for any parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision after
the effective date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of these
subdivision regulations, and no excavation of land or construction of any
public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in
conformity with the regulations contained herein and in conformity with
construction standards adopted by the state.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.006 ENACTMENT.
   In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes and
policies, these subdivision regulations are hereby adopted.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.007 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these
regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   Conflict with public and private provisions:
      (1)   Public provisions. The regulations are not intended to interfere
with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or
other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these
regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of
law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall
control; and
      (2)   Private provisions.
         (a)   These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement,
covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the
provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards
or regulations than the easement, covenant or other private agreement or
restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
         (b)   Where the provisions of the easement covenant, or private
agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or
higher standards than the requirements of these regulations, or the
determinations of the Commission in approving a subdivision or in enforcing
these regulations, and the private provisions are not inconsistent with these
regulations or determinations thereunder, then the private provisions shall be
operative and supplemental to these regulations and determinations made
thereunder.
         (c)   Note: Private provisions can only be enforced privately unless a
public agency has been made party to the agreements.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.008 SAVING PROVISION.
   These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending
under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to
accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as
waiving any right of the city under any section or provision existing at the
time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any rights
obtained by any person, firm or corporation, by lawful action of the city
except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.009 AMENDMENTS.
   For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety and general
welfare, the city, on recommendation of the Commission, may from time to time
amend the provisions imposed by these subdivision regulations. Public hearings
on all proposed amendments shall be held by the Commission and/or the city in
the manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.010 CONDITIONS.
   Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated
by the state to this city. The developer has the duty of compliance with
reasonable conditions laid down by the Commission for design, dedication,
improvement and restrictive use of the land in order to conform to the physical
and economical development of the city and jurisdictional area and to the
safety and general welfare of the future lot owners in the subdivision and of
the city and jurisdictional area at large.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.011 RESUBDIVISION OF LAND.
   (A)   Procedure for resubdivision. For any change in a map of an approved or
recorded subdivision plat, if the change affects any street layout shown on the
map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects
any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any regulations
controlling subdivisions, the parcel shall be approved by the Commission by the
same procedure, rules and regulations as for a subdivision.
   (B)   Procedure for subdivisions where future resubdivision is indicated.
Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or
more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that
the lots will eventually be re-subdivided into smaller building sites, the
Commission may require that the parcel of land allow for the future opening of
streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing for
the future opening and extension of the streets may be made a requirement of
the plat.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.012 VACATION OF PLATS.
   Any recorded plat or part of any recorded plat may be vacated only in
accordance with the Indiana Code.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.013 VARIANCES.
   (A)   General. Where the Commission finds that extraordinary hardships or
practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations
and/or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by
an alternative proposal, it may approve variances to these subdivision
regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured, provided that the variances shall not have the effect of nullifying
the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further provided the
Commission shall not approve variances unless it shall make findings based upon
the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
      (1)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health or welfare or injurious to other nearby property;
      (2)   The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property;
      (3)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out; and
      (4)   The variance will not in any manner contravene the provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan or official map as interpreted by the
Commission and the City and/or County Engineer.
   (B)   Conditions. In approving variances, the Commission may require such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements of these regulations.
   (C)   Procedures. A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for
the consideration of the Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds
for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.014 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Administrator to enforce these regulations and
to bring any violations or lack of compliance to the attention of the City
Attorney.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
§ 155.025 GENERAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Discussion of requirements.
      (1)   Prior to submitting any of the materials required by this chapter,
the applicant or his or her representative should discuss with the
Administrator the nature of the land division being proposed, so that the
applicant may be instructed concerning the classification of his or her
subdivision and what regulatory procedures apply to it and must be followed
under this chapter in order to secure primary and secondary approval. Where
applicable, requirements concerning the general layout of streets and for
reservations of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire protection
and similar matters, as well as the availability of existing services should be
discussed.
      (2)   The Administrator shall also advise the applicant, where
appropriate, to discuss the proposed land division with those other officials
who must eventually approve those aspects of the subdivision plat coming within
their jurisdiction.
      (3)   The distinction between major and minor subdivisions and exempt
divisions as defined in this chapter, shall be made by the Administrator when
the applicant submits an application for sketch plan approval in the case of
major and minor subdivisions, or, in the case of exempt divisions, provides the
Administrator at a pre-design conference with adequate information to enable
him or her to determine that the proposed division is an exempt division.
   (B)   Classification of land divisions.
      (1)   All land to be divided shall be categorized into one of the three
mail classes of land division indicated in this chapter's definition of
subdivision.
      (2)   These classes are:
         (a)   Major subdivisions;
         (b)   Minor subdivisions; and
         (c)   Exempt divisions.
      (3)   Exempt divisions are not subject to the requirements of this
chapter beyond the determination by the Administrator that they meet all the
requirements for exempt divisions set forth in §
155.029. However, lots created by exempt divisions (except Exemption F) shall
be ten or more acres in size to be eligible as principal use building sites
(Exemption A), unless the lots have been created by order of a court (Exemption
C). No building site for principle use created through Exemption A shall be
reduced below ten acres unless through subdivision or by order of a court
(Exemption C). For purposes of this division, a lot is "created" on the date of
its recording. (See
Table 3.2 in §
155.029(B) below, for definition of exempt divisions.)
      (4)   Before any permit shall be granted for a structure to be erected on
land to be subdivided into a major or minor subdivision, the subdividing owner
or his or her subdivision agent shall apply for and secure approval of the
proposed subdivision in accordance with §
155.026 and either §§
155.027 or
155.028 as appropriate. Before any permit shall be granted for a structure to
be erected on a parcel of land to be created or altered by an exempt division,
the land divider or his or her agent shall certify to the satisfaction of the
Administrator that all requirements for exemption have been met, as detailed in
§
155.029, in order to exempt the land division from all other requirements of
this chapter.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.026 MAJOR AND MINOR SUBDIVISIONS; SKETCH PLAN APPLICATION PROCEDURE;
PRIMARY APPROVAL.
   (A)   Application requirements.
      (1)   In order to begin the subdivision process, the applicant shall file
an application for review of sketch plan and certificate with the Administrator
and be entitled to a signed receipt for same.
      (2)   This application shall:
         (a)   Be made on forms available at the office of the Commission and
signed by the owner;
         (b)   Include indication of all contiguous holdings of the owner
including land in the same ownership, with an indication of the portion which
is proposed to be subdivided, accompanied by an affidavit of ownership, which
shall include the dates the respective holdings of land were acquired, together
with the book and page of each conveyance to the present owner as recorded in
the County Recorder's office. The affidavit shall advise as to the legal owner
of the property, the contract owner of the property, optionee of the property,
and the date on which the contract of sale was executed, if any corporations
are involved, the Administrator may request a complete list of all directors,
officers and a listing of stockholders if less than ten in number;
         (c)   Be presented to the Administrator in duplicate;
         (d)   Be accompanied by a minimum of three copies of the sketch plan;
         (e)   Be accompanied by a fee of $50 for minor subdivisions and $75 or
$10 per lot, whichever is greater;
         (f)   Include an address and telephone number of an agent located
within the territory of the commission who shall be authorized to receive all
notices required by this chapter; and
         (g)   Include a listing signed by the checkpoint agencies indicating
that they have received a copy of the proposed sketch plan or a certification
that it has been sent.
   (B)   Checkpoint submission. In order to fulfill this last application
requirement, a copy of the proposed plan shall be submitted to each of the
agencies appropriate to the plan's location so that their comment may be made
to the Administrator. The checkpoint agencies appropriate to each participating
jurisdiction in which a plat may be located are listed in
Table 3-1, in division (C) below. The Administrator shall request that all
officials and agencies to whom a request for review has been made submit a
written report to him or her within 15 days after receipt of the request. No
response from an agency shall be interpreted as meaning "no objection."
   (C)   Classification of subdivision. After an application for sketch plan
approval has been submitted, and at the time of sketch plan review the
Administrator shall classify the proposed subdivision as either major or minor
as defined in this chapter. The required procedures and approvals for major
subdivisions are described in §
155.027; corresponding information concerning the minor subdivision approval
process is provided in §
155.028.
TABLE 3-1. Checkpoint Agencies
Projects Within City Limits Projects Within County Jurisdictional Area
TABLE 3-1. Checkpoint Agencies
Projects Within City Limits Projects Within County Jurisdictional Area
School District             Board of Zoning Appeals
Street Department           County Plan Commission
Sewer/Wastewater Department County Building Inspector
Water Department            County Health Department
City Attorney               County Highway Department
City Engineer               County Building Inspector
Local Fire Department       County Drainage Board
City Building Inspector     County Soil and Water Conservation District
-                           Appropriate Fire Department
-                           Appropriate School District
-                           Indiana Department of Natural Resources
 
Figure 3-1. Approval Process For Major Subdivisions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/657f5231589e4e9d72860ce82f8ac4b2aa23298e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1628.jpg]
 
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.027 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General procedures for primary and secondary approval. Should the
Administrator, during the sketch plan review, classify the proposed land
division as a major subdivision, the subdivider shall follow the procedures and
be subject to the processes outlined in
Figure 3-1 in §
155.026 above, and detailed by this section. In addition to a sketch plan which
is reviewed by the Administrator and checkpoint agencies, the applicant seeking
approval of a major subdivision shall submit a preliminary subdivision plat to
be approved, conditionally approved or rejected by the Commission at a public
meeting, and a final subdivision plat which must be found in compliance with
the preliminary plat as approved by the Commission or otherwise approved in
order to be signed and recorded.
   (B)   Official submission dates. The deadline for submittal of a sketch plan
and application for certificate of approval shall be 61 calendar days prior to
the date of the public meeting at which the subdivider intends to have his or
her preliminary plat submission heard, and 31 calendar days prior to the
deadline for the submission of the preliminary plat. Thus, as a minimum, sketch
plan submission shall precede preliminary plat submission by no less than 31
calendar days, which in turn shall precede the public hearing at which it is
intended to be heard by no less than 30 calendar days.
   (C)   Sketch plan review process. Within 20 calendar days of the subdivided
sketch plan application submittal, the Administrator shall have studied the
proposal, reviewed checkpoint reports received, and met with the subdivider to
discuss pertinent aspects of the possible modifications and/or changes that may
be suggested or required by this chapter. The Administrator shall request that
a representative of each checkpoint agency wishing to be involved in a sketch
plan review be present to participate in the sketch plan review meeting. In
taking into consideration the requirements of this chapter, particular
attention shall be given to the arrangement, location and width of streets,
their relation to the topography of the land, sewage disposal, drainage, lot
size and arrangement, the further development of adjoining lands as yet
unsubdivided, and the requirements of the official map and Comprehensive Plan
as adopted by the participating jurisdictions. Subsequent to this meeting, the
Administrator shall provide the participants with a written record of the
proceedings of that meeting.
   (D)   Preliminary plat procedures for primary approval.
      (1)   Submission requirements. Following the submission, review and
report on the sketch plan application, the subdivider may file for primary
approval of a preliminary plat. This submission shall:
         (a)   Be made on forms available at the office of the Commission and
be submitted with fee of $5 per lot for each lot which was not included in the
sketch plan;
         (b)   Include indication of all land which the applicant proposes to
subdivide and all land immediately adjacent and across any street or railroad
right-of-way, extending 600 feet therefrom, but not more than two property
owners deep from the proposed subdivision, with the names and addresses of the
title owners as shown in the files. This information may be shown on a separate
current plat map reproduction of the city and/or county showing the boundaries
of the subdivision superimposed thereon;
         (c)   Be presented in duplicate to the Administrator no later than 30
calendar days prior to the regular meeting of the Commission at which it is
intended to be heard;
         (d)   Be accompanied by ten copies of the preliminary plat as
described in this chapter; and
         (e)   Generally comply with the sketch plan as reviewed.
      (2)   Placement on the Commission agenda. Subsequent to the submission
for primary approval, the Commission shall place the matter on its next regular
meeting agenda for formal action.
      (3)   Administrative review. Subsequent to placement on the agenda, and
prior to the date of public hearing, the Administrator and other appropriate
members of the Commission including its President and Secretary shall review
the proposal and prepare a report to the entire Commission and applicant
indicating a recommendation with regard to the subdivision being proposed.
      (4)   Public hearing notification requirements. The Commission shall hold
a public hearing on the preliminary plat and notice of the hearing shall be per
I.C. 5-3-1, at the applicant's expense. Interested parties shall also be
notified by the applicant of the date, time, place and purpose of the public
hearing on the subdivision at least ten days in advance of the hearing by
certified mail. The applicant shall file with the Commission at the time of the
public hearing an affidavit so testifying along with the certified mail
receipts provided by the post office.
      (5)   Primary approval of the preliminary plat. After the Commission has
held a hearing upon the preliminary plat, the Administrator’s report,
checkpoint recommendations, testimony and exhibits submitted at the public
hearing, the applicant shall be advised of any required changes and/or
additions. The Commission shall, at a public hearing, grant primary approval,
or disapprove the preliminary plat. One copy of the preliminary plat shall be
returned to the applicant with the date of approval, conditional approval or
disapproval and the reasons therefor accompanying the plat within five days of
the public hearing. Before the Commission approves a preliminary plat showing
park reservation(s) or land for another local governmental unit, the Commission
shall obtain approval of the park or land reservation from the participating
jurisdiction. Primary approval by the Commission is subject to review by
certiorari. Secondary approval of a subdivision cannot occur until a minimum of
30 days has elapsed since the granting of primary approval.
      (6)   Field trip. The Commission, at its discretion, upon hearing the
request for primary approval, may elect to continue the matter until its next
regularly scheduled public meeting, and may schedule a field trip to the site
of the proposed subdivision, accompanied by the applicant or his or her
representative or any other person or persons at the discretion of the
Commission.
      (7)   Effective period of primary approval. Unless extended, the primary
approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one year
after the date of primary approval, at the end of which time secondary approval
of the subdivision must have been obtained and certified by the designated
officials. Any plats not receiving secondary approval within the period of time
set forth herein shall be null and void, and the developer shall be required to
resubmit a new application for sketch plan review and certificate subject to
all the zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations in effect at the time
of re-submission. Upon request of the applicant, the Commission may extend the
primary approval of a preliminary plat in increments of one year beyond an
expiration date without further notice and public hearing.
   (E)   Approval of construction plans.
      (1)   Submission procedure and requirements. Following the review of the
sketch plan and prior to submission of the final plat for secondary approval,
the applicant, if he or she wishes to proceed with the subdivision, shall file
with the Administrator before starting work on any improvements five sets of
the detailed plans and specifications thereof for approval.
      (2)   Review process. The Administrator shall immediately refer these
plans to the appropriate agencies of the affected participating jurisdictions
for review. Once these agencies indicate their approval of the construction
plans or 14 working days have elapsed since their distribution without a
written response, the Administrator shall stamp the plans approved and return
one set to the applicant. In no event shall secondary approval (of the final
plat) be given prior to approval of the construction plans.
      (3)   Installation of improvements. The installation of improvements
shall be inspected by the appropriate participating jurisdiction. The
inspections are required in all instances regardless of whether the work is
performed before or after secondary approval. Failure to request or to procure
inspection of work performed after the date of this chapter and before
secondary approval may be cause for denial of secondary approval.
   (F)   Final plat procedure (secondary approval).
      (1)   Submission requirements. Following primary approval or conditional
primary approval of the preliminary plat and approval of the construction
plans, the applicant, if he or she wishes to proceed with the subdivision,
shall file with the Administrator a request for secondary approval of a final
plat. The application shall:
         (a)   Be submitted on forms available at the Office of the Commission;
         (b)   Include the entire subdivision, or section thereof which derives
access from an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
         (c)   Be accompanied by ten copies of the final plat as described in
this chapter;
         (d)   Totally comply with the ordinance and the terms and conditions
of primary approval;
         (e)   Be accompanied by the performance bond, if required, in a form
satisfactory to the Commission Attorney and in an amount established by the
Commission upon recommendation of the participating jurisdiction and shall
guarantee the completion of all required subdivision and off-site public
improvements; and
         (f)   Be accompanied by any restrictive covenants in a form approved
by the Commission, where they have been proposed by the subdivider or required
by the Commission.
      (2)   Determination of conformance (secondary approval). In order to be
recorded, a final plat shall either be found to be in conformance with the
primary approval by the Administrator, or by the Commission at a public
hearing. If the final subdivision plat deviates from the preliminary plat that
received primary approval, the subdivision shall be resubmitted to the
Commission at a public meeting for a new primary approval. The subdivider
submitting a final plat conforming to the primary approval shall choose as to
whether this review is to be performed by the Administrator, or by the
Commission at a public meeting.
         (a)   Should the subdivider not choose Commission review, the
Administrator shall within ten working days, review the items submitted as per
§
155.028(H)(1) below, in order to ascertain the sufficiency as to conformance
with the primary approval, if the submission is found to be in conformance and
complete, the Administrator shall recommend to the Commission the signing of
the certificate granting secondary approval.
         (b)   Should the subdivider choose Commission review, the Commission
shall determine conformance with the primary approval at a public hearing. The
subdivider shall request Commission review in writing no less than 30 calendar
days prior to the date of the public hearing at which he or she intends to have
his or her final plat reviewed. The Commission shall place the matter on its
next regular hearing agenda. The Administrator shall review the proposal and
submit a written report and recommendations to the Commission and the
applicant; and, at the public hearing, the Commission shall approve or
disapprove the final plat. If granted secondary approval it shall be signed by
the designated officials, if not granted secondary approval, then the
subdivider shall be informed as to the insufficiency of his or her submittal.
         (c)   Sectionalizing plats:
            1.   Prior to granting secondary approval of a major subdivision
plat, the Commission may permit the plat to be divided into two or more
sections and may impose conditions upon the filing of the sections as it may
deem necessary to assure the orderly development of the plat;
            2.   The Commission may require that the performance bond be in
such an amount as will be commensurate with the section or sections of the plat
to be filed and may defer the remaining required performance bond principal
amount until the remaining sections of the plat are offered for filing;
            3.   Those sections must contain at least 20 lots or 10% of the
total number of lots contained in the approved plat, whichever is less; and
            4.   The approval of all remaining sections not filed with the
Administrator shall automatically expire after two years from the date of
primary approval of the preliminary plat, unless the expiration date has been
extended.
   (G)   Signing and recording a plat.
      (1)   Signing of plat.
         (a)   When the filing of a performance bond is required, the
designated officials of the Commission shall endorse approval on the plat by
signing the certificate only after the bond and the construction plans have
been approved, and all the conditions of the primary approval have been
satisfied.
         (b)   When installation of improvements is required, the designated
officials of the Commission shall endorse secondary approval of the plat by
signing the certificate after all conditions of the primary approval have been
satisfied, all improvements satisfactorily completed and accepted for public
maintenance (when required), "as built" construction plans submitted (as
required by §
155.065(B)(5) and a maintenance bond provided (as required by §
155.067(B) below). There shall be written evidence that the required public
facilities have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the participating
jurisdiction as shown by a certificate signed by the appropriate entity, i.e.
Board of Works, County Commissioners and/or the County Drainage Board, that the
necessary improvements have been accomplished.
      (2)   Assurance to subdivider. If the subdivider elects to install all
improvements before he or she applies for secondary approval and it is shown
that the conditions of the ordinance have been met and if the final plat
completely conforms to the primary approval, the Commission shall have no other
recourse than to grant secondary approval.
      (3)   Recording of final plat. The designated officials shall sign the
certificate which shall be part of the tracing cloth or reproducible Mylar of
the subdivision plat, plus three Mylar prints of the subdivision plat. The
Mylar prints shall be returned to the subdivider and his or her engineer or
surveyor. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider in the presence of
the Administrator or his or her designee to file the plat with the County
Recorder within 30 days of the date of signature. Failure of the subdivider to
file the plat as herein provided within 30 days shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.028 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General procedures for approval. Should the Administrator, upon
examination of the sketch plan application, classify the proposed land division
as a minor subdivision, the subdivider shall follow the procedures and be
subject to the process outlined in
Figure 3-2 in division (C) below and detailed in this section. In addition to a
sketch plan which is reviewed by the Administrator and checkpoint agencies for
primary approval by the Commission, the applicant seeking approval of a minor
subdivision shall submit for secondary approval a final subdivision plat which
must be found in compliance with the sketch plan or otherwise approved by the
Commission in order to be signed and recorded.
   (B)   Official submission date and placement on the agenda. An application
for sketch plan approval shall be submitted no less than that 30 calendar days
prior to either a regularly scheduled public meeting of the Commission or a
specially called meeting at which the proposal is intended to be acted upon.
The Administrator shall place the application on the agenda of the first
regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission or a specially called meeting to
occur 30 days after the date on which a complete application is submitted.
   (C)   Sketch plan review process. Within 20 calendar days of the
subdivider's sketch plan application submittal, the Administrator shall have
studied the proposal, reviewed checkpoint reports received and met with the
subdivider to discuss pertinent aspects of the proposed subdivision and
possible modifications and/or changes that may be suggested or required by this
chapter. The Administrator shall request that a representative of each
checkpoint agency that wishes to be involved in a sketch plan review be present
to participate in the sketch plan review meeting. In taking into consideration
the requirements of this chapter, particular attention shall be given to sewage
disposal, drainage, lot size and arrangement, the further development of
adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided, and the requirements of the official map
and Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the participating jurisdictions.
Subsequent to the meeting, the Administrator shall provide the participants
with a written record of the proceedings of that meeting.
Figure 3-2. Approval Process For Minor Subdivisions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/657f5231589e4e9d72860ce82f8ac4b2aa23298e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1631.jpg]
 
   (D)   Administrative review. Subsequent to placement on the agenda, and
prior to the date of public hearing, the Administrator and other appropriate
members of the Commission including the President and Secretary of the
Commission shall review the proposal and prepare a written report to the
Commission and applicant indicating a recommendation with regard to the
subdivision being proposed.
   (E)   Public hearing notification and sign posting requirements. The
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the sketch plan and notice of the
hearing shall be per I.C. 5-3-1, at the applicant's expense. At the time of the
public hearing, the applicant shall submit an affidavit stating that the
applicant has placed posters provided by the Administrator (advising interested
parties of the hearing) at the locations designated by him or her on the
proposed subdivision property at least ten days prior to the public hearing and
show proofs of publication that notices of public hearing were published at
least ten days prior to the public hearing. Interested parties shall be
notified by the applicant of the date, time, place and purpose of the public
hearing on the subdivision at least ten days in advance of the public hearing
an affidavit so testifying, along with the certified mail receipts provided by
the post office.
   (F)   Primary approval of the sketch plan.
      (1)   After the Commission has, at a regularly scheduled hearing,
examined the sketch plan, Administrator's report, checkpoint recommendations,
testimony and exhibits submitted, the Commission shall, at a regularly
scheduled hearing, approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the sketch
plan.
      (2)   One copy of the sketch plan shall be returned to the applicant with
the date of approval, conditional approval or disapproval and the reasons
therefor accompanying the sketch plan within five days after the public
hearing. Primary approval by the Commission is subject to review by certiorari.
Secondary approval of a subdivision cannot occur until a minimum of 30 days has
elapsed since the granting of primary approval or conditional approval or
conditional primary approval.
   (G)   Effective period of primary approval. Unless extended, the primary
approval of a minor sketch plan shall be effective for a period of one year
after the date of the primary approval, at the end of which time secondary
approval of the subdivision must have been obtained and certified by the
President and Secretary of the Commission. Any plats not receiving secondary
approval within the period of time set forth herein shall be null and void, and
the developer shall be required to resubmit a new application for sketch plan
review and certificate, subject to all the zoning restrictions and subdivision
regulations in effect at the time of re-submission. Upon written application of
the applicant, the Commission may extend the primary approval of a minor sketch
plan in increments of one year beyond an expiration date without further notice
and public hearing.
   (H)   Final subdivision plat procedure for secondary approval.
      (1)   Application requirements. Following approval or conditional
approval of the preliminary plat, the applicant, if he or she wishes to proceed
with the subdivision, shall file with the Administrator an application for
secondary approval of a subdivision plat. The application shall:
         (a)   Be submitted on forms available at the office of the Commission;
         (b)   Include the entire subdivision or section thereof;
         (c)   Be accompanied by ten copies of the final subdivision plat as
described in this chapter;
         (d)   Totally comply with the chapter and the terms and conditions of
approval;
         (e)   Be accompanied by the performance bond, if required, in a form
satisfactory to the Commission Attorney and in an amount established by the
Commission upon recommendation of the participating jurisdiction and shall
guarantee the completion of all required subdivision and off-site public
improvements; and
         (f)   Be accompanied by restrictive covenants in a form approved by
the Commission, where proposed by the subdivider or required by the Commission.
      (2)   Determination of conformance (secondary approval). In order to be
recorded, a final subdivision plat shall either be found to be in conformance
with the approved sketch plan by the Administrator, or by the Commission at a
public hearing, if the final subdivision plat deviates from the sketch plan
that received primary approval, the subdivision shall be resubmitted to the
Commission at a public hearing for a new primary approval. The subdivider
submitting a final plat conforming to the primary approval shall choose as to
whether this review is performed by the Administrator or by the Commission at a
public hearing.
         (a)   Should the subdivider not choose Commission review, the
Administrator shall within ten working days, review the items submitted as per
division (H)(1) above in order to ascertain conformance with the primary
approval. If the submission is found to be in conformance and complete, the
Administrator shall recommend to the Commission the signing of the certificate
granting secondary approval.
         (b)   Should the subdivider choose Commission review, the Commission
shall determine conformance with the primary approval at a public hearing. The
subdivider shall request Commission review in writing no less than 30 calendar
days prior to the date of the public hearing at which he or she intends to have
his or her final plat reviewed. The Commission shall place the matter on its
next regular hearing agenda. The Administrator shall review the proposal and
submit a written report and recommendations to the Commission and the
applicant; and, at the public hearing, the Commission shall give secondary
approval or disapproval of the final plat. If approved, it shall be signed by
the designated officials, if not approved, the subdivider shall be informed as
to the insufficiency of his or her submittal.
         (c)   Prior to granting secondary approval of a minor subdivision
plat, the Commission may permit the plat to be divided into two or more
sections and may impose the conditions upon the filing of the sections as it
may deem necessary to assure the orderly development of the plat. The
Commission may require that the performance bond be in the amount as is
commensurate with the section or sections of the plat to be filed and may defer
the remaining required performance bond principal amount until the remaining
sections of the plat are offered for filing.
   (I)   Signing and recording a plat.
      (1)   Signing of plat.
         (a)   When the filing of a performance bond is required, the
designated officials of the Commission shall endorse approval on the plat by
signing the certificate after the bond and construction plans have been
approved and all the conditions of the primary approval have been satisfied.
         (b)   When installation of improvements is required the designated
officials of the Commission shall endorse secondary approval on the plat by
signing the certificate after all conditions of the primary approval have been
satisfied, all improvements satisfactorily completed and accepted for public
maintenance (when required), "as built" construction plans submitted (as
required by §
155.065(B)(5)), and a maintenance bond provided (as required by §
155.067(B)). There shall be written evidence that the required public
facilities have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the participating
jurisdiction as shown by a certificate signed by the appropriate Board of
Works, County Commissioners and/or the County Drainage Board that the necessary
improvements have been accomplished.
      (2)   Assurance to subdivider. If the subdivider elects to install all
improvements before he or she applies for secondary approval and it is shown
that the conditions of the ordinance have been met, and if the final plat
completely conforms to the primary approval, the Commission shall have no other
recourse than to grant secondary approval.
      (3)   Recording of plat.
         (a)   The designated officials shall sign the certificate granting
secondary approval which shall be part of the tracing cloth or reproducible
Mylar of the subdivision plat, plus three Mylar prints of the subdivision plat.
The Mylar prints shall be returned to the applicant and his or her engineer or
surveyor.
         (b)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to file the
plat in the presence of the Commission's Administrator or his or her designee
with the County Recorder within 30 days of the date of signature. Failure of
the subdivider to file the plat as herein provided within 30 days shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.029 EXEMPT DIVISIONS.
   (A)   General procedure for exempt divisions.
      (1)   In order for a land division to be considered an exempt division
the information prescribed for the applicable type of division under §
155.084 below shall be submitted to the Administrator so that he or she can
determine whether the division meets the provisions of the definition in
Table 3.2 in §
155.029(B) below and the requirements in §
155.025 above for this classification and therefore can issue to the subdivider
a statement of compliance to the applicable provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Both the subdivider and the Administrator shall hold copies of the
statement of compliance.
      (3)   When the parcel so exempted by this statement is conveyed to
another party, the copy of the instrument of the conveyance shall be recorded
with the County Recorder bearing a stamp of approval signed by the
Administrator indicating that the statement of compliance has been obtained as
ascertained by the copy(s) of the statement which have been held for this
purpose.
   (B)   Exempt division review process. Within three working days of the land
divider's complete submission of the required information (see §
155.084 below), the Administrator shall review the submission and notify the
land divider that his or her proposed land division either qualifies as an
exempt division and is thus exempt from all other provisions of this chapter,
or does not qualify as an exempt division and is thus subject to the relevant
subdivision processes described in this chapter.
Table 3.2. Classification of Subdivisions
Table 3.2. Classification of Subdivisions
            A.   A division of land into two or more tracts of which all tracts are at least
            ten acres in size.
            B.   A division of land for the transfer of a tract or tracts to correct errors
            in an existing legal description, provided that no additional building sites
            other than for accessory buildings are created by the division.
            C.   A division of land pursuant to an allocation of land in the settlement of a
Exempt      decedent's estate or a court decree for the distribution of property.
Divisions   D.   A division of land for federal, state or local government to acquire street
            right-of-way.
            E.   A division of land for the transfer of a tract or tracts between adjoining
            lots provided that no additional principal use building sites are created by the
            division. The lots so created hereunder shall have only one principal use
            building site each.
            F.   A division of land into cemetery plots for the purpose of burial of corpses.
            The division of any previously divided parcel into not more than three parcels or
Minor       lots and requiring no new streets or easements of access, and which division is
Subdivision not in conflict with any other provisions, provided however, there shall be no
            more than one minor plat resulting from one root parcel.
Major       Any subdivision not classified as a minor or exempt subdivision.
Subdivision
 
Figure 3-3. Classification of Subdivisions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/657f5231589e4e9d72860ce82f8ac4b2aa23298e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1634.jpg]
 
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS AND DESIGN
§ 155.040 GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. In addition to the
requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with the
following laws, rules and regulations:
      (1)   All applicable state and local statutory provisions;
      (2)   The Zoning Ordnance, Building and Housing Codes and all other
applicable laws and ordinances of the appropriate jurisdictions;
      (3)   The Comprehensive Plan and official map, including all streets,
drainage systems and parks shown on the official map or Comprehensive Plan as
adopted;
      (4)   The special requirements of these regulations and any rules of the
Health Department and/or appropriate state agencies;
      (5)   The rules and regulations of the State Department of Transportation
if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abut a state highway or state
frontage road;
      (6)   The highway and drainage standards and regulations adopted by the
County Engineer and all boards, commissions, agencies and officials of the
county and/or city; and
      (7)   All pertinent standards contained within valid planning guides
published by the Plan Commission.
   (B)   Plat approval. Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not
in conformity with the above guides and requirements or with the policies and
purposes of these regulations established in §
155.003 above.
   (C)   Self-imposed restrictions. If the owner places restrictions on any of
the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the Zoning
Ordinance or these regulations, the restrictions or reference thereto may be
required to be indicated on the subdivision plat, or the Commission will
require that restrictive covenants be recorded with the County Recorder in a
form to be approved by the Commission Attorney.
   (D)   Plats straddling municipal boundaries.
      (1)   Whenever access to the subdivision is required across land in
another jurisdiction, the Commission may request assurance that the access is
legally established, and from the City Engineer (within corporate limits) or
County Engineer (within jurisdictional area) that the access road is adequately
improved, or that a performance bond has been duly executed and is sufficient
in the amount to assure the construction of the access road.
      (2)   Lot lines shall be laid out so as not to cross municipal boundary
lines.
   (E)   Boundary improvements.
      (1)   The subdivider shall have placed, under the supervision of a
registered land surveyor, concrete monuments four inches square or four inches
in diameter.
         (a)   The center of all monuments shall be marked on the top by a
steel dowel at least one-half-inch in diameter, set flush with the top.
         (b)   Monuments shall be set so that the top is slightly below the
adjoining established grade and shall be installed at the following points,
following grading of each phase of the subdivision:
            1.   At the intersection of street and alley right-of-way lines;
            2.   At the beginning and ending of all street curves on both
right-of-way lines; and
            3.   At all boundary corners of the dedicated plat area and
dedicated public areas.
      (2)   The subdivider shall have placed, under the supervision of a
registered land surveyor, iron pipe or iron and steel bars, at least five-
eighths-inch in diameter by three feet in length at the corners of each lot not
marked by monuments required above.
         (a)   The top of the pipe or bar shall be set level with the
established grade adjoining it.
         (b)   They shall be set prior to the issuance of any improvement
location permit.
   (F)   Character of the land. Land which the Commission finds to be
unsuitable for subdivision or development because of flooding, improper
drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or
topography, utility easements or other features which might reasonably be
harmful to the safety, health and general welfare of the present or future
inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be
subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer
and approved by the Commission, upon recommendation of the County and/or City
Engineer, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. the
land shall be set aside for the uses permitted by the Zoning Ordinance as shall
not involve any danger.
   (G)   Subdivision name.
      (1)   The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too
closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the area
covered by these regulations.
      (2)   The Commission shall have final authority to designate the name of
the subdivision which shall be determined at the time of primary approval.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.041 LOT IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Lot arrangement.
      (1)   The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable
difficulties for reasons of topography or other conditions in securing
improvement location permits to build on each of the created lots in compliance
with the Zoning Ordinance and health regulations and in providing driveway
access to buildings on the lots from the appropriate approved street.
      (2)   Every lot shall front or abut on a street.
      (3)   Lots shall have a front to front relationship across all streets
where possible. This shall be accomplished to assure that houses do not face
rear or side yards of lots across streets wherever possible.
      (4)   Where lots border upon bodies of water, the front yard may be
designated as the waterfront side of the lot provided the lot has sufficient
depth to provide adequate setback on the street side to maintain a setback for
all structures equal to the setback on the street side as well as on the
waterfront side.
   (B)   Lot dimensions.
      (1)   Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards in the
Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the
zoning district, the Commission may require that the lots be arranged so as to
allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be
necessary to serve all the potential lots in compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance and these regulations.
      (3)   In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street
lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule
will give a better street or lot plan.
      (4)   Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for
erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from both
streets.
      (5)   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business,
commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for all of the
off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and
development contemplated, as established in the Zoning Ordinance.
      (6)   Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth
to width ratio of two to one shall normally be considered the maximum. See
Figure 4-1 below.
   (C)   Double frontage lots and access to lots.
      (1)   Double frontage lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots
shall be avoided except where necessary to provide for the separation of
residential development from the traffic on bordering arterials or to overcome
specific disadvantages of topography and orientation affecting the subdivided
lots. See
Figure 4-2. below.
      (2)   Access from primary and secondary arterials.
         (a)   Lots shall not, in general, derive access from a primary or
secondary arterial street.
         (b)   Where driveway access from a primary or secondary arterial
street may be the only possible access for several adjoining lots, the
Commission may require that the lots be served by a combined access drive in
order to limit possible traffic hazards from multiple access to the streets.
         (c)   Where possible, driveways should be designed and arranged so as
to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on primary or secondary
arterials.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/657f5231589e4e9d72860ce82f8ac4b2aa23298e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1637.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/657f5231589e4e9d72860ce82f8ac4b2aa23298e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1640.jpg]
 
   (D)   Soil preservation, grading and seeding.
      (1)   Soil preservation and final grading. No certificates of occupancy
shall be issued until final grading has been completed in accordance with the
approved construction plans and the lot pre-covered with topsoil having an
average depth of at least six inches which shall contain no particles over two
inches in diameter over the entire area of the lot, except that portion covered
by buildings or included in streets, or where the grade has not been changed or
natural vegetation seriously damaged. Topsoil shall not be removed from
residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide
at least six inches of cover between sidewalks and curbs, and shall be
stabilized by seeding or planting.
      (2)   Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive
drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be
coordinated with the general storm water drainage pattern for the area.
Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid the accumulation of storm water on
any one or more lots from adjacent lots. It shall be the responsibility of the
lot owner to maintain the lot grade, as it applies to drainage, as provided for
in the approved construction plans.
      (3)   Lawn-grass seed and sod. Lawn-grass seed shall be sown at not less
than four pounds to each 1,000 square feet of land area. The seed shall be sown
between March 15 and September 30. The seed shall consist of a minimum of 10%
rye grass by weight and a minimum of 90% of permanent bluegrass by weight. All
seed shall have been tested for germination within one year of the date of
seeding, and the date of testing shall be on the label containing the seed
analysis. All lots shall be seeded from the road side edge of the unpaved
right-of-way back to a distance of 25 feet behind the principal residence on
the lot. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until re-spreading of soil
and seeding of lawn has been completed; except that between October 15 and
March 15 and between May 15 and August 15, the applicant shall submit an
agreement in writing signed by the developer and the property owner, with a
copy to the improvement location permit official, that the spreading of the
soil and seeding of the lawn will be done during the immediately following
planting season as set forth above in this section, and leave a cash escrow for
performance in an amount as shall be determined by the improvement location
permit official. Sod may be used to comply with any requirement of seeding set
forth herein.
   (E)   Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones,
soil, junk, rubbish or other waste material of any kind shall be buried in any
land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of occupancy within
a subdivision, nor shall any be left or deposited in any area of the
subdivision at the time of expiration of the performance bond or dedication of
public improvements, whichever is sooner.
   (F)   Fencing. Each subdivider and/or developer shall be required to furnish
and install fences wherever the Commission determines that a hazardous
condition may exist. The fences shall be constructed according to standards
established by the County and/or City Engineer and shall be noted as to height
and material on the final plat. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until the fence improvements have been duly installed.
   (G)   Waterbodies and watercourses. If a tract being subdivided contains a
water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute
the entire ownership of the water body among the fees of adjacent lots. The
Commission may approve an alternative allocation of interests whereby the
ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body is so
placed that it will not become a local government responsibility. No part of
the minimum area of a lot required under the Zoning Ordinance may be satisfied
by land which is under water. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area
of a lot from the street from which it has access, provisions shall be made for
installation of a culvert or other structure, of a design approved by the
County and/or City Engineer.
   (H)   Performance bond to include lot improvement. The performance bond
shall include an amount to guarantee completion of all requirements contained
in this section, including, but not limited to, soil preservation, final
grading, lot drainage, lawn-grass seeding, removal of debris and waste, fencing
and all other lot improvements required by the Commission. Whether or not a
certificate of occupancy has been issued, at the expiration of the performance
bond, the city may enforce the provisions of the bond where compliance with the
provisions of this section or any other applicable law, ordinance or regulation
has not occurred.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.042 STREETS.
   (A)   General requirements; frontage on improved streets. No subdivision
shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and
access from an existing street on the official map, or if there is not an
official map, unless the street is:
      (1)   An existing state, county or township highway, or
      (2)   A street shown upon a plat approved by the Commission and recorded
in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds. The street or highway must be
suitably improved as required by the highway rules, regulations, specifications
or orders, or be secured by a performance bond required under these
regulations, with the width and right-of-way required by these regulations or
as indicated on the official map or Thoroughfare Plan. Whenever the area to be
subdivided is to use an existing street frontage, the street shall be suitably
improved as provided herein above.
   (B)   Grading and improvement plan. Streets shall be graded and improved and
conform to the city construction standards and specifications and shall be
approved as to design and specifications by the County or City Engineer, in
accordance with the construction plans required to be submitted prior to
secondary approval.
   (C)   Topography and arrangement.
      (1)   Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography. All
streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building
sites at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform
as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep
grades and sharp curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in
the design standards of these regulations.
      (2)   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established on
the official map or Comprehensive Plan.
      (3)   All arterials and collector streets shall be properly related to
special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools,
churches and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of
existing and proposed land uses.
      (4)   Minor or local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as
possible to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit
efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of
streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to the property.
      (5)   Rigid, rectangular "gridiron" street patterns are generally to be
avoided, and the use of casually curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs or loop
streets shall be encouraged where the use will result in a more desirable lay-
out and relate better to the existing topography. On flat land, innovative,
varying geometrical street patterns shall be encouraged where they are likely
to enhance visual interest and a sense of order for those using them (e.g.,
non-grid rectilinear, trapezoidal, polygonal or other geometric patterns).
      (6)   Proposed streets shall, where appropriate, be extended to the
boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided unless this is prevented by
topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Plan
Commission the extension(s) is/are not necessary or desirable for the
coordination of the layout of the subdivision under consideration with the
existing street layout or for the most advantageous future development of
adjacent tracts (see division (K)(1) below).
      (7)   In business and industrial developments, the streets and other
access-ways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings,
location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and
maneuvering areas, walkways, bikeways and parking areas so as to minimize
conflict of movement between the various types of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
   (D)   Blocks.
      (1)   Block width shall be determined by the condition of the layout and
shall be suited to the intended layout.
      (2)   Block lengths shall not exceed 660 feet in length, except where in
the opinion of the Commission conditions may justify a greater distance.
      (3)   The Commission may require the reservation of easements through the
block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities or pedestrian traffic.
Pedestrian ways or crosswalks not less than six feet wide with a pavement width
of not less than five feet may be required by the Commission through the center
of blocks more than 800 feet long or at other appropriate locations and at the
ends of the cul-de-sacs where deemed essential to provide for circulation or
access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other
community facilities. Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of a length
and width as may be determined to be suitable by the Commission for the
intended use.
   (E)   Access to collector streets. Where possible, lots in single-family
residential subdivisions, fronting on collector streets shall be avoided and
lots at the corners of intersections between local and collector streets shall
front on the local street and have driveway access to it only and not to the
collector street. In multiple-family residential areas, entrances to group
parking lots shall have access only to collector streets (where possible) and
the entrances shall be widely spaced.
   (F)   Access to primary arterials. Where a subdivision borders on or
contains an existing or proposed primary arterial, the Commission may require
that access to it be limited by one of the following means:
      (1)   The subdivision of the lots so as to back onto the primary arterial
and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be provided from the
primary arterial and screening shall be provided within a strip of land along
the rear property line of the lots;
      (2)   A series of cul-de-sacs, or loop streets entered from, and designed
generally to be at right angles to an access street that is at some distance
from and parallel to the arterial street, with the rear lines of their terminal
lots backing onto the arterial; and
      (3)   A private marginal access or service road (separated from the
arterial by a landscaped and/or decoratively fenced grass strip and having
access thereto at widely spaced suitable points).
   (G)   Street names. The sketch plan, as submitted, shall indicate names of
proposed streets. As part of his or her review, the Administrator shall refer
proposed street names to the local postmaster for his or her comments regarding
duplication of names and possible confusion. After reviewing them, the
Administrator shall inform the subdivider of his or her recommendations for
their possible revision during the sketch plan review. Names shall be
sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from other street names in the
city, county or other nearby areas so as to avoid confusion. A street which is,
or is planned as, a continuation of an existing street shall bear the same
name. Street name signs shall be installed at every intersection and shall
comply with current city or county standards.
   (H)   Street regulatory signs. The applicant shall provide and install a
street sign at every street intersection within his or her subdivision as
required by the City and/or County Engineer. All street signs shall be
inspected and approved before issuance of certificates of occupancy for any
residence on the approved streets. Signs must comply with requirements in the
most recent edition of the Uniform Traffic Control Manual.
   (I)   Street lights. Installation of street lights shall be required in
accordance with design and specification standards approved by the City and/or
County Engineer. Street light standards and fixtures shall also be in
accordance with the visual design standards of the Design Review Committee. If
special decorative lighting is used, the additional cost over that of standard
lighting shall be paid through a homeowners' association.
   (J)   Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted
adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access to it from
adjacent property if the street is a local service street rather than a
collector or arterial street. (See divisions (E) and (F) above.)
   (K)   Construction of streets.
      (1)   Construction of streets other than cul-de-sacs. The arrangement of
streets shall provide for the continuation of streets between adjacent
subdivisions or other properties when the continuation is necessary for the
convenient movement of traffic, for effective fire protection, for efficient
provision of utilities, and where the continuation is in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan, if the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must
be a dead-end (stub) street temporarily, the right-of-way for all the temporary
dead-end streets, with the notation on the subdivision plat that land outside
the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutters whenever the street is
continued. Temporary turnarounds must be provided at the ends of the stub
streets. The Commission may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in
accordance with the design standards in these regulations.
      (2)   Cul-de-sacs (permanent dead-end streets). Where a street does not
extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not
required by the Commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall
normally not be nearer to the boundary than 50 feet. However, the Commission
may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage
facilities, pedestrian traffic or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be
provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street in accordance with city and/
or county construction standards and specifications available from the City
and/or County Engineer's office. For greater convenience to traffic and more
effective police and fire protection, residential cul-de-sacs streets shall
generally be limited to 600 feet in length. Maximum length for industrial and
other cul-de-sac streets may exceed 600 feet subject to the approval of the
Commission.
      (3)   Underground utilities shall not be placed under a dedicated
roadway, nor a roadway built over underground utility lines. Where it is
necessary for underground utility lines to cross under a roadway, the crossing
shall be perpendicular to the roadway.
   (L)   Design standards.
      (1)   General. In order to provide for streets of suitable location,
width and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford
satisfactory access for police, firefighting, snow removal, sanitation and
street maintenance equipment, and to coordinate street location in order to
achieve a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties,
the following design standards for streets are hereby required. (Street
classifications may be indicated in the Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan
or on the official map; otherwise, they shall be determined by the Commission.)
      (2)   Street surfacing and improvements. After sewer and water utilities
have been installed by the developer, the applicant shall construct curbs and
gutters and shall surface or cause the roadways to be surfaced to the widths
prescribed in these regulations. The surfacing shall be of a character as is
suitable for the expected traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in
the surrounding areas. Types of pavement shall be as determined by the City
and/or County Engineer. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains
and bridges. All street pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and
structures, curbs, turn-arounds and sidewalks shall conform to all construction
standards and specifications adopted by the Commission, City and/or County
Engineer and shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be
submitted by the developer for plat approval. The surface layer of asphalt on a
street in a new development does not have to be completed until 70% buildout of
the project, or one year after the start of the project, whichever is sooner.
      (3)   Excess right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards
designed in these regulations shall be required whenever, due to topography,
additional width is necessary to provide for adequate and stable earth slopes.
The slopes shall not be in excess of three to one.
      (4)   Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad rights-of-way and
limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of
adjoining lands shall be treated as follows.
         (a)   In residential districts, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in
depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall
be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway.
This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the
plat: "This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structures hereon
other than earth berms, walls, fences and other landscape screening devices
approved by the Commission is prohibited."
         (b)   In districts zoned for business, commercial or industrial uses,
the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to a railroad
shall, wherever practical, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure a
suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.
         (c)   Streets parallel to a railroad when intersecting a street which
crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a
distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. The distance
shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for
future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.
      (5)   Intersections.
         (a)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as
possible at right angles. No street shall intersect a major street at an angle
of less than 70 degrees. An oblique street should be approximately at right
angles for at least 100 feet from an intersection. Not more than two streets
shall intersect at any one point.
         (b)   Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street
shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersection on the
opposite side of the street. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than
150 feet shall not be permitted except where the intersected street has
separated, dual drives, without median breaks at either intersection. Where
local streets intersect with arterials, their alignment shall be continuous.
Intersections of arterials shall be at least 800 feet apart.
         (c)   Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two streets shall be
at least 20 feet. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a
block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering
practice to permit safe vehicular movement.
         (d)   Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection a
leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a 2% grade at a
distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the
intersecting street.
         (e)   Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or
existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by
limiting visibility, the developer shall cut the ground and/or vegetation
(including trimming trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-
of-way to the extent deemed necessary by the City and/or County Engineer to
provide an adequate sight distance.
         (f)   The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall
be 3% maximum and 2% minimum.
      (6)   Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined
by the Commission, shall be constructed at the full expense of the applicant
without reimbursement from the city and/or county. The sharing of expense for
the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the applicant as
determined by the Commission, will be fixed by special agreement between the
city and/or county and the applicant. The cost shall be charged to the
applicant pro-rata as the percentage of his or her land developed and so
served.
      (7)   Residential driveways. Residential driveways shall have a minimum
throat width of 12 feet and a maximum of 24 feet at the right-of-way. The drive
approach shall have a five foot flare or regular five-foot radius. All
driveways must be paved and shall conform to the city's design standards and
the portion of the driveway in the right-of-way must have a minimum six-inch
pavement depth.
      (8)   Commercial and industrial driveways. Commercial and industrial
driveways shall have a minimum throat width of 12 feet and a maximum of 24
feet, for entrance or exit only driveways. For two-way driveways, the minimum
throat width is 24 feet and the maximum is 36 feet at the right-of-way. The
drive approach shall have a minimum ten-foot radius. All driveways must be
paved and shall conform to the city's design standards, and the portion of the
driveway in the right-of-way must have a minimum six-inch pavement depth.
   (M)   Street dedications and reservations.
      (1)   New perimeter streets. Street systems in new subdivisions shall be
laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an
existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the
street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The Commission may
authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates
the entire required right-of-way width within his or her own subdivision's
boundaries.
      (2)   Widening and realignment of existing streets.
         (a)   Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow street or when
the Comprehensive Plan, official map, Thoroughfare Plan or zoning setback
regulations indicate plans for realignment or widening of a street that would
require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be
required to improve and dedicate the streets at his or her own expense.
         (b)   The frontage streets and other streets on which subdivision lots
front shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at his or her own
expense to the full width required by these subdivision regulations. Land
reserved for any street purposes may not be counted in satisfying the yard or
area requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
Table 4-1. Street Standards
Design Standards for Streets*
Street Min.      Min.     Max.  Min.   Min.      Min. Sight Min.   Min. Turn-
Type   Width ROW Pavement Grade Radius Length of Distance   Corner Around
                 Width          Curve  Tangent              Radius
Table 4-1. Street Standards
Design Standards for Streets*
                      Min.  Min.           Min.   Min.    Min.     Min.   Min.
Street Type           Width Pavement Max.  Radius Length  Sight    Corner Turn-
                      ROW   Width    Grade Curve  of      Distance Radius Around
                                                  Tangent
            Arterial  60    36 feet  7.5%  100    150     240 feet 25     N/A
                      feet                 feet   feet             feet
Residential Local     50    24-36    7.5%  100    100     200 feet 25     100/80
            street    feet  feet**         feet   feet             feet   feet
            Collector 50    30 feet  7.0%  100    150     200 feet 25     100/80
                      feet                 feet   feet             feet   feet
            Arterial  80    43 feet  6.0%  200    200     240 feet 40     N/A
                      feet                 feet   feet             feet
Commercial  Local     60                   200    200              40     160/
and         street    feet  30 feet  6.0%  feet   feet    200 feet feet   140
Industrial                                                                feet
                      70                   200    200              40     160/
            Collector feet  36 feet  6.0%  feet   feet    240 feet feet   140
                                                                          feet
*Subject to review and approval of local government engineer and/or State
Highway Commission.
**24 feet width if on-street parking is prohibited; 30 feet if one lane of on-
street parking allowed; 36 feet if two lanes of on-street parking allowed
 
 
Standards Applied to All Streets
Minimum grade                        0.5%
Maximum grade                        6.0%
Maximum block length                 660 feet
Maximum cul-de-sac length            600 feet
Maximum length of temporary dead-end 1,000 feet
street
Maximum length of vertical curves    100 feet, but not less than 20 feet for
                                     each % of algebraic difference in grade
 
Street Paving Thicknesses
 Local Collector Arterial
Street Paving Thicknesses
                            Local      Collector  Arterial
Portland cement
Concrete                    6 inches   7.5 inches
Hot mix asphalt                                   As required by city design
Surface                     1.5 inches 1.5 inches standards
Intermediate                2 inches   2 inches
Base                        4 inches   4 inches
Subbase compacted aggregate 10 inches  10 inches
 
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.043 DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   General requirements. The Commission shall not recommend for approval
any subdivision plat which does not make adequate provision for storm or flood
water runoff channels or basins. The storm water drainage system shall be
separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Surface water drainage
patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block. The system must meet
the following standards:
      (1)   A storm water sewer system or a surface drainage system designed
for not less than a five-year storm frequency to serve the area being
subdivided shall be provided;
      (2)   When curbs and gutters are provided or when the Commission
determines the natural surface drainage to be inadequate, the subdivider shall
construct a storm water sewer system with inlets appropriately spaced in the
subdivision;
      (3)   A natural surface drainage system shall be permitted when curbs and
gutters are not provided, and the natural drainage will, in the opinion of the
Commission, adequately drain the storm water from the subdivision. The drainage
ways should be shallow swales sowed in grass rather than deep, open ditches.
Streets not having curb and gutter shall provide the following:
         (a)   Side ditch swales constructed at one foot (vertical) to three
feet (horizontal);
         (b)   A swale or culvert at all driveways sized according to the
amount of storm water flow;
         (c)   Culverts under the roadway where necessary: the size of culverts
will be according to the amount of storm water flow, but will not be less than
12 inches in diameter; and
         (d)   Relief of side ditches and swales along the roadway through the
use of off-street detention basins or existing drainage channels. Detention
basins may be required to avoid overloading channels and ditches.
      (4)   When topsoil has been removed from the surface of a lot on a slope
where erosion will cause a displacement of loose materials, the subdivider
shall utilize approved methods to prevent the wash from damaging adjacent
property, accumulating on street surfaces, or blocking drainageways; and
      (5)   In the design of a storm water sewer system for a subdivision, the
present and future expected runoff from the larger drainage area shall be
considered. For this reason, it may be desirable that larger sewers than those
needed to service the immediate subdivision be installed, if this occurs, the
Commission may recommend that the public utility join with the subdivider in
the installation of the sewer system.
   (B)   Nature of storm water facilities.
      (1)   Location. The applicant may be required by the Commission to carry
away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist, either
prior to, or as result of the subdivision. The drainage facilities shall be
located in the street right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual,
unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in
accordance with the city's and/or county's construction standards and
specifications.
      (2)   Accessibility to public storm sewers.
         (a)   Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall
install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable
distance adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of storm water,
subject to the specifications of the City Engineer. However, in subdivisions
containing lots of less than 15,000 square feet in area and in business and
industrial districts, underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed
throughout the subdivision and be conducted to an approved outfall. Inspection
of facilities shall be conducted by the City Engineer.
         (b)   If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided
eventually, as determined by the City Engineer and the Commission, the
developer shall make arrangements for future storm water disposal by the public
utility system at the time the plat receives final approval. Cost provision(s)
for the connections) shall be incorporated by inclusion in the amount of the
performance bond or equivalent required for the subdivision plat.
      (3)   Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other
drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential
runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the
subdivision. The City and/or County Engineer shall determine the necessary size
of the facility, based on the provisions of the required construction standards
and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed
development permitted by the Zoning Ordinance.
      (4)   Effect on downstream drainage areas. The City and/or County
Engineer shall determine the effect of each proposed subdivision on existing
drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. City and/or county
drainage studies together with other studies as may be available and
appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is
anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the
subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the
Commission may withhold secondary approval of the subdivision until provision
(such as a storage facility) has been made for file improvement of the
potential condition in a sum as the Commission shall determine. No subdivision
shall be approved unless adequate drainage from it will be provided to an
adequate drainage water course or facility.
      (5)   Areas of poor drainage. Areas which are not in the flood plain but
contain soils which are subject to flooding may be approved for subdivision by
the Commission, provided that the subdivider fills the affected areas of the
subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place building sites and streets two
feet above ponding levels.
      (6)   Areas of high seasonal water tables. In areas characterized by
soils having a high seasonal water table as determined by the County Soil and
Water Conservation District, lots shall be limited to slab type construction
unless the Commission determines that appropriate engineering techniques will
be applied to alleviate the subsurface problem.
      (7)   Floodway areas. If a subdivision of land is proposed within the
flood plain, floodways shall be preserved and not diminished in capacity by
filling or obstruction, except as approved by the Natural Resources Commission
in writing. No residential building site may be located within the floodway.
See Figures
4-3 and
4-4 in division (B)(10) below.
      (8)   Floodway fringe areas. Where a subdivision is proposed within an
area of the flood plain designated as a floodway fringe, the Commission may
approve the subdivision provided that: all streets are elevated sufficiently to
be above the regulatory flood elevation; all lots for residential usage have a
flood protection grade two feet above the regulatory flood elevation; where
provided, water and sanitary sewer facilities are constructed to eliminate
contamination of or by, flood water; and, approval to fill the area from the
Natural Resources Commission has been obtained in writing. Lands below the
regulatory flood elevation shall not be used for computing the area requirement
for any lot. See Figures
4-3 and
4-4 in division (B)(10) below.
      (9)   Flood plain areas. Where a subdivision is proposed within an area
of the flood plain for which floodway and floodway fringe designations have not
been made, the Commission shall not approve such a subdivision unless all
streets are raised sufficiently to be above the regulatory flood elevation; all
lots for residential usage have a flood protection grade of two feet above the
regulatory flood elevation; where provided, public water and sanitary sewer
facilities are constructed to eliminate contamination of or by flood water;
and, filling to achieve the above will not raise the level of the regulatory
flood elevation more than one-tenth of one foot for that reach of the stream.
All filling in the flood plain must be approved in writing by the State Natural
Resources Commission. Lands below the regulatory flood elevation shall not be
used for computing the area requirement for any lot.
      (10)   Recording of plats in the flood plain and floodway fringe. All
final plats having within their boundaries areas whose elevation is below that
of the regulatory flood elevation shall show and label the regulatory flood
boundary and elevation, as of the date the final plat is drawn, on the final
plat for recording.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/657f5231589e4e9d72860ce82f8ac4b2aa23298e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1643.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/657f5231589e4e9d72860ce82f8ac4b2aa23298e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1646.jpg]
 
   (C)   Dedication of drainage easements.
      (1)   General requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
drainage course, drainage way, channel or stream, a storm water easement or
drainage right-of-way shall be provided, granted or dedicated to the city and/
or county, conforming substantially to the lines of the watercourse, and of a
width and construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose of both
drainage and maintenance of the right-of-way. Wherever possible, it is
desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped
banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow.
      (2)   Drainage easements.
         (a)   Where topography or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within street rights-of-way,
perpetual unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for the drainage
facilities shall be provided across property outside the right-of-way lines and
with satisfactory access to the street. Easements shall be indicated on the
plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the street to a natural
watercourse or to other drainage facilities.
         (b)   The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or
conservation, easement land on both sides of existing watercourses of a width
to be determined by the Commission and, in the case of legal drains, the County
Drainage Board.
         (c)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private
land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and
indicated on the plat.
         (d)   Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or
overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for
dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage
ways. The land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be included in
the computations for determining the number of lots allowable under average
density procedures nor for computing the area requirement for any individual
lot.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.044 WATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   The applicant shall take all actions necessary to extend or create
a water-supply district for the purpose of providing a water-supply system
capable of providing for domestic water use and fire protection.
      (2)   Where a public water main is accessible, the subdivider shall
install a complete water distribution system approved by the State Board of
Health, including a connection for each lot.
      (3)   Water main extensions shall be approved by the officially
designated agency of the state, county or municipality concerned.
      (4)   To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, water
supply improvements, and the boundary lines of proposed districts indicating
all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the preliminary plat,
and the cost of installing same shall be Included in the performance bond to be
furnished by the subdivider.
   (B)   Individual wells and central water systems.
      (1)   In low-density zoning districts, if a public water system is not
available, at the discretion of the Commission, each lot may be provided with
an individual water supply, provided that the supply is installed in accordance
with the minimum requirements of the State Board of Health. Water sample test
results shall be submitted to the Health Department for its approval, and
individual wells and central water systems shall be approved by the appropriate
health authorities. These approvals shall be submitted to the Commission.
      (2)   If the Commission requires that a connection to a public water main
be eventually provided as a condition for approval of an individual well or
central water system, the applicant shall make arrangements for future water
service at the time the plat receives secondary approval. Performance or cash
bonds maybe required to ensure compliance.
   (C)   Fire hydrants. Hydrants should be provided at each street intersection
and at intermediate points between intersections, meeting the requirements of
the city and the Fire Insurance Underwriters' Association. Generally, hydrant
spacing may range from 350 to 600 feet depending on the nature of the area
being served, as determined by the City Engineer.
   (D)   Specifications for parts and materials.
      (1)   The water main shall be constructed out of ductile iron with slip
joints, Class 50 or Class 350. The city will set the sizing on the water main,
and must approve the water main before installation.
      (2)   The water main fittings shall be constructed out of ductile iron
with mechanical joints, Class C153. The city must approve the fittings before
installation.
      (3)   All water main valves must be true resilient wedge valves, open
left. The city must approve the valves before installation.
      (4)   Hydrants must open left, with VA operating nuts. Depth is dependent
on grade. Hydrants must be Kennedy or Mueller Brand. The city must approve the
hydrants before installation.
      (5)   Water service lines:
         (a)   Copper lines must be K-type, coil or ridged. The city must
approve the lines before installation; and
         (b)   PVC/Plastic lines must be nominal size, 200 pounds tested. The
city must approve the lines before installation.
      (6)   Water meters are supplied by the utility, included in the cost of
the water tap. The size is dependent on the amount of water used or line size.
      (7)   Water valve box, curb box and extension must be iron, and approved
by the city before installation.
      (8)   Water meter pits must be constructed of PVC or approved by the city
before installation.
      (9)   Fittings for meters and services lines must be brass, compression
and flair.
      (10)   It is recommended to use a ball valve for inside valves in a home,
business or industry.
      (11)   The back flow device must be state approved, and be approved by
the city before installation. It must be tested at least one time per year by a
certified tester.
   (E)   Inspection, handling and storage.
      (1)   Material standards and material selection.
         (a)   Pipe, fittings, valves and fire hydrants shall conform to the
latest standards issued by the AWWA, if the standards exist, and be acceptable
to the reviewing authority.
         (b)   In the absence of the standards, materials meeting applicable
product standards and acceptable to the reviewing authority may be selected.
         (c)   Special attention shall be given to selecting pipe materials
which will protect against both internal and external pipe corrosion.
      (2)   Joints.
         (a)   Packing and jointing materials used in the joints of pipe shall
meet the standards of the AWWA and the reviewing authority.
         (b)   Pipe having mechanical joints or slip-on joints with rubber
gaskets is preferred.
      (3)   Handling and storage.
         (a)   All pipe, fittings, valves, hydrants and accessories shall be
loaded and unloaded by lifting with hoists or skidding in order to avoid shock
or damage.
         (b)   Under no circumstances shall the materials be dropped.
         (c)   Pipe handled on skidways shall not be rolled or skidded against
pipe on the ground.
         (d)   Slings, hooks or pipe tongs shall be padded and used in such a
manner as to prevent damage to the exterior surface or internal lining of the
pipe.
         (e)   Storage:
            1.   Materials, if stored, shall be kept safe from damage;
            2.   The interior of all pipe, fittings and other appurtenances
shall be kept free from dirt or foreign matter at all times; and
            3.   Valves and hydrants shall be drained and stored in a manner
that will protect them
         (f)   Pipe shall not be stacked higher than the limits shown in
Table 4-2 above.
            1.   The bottom tier shall be kept off the ground on timbers, rails
or concrete.
            2.   Pipe in tiers shall be alternated: bell, plain end; bell,
plain end.
            3.   At least two rows of timbers shall be placed between tiers,
and chocks shall be affixed to each timber in order to prevent movement.
            4.   The timbers shall be large enough to prevent contact between
the pipe in adjacent tiers.
         (g)   Gaskets for mechanical and push-on joints shall be stored in a
cool location out of direct sunlight.
            1.   Gaskets shall not come in contact with petroleum products.
            2.   Gaskets shall be used on a first-in, first-out basis.
         (h)   Mechanical-joint bolts shall be handled and stored in a dry
location in a manner that will ensure proper use with respect to types and
sizes.
         (i)   Prolonged exposure to sunlight will eventually deteriorate
polyethylene film.
            1.   Therefore, the exposure prior to backfilling the wrapped pipe
should be kept to a minimum.
            2.   If several weeks of exposure prior to backfilling are
anticipated, Class C material should be used.
   (F)   Trench construction/grade and alignment.
      (1)   Trench construction. The trench shall be excavated to the
alignment, depth and width specified or shown on the plans and shall be in
conformance with all federal, state and local regulations for the protection of
the workers.
         (a)   Trench preparation shall proceed in advance of pipe installation
only as far as stated in the specifications or as directed by the owner.
         (b)   Discharge from any trench-dewatering pumps shall be conducted to
natural drainage channels, storm sewers or as directed by applicable regulatory
agencies.
         (c)   Excavated material shall be placed in a manner that will not
obstruct the work nor endanger the workers or the public, or obstruct
sidewalks, driveways, roadways or other structures. Placement of excavated
material shall be done in compliance with federal, state and local regulations.
         (d)   Pavement removal:
            1.   Removal of pavement and road surfaces shall be a part of the
trench excavation;
            2.   The amount removed shall depend on the width of trench
required for installation of the pipe and the dimensions of the area into which
valves, hydrants, specials, manholes and other structures by more than six
inches (150 mm) in any direction, unless otherwise required or approved by the
owner; and
            3.   Methods such as sawing, drilling or chipping shall be used to
ensure the breakage of pavement along straight lines.
         (e)   Width:
            1.   The width of the trench at the top of the pipe shall be the
same as that afforded by the single-pass capabilities of normally available
excavating equipment and shall be ample to permit the pipe to be laid and
joined properly and to allow the backfill to be placed as specified;
            2.   Trench widths shown in
Table 4-2 may be used as a guide; and
            3.   Trenches shall be of an extra width, when required, to permit
the placement of timber supports, sheeting, bracing and appurtenances as
required by the safety requirements of the agency having jurisdiction.
         (f)   Bell holes:
            1.   Holes for the bells shall be provided at each joint, but shall
be no larger than necessary to allow joint assembly and to ensure that the pipe
barrel will lie flat on the trench bottom; and
            2.   Push-on type joints require only minimum depressions for bell
holes
         (g)   Other than noted previously, the trench bottom shall be true and
even to provide support for the full length of the pipe barrel, except that a
slight depression may be provided to allow withdrawal of pipe slings or other
lifting tackle without damaging coating or polyethylene encasement.
         (h)   Rock conditions:
            1.   When excavation of rock is encountered, all rock shall be
removed to provide a clearance below and on each side of all pipe, valves and
fittings of at least six inches (150 mm) for pipe sizes 24 inches or smaller
and nine inches (230 mm) for pipe sizes 30 inches and larger; and
            2.   When excavation is completed, a layer of appropriate backfill
material shall be placed on the bottom of the trench to the previously
mentioned depths, leveled and tamped.
         (i)   These clearances and bedding procedures shall also be observed
for pieces of concrete or masonry and other debris or subterranean structures,
such as masonry walls, piers or foundations, that may be encountered during
excavation.
         (j)   This installation procedure shall be followed when gravel
formations containing loose boulders greater than approximately eight inches
(200 mm) in diameter are encountered.
         (k)   In all cases, the specified clearances should be maintained
between the bottom of all pipe and appurtenances and any part, projection or
point of rock, boulder or stone of sufficient size and placement that, in the
opinion of the owner, could cause a fulcrum point or pointload.
      (2)   Alignment and grade
         (a)   The water mains shall be laid and maintained to lines and grades
established by the plans and specifications, with fittings, valves, tapped or
boosed outlets, and hydrants at the required locations unless otherwise
approved by the owner.
         (b)   Valve-operating stems shall be oriented in a manner to allow
proper operation.
         (c)   Hydrants shall be installed plumb.
         (d)   Prior investigation:
            1.   Prior to excavation, investigation shall be made to the extent
necessary to determine the location of existing underground structures and
conflicts.
            2.   Care shall be exercised by the contractor during excavation to
avoid damage to existing structures.
            3.   Special precautions shall be taken when the water main being
installed is adjacent to a facility that is cathodically protected.
         (e)   When obstructions that are not shown on the plans are
encountered during the progress of work and interfere so that an alteration of
the plans is required, the owner will alter the plans, or order a deviation in
line and grade, or arrange for removal, relocation or reconstruction of the
obstructions.
         (f)   When crossing existing pipelines or other structures, alignment
and grade shall be adjusted as necessary, with the approval of owner, to
provide clearance as required by federal, state and local regulations or as
deemed necessary by the owner to prevent future damage or contamination of
either structure.
         (g)   Should the trench pass over a sewer or other previous
excavation, the trench bottom shall be sufficiently compacted to provide
support equal to that of the native soil or to conform to other regulatory
requirements in a manner that will prevent damage to the existing installation.
         (h)   Blasting:
            1.   Blasting for excavation shall be permitted only after securing
the approval of the owner, who will establish the hours of blasting; and
            2.   The blasting procedure, including protection of persons and
property, shall be in strict accordance with federal, state and local
regulations.
         (i)   Trees, shrubs, fences and all other property and surface
structures shall be protected during construction, unless their removal is
shown in the plans and specifications or approved by the owner.
         (j)   Any cutting of tree roots or branches shall be done only as
approved by the owner.
         (k)   Temporary support, adequate protection and maintenance of all
underground and surface structures, drains, sewers and other obstructions
encountered in the progress of the work shall be provided in accordance with
specifications or applicable regulations.
         (l)   All properties that have been disturbed shall be restored as
nearly as practical to their original condition.
         (m)   Unsuitable subgrade material.
            1.   When the subgrade is found to include ashes, cinders, refuse
organic material, or other unsuitable material, the material shall be removed
to a minimum of at least six inches (150 mm) below the bottom of the pipe or to
the depth ordered by the owner.
            2.   The removed material shall be replaced, under the direction of
the owner, with clean, stable backfill material.
         (n)   When the bottom of the trench or the subgrade is found to
consist of material that is unstable to such a degree that, in the judgement of
the owner, it cannot be removed, a foundation for the pipe and/or appurtenance
shall be constructed using piling, treated timber, concrete or other materials,
at the direction of the owner.
         (o)   Appropriate traffic-control devices shall be provided in
accordance with federal, state and local regulations to regulate, warn and
guide traffic at the work site.
   (G)   Pipe installation.
      (1)   Proper implements, tools and facilities shall be provided and used
for the safe and convenient performance of the work.
         (a)   All pipe, fittings, valves and hydrants shall be lowered
carefully into the trench by means of a derrick, ropes or other suitable tools
or equipment, in such a manner as to prevent damage to water main materials and
protective coatings and lining.
         (b)   Under no circumstances shall water main materials be dropped or
dumped into the trench.
         (c)   Where practical, the trench should be dewatered prior to
installation of the pipe.
      (2)   Examination of material:
         (a)   All pipe, fittings, valves, hydrants and other appurtenances
shall be examined carefully for damage and other defects immediately before
installation; and
         (b)   Defective materials shall be marked and held for inspection by
the Waterworks Superintendent, who may prescribe corrective repairs or reject
the materials.
      (3)   Pipe ends:
         (a)   All lumps, blisters and excess coating shall be removed from the
socket and plain end of each pipe; and
         (b)   The outside of the plain end and the inside of the bell shall be
wiped clean and dry and be free from dirt, sand, grit or any foreign materials
before the pipe is laid.
      (4)   Pipe cleanliness:
         (a)   Foreign material shall be prevented from entering the pipe while
it is being placed in the trench; and
         (b)   No debris, tools, clothing or other materials shall be placed in
the pipe at any time.
      (5)   Pipe placement:
         (a)   As each length of pipe is placed in the trench, the joint shall
be assembled and the pipe brought to correct line and grade; and
         (b)   The pipe shall be secured in place with approved backfill.
      (6)   Pipe plugs:
         (a)   At times when pipe-laying is not in progress, the open ends of
pipe shall be closed by a water-tight plug or other means approved by city
waterworks;
         (b)   The plug shall be fitted with a means for venting;
         (c)   When practical, the plug shall remain in place until the trench
is pumped completely dry; and
         (d)   Care must be taken to prevent pipe flotation, should the trench
fill with water.
      (7)   For any installation requiring polyethylene encasement for ductile-
iron pipe, the encasement shall be installed in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C105/
A21.5.
      (8)   Parallel installation:
         (a)   Water main must be laid at least ten feet horizontally from any
existing or proposed sewage line.
            1.   The distance shall be measured edge to edge.
            2.   In a case where it is not practical to maintain a ten-foot
separation, the reviewing authority may allow deviation on a case-by-case
basis, if supported by data from the design engineer.
         (b)   The deviation may allow installation of the water main closer to
a sewer, provided that the water main is laid in a separate trench or on an
undisturbed earth shelf located on one side of the sewer at such an elevation
that the bottom of the water main is at least 18 inches above the top of the
sewer.
      (9)   Water mains crossing sewers shall be laid to provide a minimum
vertical distance of 18 inches between the outside of the water main and the
outside of the sewer.
         (a)   This shall be the case where the water main is either above or
below the sewer.
         (b)   At crossing, one full length of water pipe shall be located so
both joints will be as far from the sewer as possible.
         (c)   Special structural support for the water and sewer pipes may be
required.
      (10)   No water pipe shall pass through or come in contact with any part
of a sewer manhole.
      (11)   Joint assembly:
         (a)   Push-on joints shall be assembled in accordance with prevailing
city standards; and
         (b)   Mechanical joints shall be assembled in accordance with
prevailing city standards.
      (12)   Joint deflection: when it is necessary to deflect pipe from a
straight line in either the horizontal or vertical plane, the amount of joint
deflection shall not exceed that shown in Tables
4-4 and
4-5.
         (a)   The deflections listed are maximum deflections and should not be
exceeded.
         (b)   For design purposes, deflection should be limited to 80% of the
values shown.
         (c)   
Figure 4-5 illustrates the maximum offset S and approximate radius curve R,
which are listed in Tables
4-4 and
4-5.
      (13)   Cutting pipe for insertion of valves, fittings or closure pieces
shall be done in conformance with all safety recommendations of the
manufacturer of the cutting equipment.
         (a)   Cutting shall be done in a safe, workmanlike manner without
creating damage to pipe or cement-mortar lining.
         (b)   Existing gray-iron pipe may be cut using a hydraulic squeeze
cutter, abrasive pipe saw, rotary wheel cutter, guillotine pipe saw or milling
wheel saw.
      (14)   Ductile-iron pipe may be cut using an abrasive pipe saw, milling
wheel saw, rotary wheel cutter or guillotine pipe saw. Cut ends and rough edges
shall be ground smooth, and for push-on joint connections the cut end shall be
beveled by methods recommended by the manufacturer and approved by city
waterworks.
   (H)   Valves and fitting installation.
      (1)   Examination of material.
         (a)   Prior to installation, valves shall be inspected for direction
of opening, number of turns to open, freedom of operation, tightness, pressure-
containing bolting and test plug, cleanliness of valve ports and especially
seating surfaces, handling damage and cracks.
         (b)   Defective valves shall be corrected and/or held for inspection
by city waterworks.
         (c)   Valves shall be closed before being installed.
      (2)   Valve location.
         (a)   Valves in water mains shall, where practical, be located within
or immediately adjacent to the street property lines.
         (b)   Sufficient valves shall be provided on a water main so that
inconvenience and sanitary hazards will be minimized during repairs.
         (c)   Valves should be located at not more than 500-foot intervals in
commercial districts and at not more than one block or 800-foot intervals in
other districts.
         (d)   Main shall be drained through drainage branches or blowoffs.
         (e)   Drainage branches, blowoffs, air vents and appurtenances shall
be provided with control valves and shall be located and installed in
accordance with prevailing city standards.
         (f)   Drainage branches or blowoffs should not be directly connected
to any storm or sanitary sewer, submerged in any stream, or be installed in any
other manner that will permit back siphonage into the distribution system.
      (3)   Valve protection and box. A valve box or a vault shall be provided
for every valve.
         (a)   A valve box shall be provided for every valve that has no
gearing or operation mechanism or in which the gearing or operation mechanism
is fully protected with a gear case.
         (b)   The valve box shall not transmit shock or stress to the valve.
         (c)   The valve box shall be centered over the operating nut of the
valve, with the box cover flush with the surface of the finished area or such
other level as may be directed by city waterworks.
      (4)   Valve vault. A valve vault designed to prevent settling on the pipe
shall be provided for every valve that has exposed gearing or operating
mechanisms.
         (a)   The operating nut shall be readily accessible for operation
through the opening in the valve vault, which shall be set flush with the
surface of the finished pavement or such other level as may be specified.
         (b)   Vaults shall be constructed to permit minor valve repairs and to
protect the valve and pipe from impact where they pass through the vault walls.
         (c)   In no case shall valves be used to bring misaligned pipe into
alignment during installation.
         (d)   Pipe shall be supported in such a manner as to prevent stress on
the valve.
      (5)   Plugs and caps. All dead ends on new mains shall be closed with
plugs or caps that are suitably restrained to prevent blowing off under test
pressure. If a blowoff-valve precedes a plug or cap, it too shall be equipped
with suitable blowoff facilities.
      (6)   Resilient wedge valves. All valves for the distribution system
shall be resilient wedge valves. The series, type and make must be approved by
city waterworks before installation.
   (I)   Hydrant installation.
      (1)   Prior to installation. Prior to installation, all hydrants shall be
inspected for direction of opening, nozzle threading, operating-nut and cap-nut
dimensions, tightness of pressure-containing bolting, cleanliness of inlet
elbow, handling damage and cracks. Defective hydrants shall be corrected or
held for inspection by the city waterworks.
      (2)   Placement. All hydrants shall stand plumb and shall have their
nozzles parallel with or at right angles to the curb, except that hydrants
shall be installed such that hydrants having two-hose nozzles 90 degrees apart
shall be set with each nozzle facing the curb at an angle of 45 degrees.
         (a)   Hydrants shall be set to the established grade, with the center
line of the lowest nozzle at least 12 inches above the ground or as directed by
the city waterworks.
         (b)   Traffic model hydrants shall be installed such that the break
away flange shall be installed not less than two inches, nor more than six
inches, above established grade.
         (c)   Each hydrant shall be connected to the main with a six-inch or
larger diameter branch controlled by an independent valve, unless otherwise
specified by city waterworks.
         (d)   The valve shall be restrained to allow shutoff when the hydrant
is to be removed.
      (3)   Dry barrel hydrant. When a dry barrel hydrant is set in soil that
is pervious, drainage shall be provided at the base of the hydrant by placing
coarse gravel or crushed stone mixed with coarse sand from the bottom of the
trench to at least six inches above the drain-port opening in the hydrant and
to a distance of one foot around the elbow.
         (a)   Where ground water rises above the drain port or when the
hydrant is located within eight feet of a sanitary sewer main, the drain port
shall be plugged and water pumped from the hydrant when freezing may occur.
         (b)   When a dry barrel hydrant with an open drain port is set in clay
or other impervious soil, a drainage pit two feet by two feet by two feet shall
be excavated below each hydrant.
         (c)   The drainage pit shall be filled with coarse gravel or crushed
stone mixed with coarse sand, under and around the elbow of the hydrant and to
a level of six inches above the drain port.
         (d)   At no time should hydrant drains be connected to sanitary sewers
or storm drains.
      (4)   Location and spacing of hydrants.
         (a)   Hydrants should be provided at each street intersection and at
intermediate points between intersections as recommended by the state insurance
service and city waterworks. Hydrant spacing may range from 350 to 600 feet
depending on the area being served.
         (b)   Hydrant leads:
            1.   Hydrant leads shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter;
and
            2.   Auxiliary valves shall be installed in all hydrant leads.
         (c)   Fire hydrants should have a bottom valve size of at least five
inches, 1 four and one-half-inch pumper nozzle and 2 two and one-half-inch
nozzles.
         (d)   In the case of hydrants that are intended to fail at the
groundline joint upon vehicle impact (traffic hydrant), specific care must be
taken to provide adequate soil resistance to avoid transmitting shock movement
to the lower barrel and inlet connection. In loose or poor load-bearing soil,
this may be accomplished by pouring a concrete collar approximately six inches
thick to a diameter of two feet at or near the groundline around the hydrant
barrel.
         (e)   Whether over or under water, surface water crossings present
special problems. The reviewing authority should be consulted before final
plans are prepared.
            1.   Above-water crossings. The pipe shall be adequately supported
and anchored, protected from damage and freezing, and accessible for repair or
replacement.
            2.   Under-water crossings. Minimum cover of two feet shall be
provided over the pipe. When crossing water courses which are greater than 15
feet in width, the following shall be provided:
               a.   The pipe shall be of special construction, having flexible
watertight joints;
               b.   Valves shall be provided at both ends of the water
crossings so that the section can be isolated for testing or repair; and
               c.   The valve shall be easily accessible and not subject to
flooding, and the valve closest to the supply source shall be in a manhole.
Permanent taps shall be made on each side of the valve within the manhole to
allow insertion of a small meter to determine leakage and for sampling
purposes.
         (f)   Highway and railroad crossings:
            1.   Casing pipe.
               a.   When casing pipe is specified for highways or railroad
crossings, the project shall be completed in accordance with applicable
federal, state and local regulations.
               b.   In the case of railroad crossings, the project should also
comply with regulations established by the railroad company.
               c.   General practice permits boring for casing diameters
through 36 inches with maximum length of about 175 feet (53 m); jacking for
diameters 30 inches through 60 inches with lengths of about 200 feet (61 m);
and tunneling for pipes 48 inches and larger for longer lengths.
            2.   Carrier pipe.
               a.   The casing pipe should be six to eight inches (150-200 mm)
larger than the outside diameter of the ductile-iron pipe bells.
               b.   Carrier pipe may be pushed or pulled through the completed
casing pipe.
               c.   Chocks or skids should be placed under the carrier pipe to
ensure approximate centering within the casing pipe and to prevent damage
during installation.
               d.   Care must be exercised in order to avoid metal-to-metal
contact.
               e.   In order to avoid the transfer of earth and live loads to
the carrier pipe, the space between the carrier and casing pipes should not be
filled completely.
         (g)   Flushing:
            1.   Where dead-end mains occur, they shall be provided with a fire
hydrant if flow and pressure are sufficient, or with an approved flushing
hydrant or blow-off for flushing purposes.
               a.   Flushing devices should be sized to provide flows which
will give a velocity of at least two and one-half feet per second in the water
main being flushed.
               b.   No flushing device shall be directly connected to any
sewer.
            2.   Foreign material left in the pipelines during installation
often results in a valve or hydrant seat leaking during pressure tests.
               a.   Every effort should be made to keep lines clean during
installation.
               b.   Thorough flushing is recommended prior to a pressure test;
flushing should be accomplished by partially opening and closing valves and
hydrants several times under expected line pressure, with flow velocities
adequate to flush foreign material out of the valves and hydrants.
            3.   Chambers, pits or manholes containing valves, blow-offs,
meters or other appurtenances to a distribution system, shall not be connected
directly to any storm drain or sanitary sewer, nor shall blow-offs or air
relief valves be connected directly to any sewer. The chambers or pits shall be
drained to the surface of the ground where they are not subject to flooding by
surface water, or to absorption pits underground.
         (h)   Thrust restraint:
            1.   Hydrants. The bowl of each hydrant shall be well braced
against a sufficient area of un-excavated earth at the end of the trench with
stone slabs or concrete thrust blocks, or it shall be tied to the pipe with
suitable metal tie rods, clamps or restrained joints, as shown or directed by
the owner;
            2.   Fittings. All plugs, caps, tees, reducers and bends, unless
otherwise specified, shall be provided with thrust blocks or suitably
restrained joints, as shown or specified by the owner;
            3.   Design.
               a.   The design pressure is maximum pressure to which the
pipeline will be subjected, with consideration given to the vulnerability of
the pipe-soil system when the pressure is expected to be applied.
               b.   In most cases, this will be the test pressure of the pipe,
applied shortly after installation, when the pipe-soil system is normally most
vulnerable.
               c.   For buried pipelines, thrust restraint is achieved by
transferring the thrust force to the soil structure outside the pipe.
               d.   The objective of the design is to distribute the thrust
forces to the soil structure in such a manner that joint separation will not
occur in unrestrained joints.
            4.   Concrete thrust blocks.
               a.   Vertical and horizontal thrust blocks shall be made of
concrete having a compressive strength of not less than 2,000 psi (13.8 MPa)
after 28 days.
               b.   The blocks shall be placed between solid ground, and
fitting is to be anchored; the mass of the block and/or the area of bearing on
the pipe and on the ground in each instance shall be that shown or directed by
the owner.
               c.   The blocking shall, unless otherwise shown or directed, be
so located as to contain the resultant thrust force in such a way that the pipe
and fitting joints will be accessible for repair.
            5.   Restrained joints.
               a.   Restraining mechanisms for push-on or mechanical joints may
be used instead of concrete backing, if so indicated in the plans and
specifications.
               b.   Tie rods, clamps or other components of dissimilar metal
shall be protected against corrosion by hand application of a suitable coating
or by encasement of the entire assembly with eight mil (0.2 mm) loose
polyethylene film in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C105/A21.5.
         (i)   Service taps:
            1.   Tapping.
               a.   Corporation stops may be installed either before or after
pipe installation.
               b.   Generally, they are located at 10:00 or 2:00 on the
circumference of the pipe and may be screwed directly into the tapped and
treaded main without any additional appurtenances.
               c.   When more than one tap in an existing gray cast-iron pipe
is necessary to deliver the required flow, the taps should be staggered around
the circumference at least 12 inches (0.3 m) apart (not in a straight line).
               d.   Ductile-iron pipe in all classes may be directly tapped
with standard corporation stops; however, torque requirement for the
installation may be effectively reduced by the application of two layers of
three mil (0.1 mm) TFE tape to the male threads of the corporation stop.
               e.   Service taps on gray cast-iron and ductile-iron mains
encased in polyethylene may be accomplished by making an x-shaped cut in the
polyethylene and temporarily folding back the film or by tapping directly
through the polyethylene.
               f.   After the tap has been completed, cuts in the polyethylene
and any other areas of damage to the film shall be repaired with tape as
described in ANSI/AWWA C105/A21.5.
               g.   Service lines of dissimilar metals also shall be wrapped
with polyethylene or a suitable dielectric tape for a minimum clear distance of
three feet (0.9 m) away from the gray cast-iron or ductile-iron main.
            2.   Freezing. In this cold climate with deep frost penetration,
freezing of service lines can be a problem.
               a.   In the localities, installing corporation stops
horizontally at the 3:00 or 9:00 position on the pipe circumference will
conserve available cover over the service line or reduce the necessary depth of
bury on the main pipeline.
               b.   No service tap shall furnish water to two distance
premises.
            3.   Persons taking water must protect the service tap, lines and
main from freezing or damage.
         (j)   Hydrostatic testing; pressure and leakage test:
            1.   Test restrictions.
               a.   Test pressure shall not be less than one and one-quarter
times the working pressure at the highest point along the test section.
               b.   Test pressure shall not exceed pipe or thrust-restraint
design pressures.
               c.   The hydrostatic test shall be of at least two in duration.
               d.   Test pressure shall not vary by more than ± five psi (35
MPa or 0.35 bar) for the duration of the test.
               e.   Valves shall not be operated in either direction at
differential pressure exceeding the rated value working pressure.
               f.   Use of a test pressure greater than the rated valve
pressure can result in trapped test pressure between the gates of a double-disc
gate valve.
               g.   For tests at these pressures, the test setup should include
provision, independent of the valve, to reduce the line pressure to the rated
value pressure on completion of the test.
               h.   The valve can then be opened enough to equalize the trapped
pressure with the line pressure, or fully opened if desired.
               i.   Test pressure shall not exceed the rated pressure of the
valves when the pressure boundary of the test section includes closed,
resilient-seated gate valves or butterfly valves.
            2.   Pressurization.
               a.   After the pipe has been laid, all newly-laid pipe or any
valved section thereof shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure of at least
one and one-half times the working pressure at the point of testing.
               b.   Each valve section of pipe shall be slowly filled with
water, and the specified test pressure, based on the elevation of the lowest
point of the line or section under test and corrected to the elevation of the
test gauge, shall be applied by means of a pump connected to the pipe in a
manner satisfactory to the owner.
               c.   Valves shall not be operated in either the opening or
closing direction at differential pressures above the rated pressure.
               d.   It is good practice to allow the system to stabilize at the
test pressure before conducting the leakage test.
            3.   Air removal. Before applying the specified test pressure, air
shall be expelled completely from the pipe, valves and hydrants.
               a.   If permanent air vents are not located at all high points,
the contractor shall install corporation cocks at the ports so that the air can
be expelled as the line is filled with water.
               b.   After all the air has been expelled, the corporation cocks
shall be closed and the test pressure applied.
               c.   At the conclusion the pressure test, the corporation cocks
shall be removed and plugged or left in place at the discretion of the owner.
            4.   Examination. Any exposed pipe, fittings, valves, hydrants and
joints shall be examined carefully during the test.
               a.   Any damaged or defective pipe, fittings, valves, hydrants
or joints that are discovered following the pressure test shall be repaired or
replaced with sound material.
               b.   The test shall be repeated until it is satisfactory to the
owner.
            5.   Leakage defined. LEAKAGE shall be defined as the quantity of
water that must be supplied into the newly laid: pipe or any valved section
thereof to maintain pressure within five psi (35 MPa or 0.35 bar) or the
specified test pressure after the pipe has been filled with water and the air
has been expelled. Leakage shall not be measured by a drop in pressure in a
test section over a period of time.
            6.   Allowable leakage.
               a.   No pipe installation will be accepted if the leakage is
greater than that determined by prevailing city standards.
               b.   When testing against closed metal-seated valves, an
additional leakage per closed valve of 0.0078 gph/inch (0.0012 L/h/mm) of
nominal valve size shall be allowed.
               c.   When hydrants are in the test section, the test shall be
made against closed hydrant valves.
            7.   Acceptance of installation
               a.   Acceptance shall be determined on the basis of allowable
leakage. If any test of laid pipe discloses leakage greater than that specified
in
Table 4-6, the contractor shall, at his or her own expense, locate and make
approved repairs as necessary until the leakage is within the specified
allowance.
               b.   All visible leaks are to be repaired, regardless of the
amount of leakage.
   (J)   Backfilling.
      (1)   All backfill material shall be free from cinders, ashes, refuse,
vegetable or organic material, boulders, rocks or stones, frozen soil or other
material that, in the opinion of the owner, is unsuitable.
      (2)   From one foot (300 mm) above the top of the pipe to the subgrade of
the pavement, material containing stones up to eight inches (200 mm) in their
greatest dimension may be used, unless otherwise specified.
      (3)   When the type of backfill material is not indicated on the plans or
is not specified, the excavated material may be used, provided that the
materials consist of loam, clay, sand, gravel or other materials that, in the
opinion of the owner, are suitable for backfilling.
      (4)   If excavated material is indicated on the drawings or specified for
backfill, and there is a deficiency due to rejection of a part thereof, the
required amount of sand, gravel or other approved material shall be provided.
      (5)   For purposes of definition:
         (a)   Sand is material graded from fine to coarse, containing less
than 10%, by weight, of loam and clay, that passes a three-inch sieve with no
more than 5%, by weight, remaining on a number four sieve.
         (b)   Gravel is a reasonably uniform combination containing no
boulders or stone larger than two inches (50 mm) and not containing excessive
amounts of clay and loam.
         (c)   Crushed stone is limestone or dolomite ledge-rock material that
all passes a one-half-inch sieve with no more than 25% passing a number 100
sieve.
      (6)   When special backfill compaction procedures are required, they
shall be accomplished in accordance with project specifications or applicable
federal, state and local regulations.
      (7)   Partial backfilling during testing:
         (a)   Newly installed pipelines are normally tested after backfilling;
and
         (b)   When unusual conditions require that pressure and leakage
testing be accomplished before completion of backfilling or with pipe joints
accessible for examination, sufficient backfill material shall be placed over
the pipe and soil, should be backfilled prior to testing.
      (8)   If polyethylene encasement is used, any damage that occurs to the
water main shall be repaired in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C105/A21.5.
   (K)   Disinfection.
      (1)   A newly installed main shall be disinfected in accordance with
ANSI/AWWA C651. Following chlorination, the main should be flushed as soon as
possible (within 24 hours), since prolonged exposure to high concentrations of
chlorine might damage the asphaltic seal coating.
      (2)   All new, cleaned or repaired water mains shall be disinfected in
accordance with AWWA Standard C601. The specifications shall include detailed
procedures for the adequate flushing, disinfection and microbiological testing
of all water mains.
   (L)   Cross-connections and interconnections.
      (1)   Cross-connections. There shall be no connection between the
distribution system and any pipes, pumps, hydrants or tanks whereby unsafe
water or other contaminating materials may be discharged or drawn into the
system.
      (2)   Cooling water. Neither stream condensate nor cooling water from
engine jackets or other heat exchange devices shall be returned to the potable
water supply.
      (3)   Interconnections. The approval of the reviewing authority shall be
obtained for interconnections between potable water supplies.
      (4)   Water services and plumbing.
         (a)   Plumbing. Water services and plumbing shall conform to relevant
local and/or state plumbing codes, or to the National Plumbing Code.
         (b)   Booster pumps. Individual booster pumps shall not be allowed for
any individual service from the public water supply mains.
   (M)   Cross-connections, control, operation; definitions. For the purpose of
this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AIR GAP. An unobstructed vertical distance through atmosphere between the
discharge end of a pipeline supplied from a public water supply, and the
overflow rim of the receiving portion of the customer water system.
      BACKFLOW. The flow of contaminants into the public water supply
distribution system from a source other than the public water supply.
      BOOSTER PUMP. A pump installed on a pipeline to increase water pressure
and flow.
      CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical arrangement, including cross-connection
control devices not in working order, whereby a public water supply
distribution system is directly connected, either continuously or
intermittently, with any secondary source of supply, sewer, drain, conduit,
pool, piping, storage, reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which
contains, or may contain, and is capable of imparting to the public water
supply, contaminants, contaminated water, sewage or liquid of unknown or unsafe
quality.
      CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE. Any device or assembly, approved by the
board for construction on or installation in water supply piping, which is
capable of preventing contaminants from entering the public water supply
distribution system.
      CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTOR. A person who has successfully
completed training in testing and inspection of cross-connection control
devices at an agency or school acceptable to the commissioner, who has
registered with the commissioner, and who has not been notified by the
commissioner that his or her work is unacceptable under this rule (327 I.A.C.
8-10).
      CROSS-CONNECTION HAZARD. Any customer facility which, because of the
nature and extent of activities on the premises or the materials used in
connection with the activities or stored on the premises, would present an
immediate or potential danger or health hazard to customers of the public water
supply should backflow occur.
      CUSTOMER. Any person who receives water from a public water supply.
      CUSTOMER SERVICE LINE. The pipeline from the public water supply to the
first tap, fixture, receptacle or other point of customer water use; or the
first secondary source of supply, or pipeline branch in a building.
      CUSTOMER WATER SYSTEM. All piping, fixtures and appurtenances, including
secondary sources of supply, used by a customer to convey water on his or her
premises.
      DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. A device or assembly composed of two tightly
closing shut-off valves surrounding two independently acting check valves, with
four test cocks, one upstream of the four valves and one between each of the
four check and shut-off valves.
      DOWNSTREAM. The direction of the flow when only the public water supply
is supplying water through the customer water system and backflow is not
occurring.
      PRESSURE TYPE VACUUM BREAKER. A chamber fitted with a spring-loaded air
inlet, for relieving a vacuum or partial vacuum in a pipeline.
      PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. Any wells, reservoirs, lakes, rivers, source of
supply, pumps, mains, pipes, facilities and structures through which water is
obtained, treated as may be required, and supplied through a water distribution
system to at least 100 persons per day for drinking, domestic or other
purposes, including state-owned facilities.
      REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTER. A device composed of two
tightly closing shut-off valves surrounding two independently acting pressure
reducing check valves which in turn surround an automatic pressure differential
relief valve, and four test cocks, one upstream of the five valves and one
between each of the four check and shut-off valves. The check valves
effectively divide the structure into three chambers; pressure is reduced in
each downstream chamber allowing the pressure differential relief valve to vent
the center chamber to atmosphere should either or both check valves
malfunction.
      SECONDARY SOURCE OF SUPPLY. Any well, spring, cistern, lake, stream or
other water source, intake structure, pumps, piping, treatment units, tanks and
appurtenances used, either continuously or intermittently, to supply water
other than that from the public water supply to the customer, including tanks
used to store water to be used only for firefighting, even though the water
contained therein is supplied from the public water supply.
      SUPPLIER OF WATER. Any person who owns and/or operates a public water
supply.
      UPSTREAM. The direction of flow opposite to downstream.
   (N)   Cross-connection and booster pump.
      (1)   Cross-connection prohibited, bypass.
         (a)   No customer shall cause or allow the construction or maintenance
of a cross-connection.
         (b)   Piping installed to bypass a cross-connection control device
constitutes a cross-connection unless the bypass piping is also fitted with a
similar cross-connection control device.
      (2)   Booster pump connection. No customer shall cause or allow the
installation or maintenance of a booster pump in a customer waste system unless
a control device is installed to prevent operation of the booster pump when
pressure to pump suction drops below 20 pounds per square inch gauge.
   (O)   Cross-connection hazards, notice, exemptions.
      (1)   Customers constructing a new facility which is designated a cross-
connection hazard by division (O)(3) below, or making modifications to the
customer service line or installing a higher capacity meter at an existing
facility which is designated a cross-connection hazard by division (O)(3)
below, shall construct an air gap or install a reduced pressure principle
backflow preventer, in accordance with 327 I.A.C. 8-10-7(a) or 327 I.A.C. 8-10-
7(b)(1), on the customer service line to the facility so designated.
      (2)   Customers having an existing facility which is designated a cross-
connection hazard by division (O)(3) below, and which have a cross-connection
which results in a contaminant being introduced into the public water supply or
to the customer water system, shall immediately construct an air gap or install
a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer in accordance with 327 I.A.C.
8-10-7(a) or 327 I.A.C. 8-10-7(b)(1), on the customer service line to the
facility so designated.
      (3)   The following customer facilities are designated cross-connection
hazards:
         (a)   Aircraft and missile manufacturing plants;
         (b)   Automotive plants including those plants which manufacture
motorcycles, automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, construction and
agricultural equipment;
         (c)   Beverage bottling plants, including dairies and breweries;
         (d)   Canneries, packing houses and reduction plants;
         (e)   Car washes;
         (f)   Chemical, biological and radiological laboratories including
those in high schools, trade schools, colleges, universities and research
institutions;
         (g)   Hospitals, clinics, medical buildings, autopsy facilities,
morgues, other medical facilities and mortuaries;
         (h)   Metal and plastic manufacturing, fabrication, cleaning, plating
and processing facilities;
         (i)   Plants manufacturing paper and paper products;
         (j)   Plants manufacturing, refining, compounding or processing
fertilizer, film, herbicides, natural or synthetic rubber, pesticides,
petroleum or petroleum products, pharmaceuticals, radiological materials or any
chemical which could be a contaminant to the public water supply;
         (k)   Commercial facilities that use herbicides, pesticides,
fertilizers or any chemical which could be a contaminant to the public water
supply;
         (l)   Plants processing, blending or refining animal, vegetable or
mineral oils;
         (m)   Commercial laundries and dye works, excluding coin-operated
laundromats;
         (n)   Sewage, storm water and industrial waste treatment plants and
pumping stations;
         (o)   Waterfront facilities including piers, docks, marinas and
shipyards;
         (p)   Industrial facilities which recycle water; and
         (q)   Restricted or classified facilities (federal government defense
or military installations), or other facilities closed to the supplier of water
or to the commissioner.
      (4)   Customer facilities not designated as a cross-connection hazard by
division (O)(3) above may be designated as a cross-connection hazard by written
notification from the commissioner to the customer and to his or her suppliers.
The notice shall specify the nature of the customer activity which necessitates
designation of his or her facility as a cross-connection hazard, and the date
by which the customer shall install a cross-connection control device as
specified in accordance with 327 I.A.C. 8-10-7(a) or 327 I.A.C. 8-10-7(b)(1),
on the customer service line to the facility so designated.
      (5)   The Commissioner may issue a letter exempting a customer from the
requirements of division (O)(1) above if the customer can show to the
satisfaction of the commissioner that the activities taking place at his or her
facility, and the materials used in connection with these activities or stored
on the premises, cannot endanger the health of customers of the public water
supply should backflow occur.
         (a)   An exemption shall remain valid for no more than three years
following the date of issuance.
         (b)   If the commissioner finds that the customer facility has become
a cross-connection hazard, the commissioner will void the exemption and so
notify the customer.
   (P)   Secondary source of installation of supply; installation of air gaps
or other devices.
      (1)   Customers shall construct an air gap or install a reduced pressure
principle backflow preventer or a double check valve assembly in accordance
with 327 I.A.C. 8-10-7(a) or 327 I.A.C. 8-10-7(b) (1) or (2), on the customer
service line to:
         (a)   Tanks used only to store water from the public water supply for
fire fighting which are constructed to maintain the bacteriological quality of
the water, in compliance with 327 I.A.C. 8-2; or
         (b)   Secondary sources of supply which use well water as the only
private source of supply and which are constructed to maintain the
bacteriological quality of the water, in compliance with 327 I.A.C. 8-2, and
which produce, without treatment, water meeting the drinking water quality
standards enumerated in 327 I.A.C. 8-2.
      (2)   No secondary source of supply of a type, other than those
enumerated in 327 I.A.C. 8-10-5(a), shall be physically connected on the
customer service line to or into the facility.
   (Q)   Construction and installation requirements for air gaps or other
devices.
      (1)   The discharge pipe of an air gap shall terminate a minimum of two
pipe diameters of the discharge pipe or six inches, whichever is lesser, above
the maximum recorded flood level or above the flood level rim of the receiving
vessel, whichever is higher. Only those models of double check valve
assemblies, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers, and pressure type
vacuum breakers which have been listed by the Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California (March
9,1987) or are acceptable under the rules of the State Plumbing Commission (860
I.A.C.) or are an equivalent shall be installed.
      (2)   Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be installed
horizontally, with no plug or additional piping affixed to the pressure
differential relief valve port, and with the pressure deferential relief valve
port a minimum of 12 inches above floor level.
         (a)   Additionally, the device must be installed at a location where
any leakage from the pressure differential relief port will be noticed, and
that allows access to the device for maintenance and testing from floor level,
and that will not subject the device to flooding, excessive heat or freezing.
         (b)   All double check valve assemblies shall be installed
horizontally at a location that allows access to the device for maintenance and
testing from floor level and that will not subject the device to excessive heat
or freezing.
         (c)   Pressure type vacuum breakers shall be installed as near as
possible to the irrigation facility, at a location that allows access to the
device for maintenance and testing from floor or ground level and that will not
subject the device to flooding, excessive heat or freezing. Additionally, the
device must be installed with its center line or datum point a minimum of 12
inches above:
            1.   Floor level;
            2.   The highest downstream shut-off valve; and
            3.   The highest downstream overflow rim or discharge point.
   (R)   Inspection of devices, time limits.
      (1)   The customer shall install and maintain in working order at all
times any cross-connection control device or booster pump control device
required by this rule (327 I.A.C. 8-10).
      (2)   To ensure that each cross-connection control device required by
this rule is in working order, the customer shall have each device inspected or
tested by a cross-connection control device inspector at the time of
construction or installation, and at the following intervals, in the following
manner.
         (a)   Air gaps shall be inspected at intervals not exceeding one year
to ensure that they continue to meet the requirements of 327 I.A.C. 8-10-7(a)
(1).
         (b)   Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be tested
at intervals not exceeding six months to ensure that both check valves are
drip-tight under all pressure differentials, and that the pressure differential
relief valve will maintain pressure in the center chamber at least two pounds
per square inch below that of the inlet chamber.
         (c)   Double check valve assemblies shall be tested at intervals not
exceeding one year to ensure that both check valves are drip-tight under all
pressure differentials.
      (3)   The customer shall permit access to his or her premises by the
inspector, supplier of water, and representatives of the commissioner, at
reasonable times, and upon presentation of identification, for inspection of
the customer water system or testing of cross-connection control devices
installed in accordance with this rule (327 I.A.C. 8-10).
      (4)   Those customers granted an exemption in accordance with 327 I.A.C.
8-10-4(e) shall report to the commissioner and to the supplier of water any
proposed change in process, plumbing or in materials used or stored at the
exempted facility at least 14 days prior to making the change. The failure to
do so shall void the exemption.
   (S)   Inspectors, reports of inspection or test.
      (1)   All cross-connection control device inspectors shall be registered
with the commissioner and shall submit reports of all inspections as required
by division (S)(2) below.
      (2)   The inspector shall report to the supplier of water, the customer,
and, if requested, the commissioner, on a form provided by the commissioner,
the results of inspections or tests conducted pursuant to 327 I.A.C. 8-10-8(b)
on air gaps, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers, double check valve
assemblies and pressure type vacuum breakers. Reports shall be submitted to the
supplier of water and to the customer within 30 days of the inspection or test.
   (T)   Non-compliance; retention of reports; access.
      (1)   Because cross-connections may cause disease through transmission of
contaminants via the public water supply, the commission shall order the
supplier of water to remove the customer service meter or otherwise sever the
public water supply connection to any customer which the commissioner finds or
has reason to believe is in violation of any provision of this rule (327 I.A.C.
8-10).
      (2)   The supplier of water shall retain the six most recent reports of
tests conducted on reduced pressure principle backflow preventers and pressure
type vacuum breakers installed in accordance with this rule (327 I.A.C. 8-10).
      (3)   If so requested, the supplier of water shall permit access to these
files at reasonable times and upon presentation of identification by
representatives of the Board.
   (U)   List of registered inspectors; list of approved devices.
      (1)   The commissioner will maintain a list of cross-connection control
device inspectors registered in the state and will make the list available to
the public on request:
      (2)   The commissioner will maintain a listing of cross-connection
control devices from the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research of the University of Southern California, and will make this list
available upon request.
      (3)   City waterworks maintains a list of approved backflow prevention
assemblies, available upon request.
Table 4-2: Maximum Stacking Heights for Ductile-Iron Pipe* and Suggested
Trench Widths at the Top of the Pipe
Nominal Pipe Size (Inches) Number of Tiers Trench Width
Table 4-2: Maximum Stacking Heights for Ductile-Iron Pipe* and Suggested
Trench Widths at the Top of the Pipe
Nominal Pipe Size (Inches) Number of Tiers Trench Width
3                          18              -
4                          16              28 (0.71)
6                          13              30 (0.76)
8                          11              32 (0.81)
10                         10              34 (0.86)
12                         9               36 (0.91)
14                         8               38 (0.97)
16                         7               40 (1.02)
18                         6               42 (1.07)
20                         6               44 (1.12)
24                         5               48 (1.22)
30                         4               54 (1.37)
36                         4               60 (1.52)
42                         3               66 (1.68)
48                         3               72 (1.83)
54                         3               78 (1.98)
* For 18- or 20-foot (5.5 or 6.1 m) lengths.
 
 
Table 4-3: Mechanical-Joint Bolt Torque
Pipe Size (Inches) Bolt Size (Inches) Range of Torque
                                      ft-lb   N-m
3                  5/8                45-60   61-81
4-24               3/4                75-90   102-122
30-36              1                  100-120 136-163
42-48              1-1/4              120-150 163-203
 
Table 4-4: Maximum Joint Deflection Full-Length Pipe: Push-On Type Joint
                                                    Approximate Radius of
                          Maximum Offset-S in (m)   Curve R Produced by
Nominal Pipe Deflection                             Succession of Joints,
Size, in     Angle- 0 deg                           ft (m)
                          L=18 ft (5.5 L=20 ft (6.1 L=18 ft  L=20 ft (6.1
                          m)           m)           (5.5m)   m)
Table 4-4: Maximum Joint Deflection Full-Length Pipe: Push-On Type Joint
                                                    Approximate Radius of
                          Maximum Offset-S in (m)   Curve R Produced by
Nominal Pipe Deflection                             Succession of Joints, ft
Size, in     Angle- 0 deg                           (m)
                          L=18 ft (5.5 L=20 ft (6.1 L=18 ft   L=20 ft (6.1
                          m)           m)           (5.5m)    m)
3-12         5            19 (0.48)    21 (0.53)    205 (62)  230 (70)
14-36        3*           11 (0.28)    12 (0.30)    340 (104) 380 (116)
42-48        2*           7.5 (0.19)   8 (0.20)     510 (155) 570 (174)
54           1-1/2        5.5 (0.14)   6 (0.15)     680 (207) 760 (232)
* For 14 in. and larger push-on joints, maximum deflection angle maybe
larger than shown above. Consult the manufacturer.
 
Table 4-5: Maximum Joint Deflection Full-Length Pipe: Mechanical Joint Pipe
                                                            Approximate Radius
Nominal Pipe Size, Deflection Angle- 0 Maximum Offset-S in  of Curve R Produced
in                 deg                 (m)                  by Succession of
                                                            Joints, ft (m)
Table 4-5: Maximum Joint Deflection Full-Length Pipe: Mechanical Joint Pipe
                                                      Approximate Radius of
                          Maximum Offset-S in (m)     Curve R Produced by
Nominal Pipe Deflection                               Succession of Joints,
Size, in     Angle- 0 deg                             ft (m)
                          L*=18 ft (5.5 L*=20 ft (6.1 L*=18 ft  L*=20 ft (6.1
                          m)            m)            (5.5m)    m)
3-4          8-18         31 (0.79)     35 (0.89)     125 (38)  140 (43)
6            7-07         27 (0.69)     30 (0.76)     145 (44)  160 (49)
8-12         5-21         20 (0.51)     22 (0.56)     195 (59)  220 (67)
14-16        3-35         13.5 (0.34)   15(0.38)      285 (87)  320 (98)
18-20        3-00         11 (0.28)     12 (0.30)     340 (104) 380 (116)
24-30        2-23         9 (0.23)      10 (0.25)     450 (137) 500 (152)
36           2-05         8 (0.20)      9 (0.23)      500 (152) 550 (167)
42-48        2-00         7.5 (0.19)    8 (0.20)      510 (155) 570 (174)
* See
Figure 4-5
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/657f5231589e4e9d72860ce82f8ac4b2aa23298e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1649.jpg]
 
Table 4-6. Allowable Leakage Per 1,000 ft (305 m) of Pipeline*
- gph
Avg Test Pressure psl (bar) Nominal Pipe Diameter- in.
Table 4-6. Allowable Leakage Per 1,000 ft (305 m) of Pipeline* - gph
Avg Test
Pressure Nominal Pipe Diameter- in.
psl
(bar)
         3    4    6    8    10   12   14   16   18   20   24   30   36   42   48   54
450 (31) 0.43 0.64 0.95 1.27 1.59 1.91 2.23 2.55 2.87 3.18 3.82 4.78 5.73 5.69 7.64 8.60
400 (28) 0.45 0.60 0.90 1.20 1.50 1.50 2.10 2.40 2.70 3.00 3.60 4.50 5.41 6.31 7.21 8.11
350 (24) 0.42 0.56 0.84 1.12 1.40 1.69 1.97 2.25 2.53 2.81 3.37 4.21 5.06 5.90 6.74 7.58
300 (21) 0.39 0.52 0.78 1.04 1.30 1.56 1.82 2.08 2.34 2.60 3.12 3.90 4.68 5.46 6.24 7.02
275 (19) 0.37 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.24 1.49 1.74 1.99 2.24 2.49 2.99 3.73 4.48 5.23 5.98 6.72
250 (17) 0.36 0.47 0.71 0.96 1.19 1.42 1.66 1.90 2.14 2.37 2.85 3.56 4.27 4.99 5.70 6.41
225 (16) 0.34 0.45 0.68 0.90 1.13 135  1.58 1.80 2.03 2.25 2.70 3.38 4.05 4.73 5.41 6.03
200 (14) 0.32 0.43 0.64 0.85 1.06 1.28 1.48 1.70 1.91 2.12 2.55 3.19 3.82 4.46 5.09 5.73
175 (12) 0.30 0.40 0.59 0.80 0.93 1.19 1.39 1.59 1.79 1.98 2.38 2.96 3.58 4.17 4.77 5.36
150 (10) 0.28 0.37 0.55 0.74 0.92 1.10 1.29 1.47 1.66 1.84 2.21 2.76 3.31 3.86 4.41 4.97
125 (9)  0.25 0.34 0.50 0.67 0.84 1.01 1.18 1.34 1.51 1.68 2.01 2.52 3.02 3.53 4.03 4.63
100 (7)  0.23 0.30 0.45 0.60 0.75 0.90 1.06 1.20 1.35 1.50 1.80 2.25 2.70 3.15 3.60 4.05
*If the pipeline under test contains sections of various diameters, the allowable
leakage will be the sum of the computed leakage for each size. To obtain leakage in
liters/hour, multiply the values in the table by 3.785.
 
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.045 SEWERAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. If, in the judgement of the Commission, a public
sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall install a
complete sanitary sewer system approved by the State Board of Health, including
a lateral connection for each lot in the subdivision.
   (B)   Sanitary sewerage system requirements. Where provided, sanitary
sewerage facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewerage systems, and
shall be installed to serve each lot to grades and sizes required by approving
officials and agencies. Sanitary sewerage facilities (including the
installation of laterals in the right-of-way) shall be subject to the
specifications, rules, regulations and guidelines of the Health Officer,
participating jurisdiction and appropriate state agency.
   (C)   Individual disposal system requirements. If public sewer facilities
are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot
areas shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 156 of this code and any ordinance of any participating jurisdiction,
establishing lot areas for individual sewerage disposal systems. In this case,
sanitary wastes may be disposed of by one of the following methods:
      (1)   The subdivision may be provided with a complete sanitary sewer
system, including a lateral connection for each lot and a package treatment
plant, all meeting the approval of the State Board of Health and the State
Stream Pollution Control Board; or
      (2)   The subdivider may provide a private sewage disposal system on
individual lots consisting of a septic tank and soil absorption field or other
approved sewage disposal system, provided the disposal systems are totaled in
accordance with the minimum standards of the State Board of Health and provided
that the soil in the subdivision will properly absorb sewage effluent as
determined by soil studies and by percolation tests performed in accordance
with the procedure prescribed by the State Board of Health or as determined by
such other comparable tests approved by the Commission. Regardless of test
used, the following shall apply:
         (a)   An adequate number of tests, as determined by the Commission, to
clearly indicate the soil conditions throughout the subdivision shall be made
by the subdivider;
         (b)   The tests shall be performed by a licensed engineer, licensed
surveyor or qualified sanitarian;
         (c)   The location of each test shall be recorded on a map of the
subdivision, located on a drawing made to scale;
         (d)   The results of the tests shall be keyed to the map and certified
as being true, correct and performed according to the required procedure by the
person performing the tests; and
         (e)   No lot shall be used as a building site on which a percolation
test indicates a time of 60 minutes or more for the water to fall one inch.
   (D)   Selected design criteria.
      (1)   Alignment. All sewers shall be laid with a straight alignment
between manholes, unless otherwise directed or approved by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Manhole location. Manholes shall be installed at the end of each
line, and at distances not greater than 400 feet for sewers 18 inches in
diameter and larger.
      (3)   Manholes. The difference in elevation between any incoming sewer
and the manhole invert shall not exceed 12 inches where required to match
crowns. The use of drop manholes requires approval by the City Engineer. The
minimum inside diameter of the manholes shall conform to those specified by the
City Engineer. Inside drop manholes will require special consideration;
however, in no case shall the minimum clear distance be less than that
indicated herein. The relationships between intersecting sewer lines shall meet
the standards required by the City Engineer. See division (D)(1) above.
      (4)   Sewerage locations. Sanitary sewers shall be located within street
or alley rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in
easements on private property, access shall be provided to all manholes. Where
sewer lines in private easements cross public street or alley rights-of-way a
manhole shall be provided in the rights-of-way where possible. Imposed loading
shall be considered at all manhole locations. Not less than six feet of cover
shall be provided over the top of pipe in street and alley rights-of-way or
three feet in all other areas.
      (5)   Cleanouts. Cleanouts will not be permitted.
      (6)   Water supply interconnections. There shall be no physical
connection between a public or private potable water supply system and a sewer
which will permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable
water system. Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or other
water supply sources and structures.
      (7)   Relation of sewers to water mains. A minimum horizontal distance of
ten feet shall be maintained between parallel water and sewer lines. At points
where sewers cross water mains, the sewer shall be constructed of cast iron
pipe or encased in concrete for a distance of ten feet in each direction from
the crossing, measured perpendicular to the water line. This will not be
required when the water line is at least two feet above the sewer line.
   (E)   Sewer mains. If a sanitary sewer system is to be installed, it may be
desirable to install sewer mains of a larger size than needed to serve the
immediate subdivision. If this occurs, the Commission may recommend that the
public utility join with the subdivider in the installation of the sewer
system.
   (F)   Specifications for parts and materials.
      (1)   The sewage main shall be constructed of Schedule 40 Plastic,
equipped with slip joints with locking gaskets. The city must approve the main
before installation.
      (2)   The sewage main fittings shall be constructed of Schedule 40
Plastic, equipped with sip joints with locking gaskets. The city must approve
the fittings before installation.
      (3)   Manholes must be constructed of cement.
      (4)   Manhole casting specifications.
         (a)   Manhole frame C.I., Neenah 24 inches (5900-0007) or like,
approved by the city before installation.
         (b)   Manhole lids C.I., Neenah 24 inches (5900-0265) or like,
approved by the city before installation.
         (c)   Risers C.I., Neenah 24 inches, bolt ii rings, approved by the
city before installation.
      (5)   Sewage tapping saddles must have at least one strap that connects
it to the main, and it must keep the sewage service line out of the main sewage
line. They must be approved by the city before installation.
      (6)   There shall not be any connects to the sewage lines without the
permission of the city prior to starting. All connects that can be made through
a manhole should be done, but the permission of the city should be obtained
prior to starting.
      (7)   Handling and storage of materials.
         (a)   All piping, fittings, manholes, castings and accessories shall
be loaded and unloaded by lifting with hoists or skidding in order to avoid
shock or damage.
         (b)   Under no circumstances shall the material be dropped.
         (c)   Pipe handled on skidways shall not be rolled or skidded against
pipe on the ground.
         (d)   Slings, hooks or pipe tongs shall be padded and used to prevent
damage to the exterior of the pipe or internal lining.
         (e)   If stored, materials should be protected against damage. Pipes
shall not be stacked higher than the limits shown in
Table 4-2. The pipes shall be stacked in alternating tiers, and the bottom tier
of pipes shall be kept off the ground. At least two rows of timbers shall be
placed between tiers and chocked. Timbers shall be large enough to prevent
contact between pipe in adjacent tiers.
         (f)   Gaskets for mechanical and push-on joints shall be stored in a
cool location out of direct sunlight. Gaskets shall be used on a first in,
first out basis. Gaskets shall not come in contact with petroleum products.
Bolts shall be handled and stored in a dry location to ensure proper use.
   (G)   Trench construction, grade and alignment.
      (1)   Trench construction.
         (a)   Trench shall be excavated to the depth, width and alignment as
specified and shall be in accordance with all regulations as they pertain to
safety.
         (b)   Trench preparation shall advance only as far as stated in the
specifications.
         (c)   Discharges due to de-watering pumping shall be to natural
drainage channels, or storm sewers.
         (d)   Excavated materials shall be placed in a manner that will not
hinder the work or endanger workers.
         (e)   Removal of pavement will be part of trench excavation.
         (f)   The amount removed shall depend on the width of the trench.
         (g)   Methods such as sawing, drilling or chipping shall be used to
ensure breakage of pavement along straight lines.
         (h)   Trench width shown in
Table 4-2 may be used as a guide.
         (i)   Trenches shall be of extra width when required for the use of
shoring or trenching equipment.
         (j)   Bell holes shall be provided at each joint.
      (2)   Alignment and grade.
         (a)   Sewer mains shall be laid and maintained to lines and grades
established by the plans.
         (b)   Prior to excavation, investigation shall be made to the extent
necessary to determine the location of existing structures.
         (c)   Care shall be exercised by the contractor to avoid damage to
existing structures.
         (d)   When obstructions that exist but are not shown on the plans are
encountered, the owner will alter the plans or order deviation in line and
grade or arrange for removal of the obstructions.
         (e)   When crossing existing pipelines or other structures, alignment
and grade shall be adjusted as necessary.
         (f)   All property shall be protected during construction, including
trees, shrubs and fences.
         (g)   Temporary support, adequate protection and maintenance shall be
provided in accordance with the specifications.
         (h)   All properties that have been disturbed shall be restored as
nearly as practical to their original condition.
         (i)   When unsuitable material is found, it shall be removed to a
minimum of at least six inches below the bottom of the pipe and replaced with
stable fill.
         (j)   When the bottom of the trench or subgrade is found to consist of
unsuitable material to the degree that it cannot be removed, a foundation shall
be constructed using piling, treated timber, concrete or other materials, at
the direction of the owner.
         (k)   Appropriate traffic-control devices shall be provided in
accordance with federal, state and local regulations.
   (H)   Pipe installation.
      (1)   Proper implements, tools and facilities shall be provided and used
for the safe and convenient performance of the work.
         (a)   All pipes, fittings or valves shall be lowered into the trench
by means of a derrick, ropes or other suitable tools or equipment with care not
to damage the items.
         (b)   Where practical, the trench should be dewatered prior to the
installation of the pipe.
      (2)   All materials shall be examined carefully for damage and other
defects. Any flawed material found shall be marked for inspection by the owner
who shall suggest repair or reject the material.
      (3)   Foreign material shall be prevented from entering the pipe during
installation.
      (4)   As each piece of pipe is laid in the trench, the joint shall be
assembled and locked into place using approved backfill.
      (5)   Any installation requiring polyethylene encasement of ductile iron
pipe shall be installed in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C105/A21.5.
      (6)   New sewer lines shall be installed at least ten feet horizontally
from any existing or proposed water line.
      (7)   Sewer lines crossing water lines shall be laid to provide a minimum
vertical distance of at least 18 inches below the existing water line.
      (8)   Sewer manholes shall be placed at all intersections of piping, or
where there is any change in the pipe diameter.
      (9)   Joint assembly:
         (a)   Push-on joints shall be assembled in accordance with prevailing
city standards; and
         (b)   Mechanical joints shall be assembled in accordance with
prevailing city standards.
      (10)   When it is necessary to deflect pipe from a straight line in
either the horizontal or vertical plane, the amount of joint deflection shall
not exceed that shown in Tables
4-4 and
4-5.
      (11)   Cutting pipe for insertion of valves, fittings or closure pieces
shall be done in conformance with all safety recommendations.
   (I)   Valve and fitting installation.
      (1)   Before installation, all material shall be inspected for operation
and defects.
      (2)   When sewer lines cross a highway or a railway, the crossing shall
be in accordance with all federal, state and local regulations as well as
compliance with the regulations set forth by the railroad company.
      (3)   All lines crossing highways or railways shall be in casing pipe.
         (a)   The casing pipe shall be six to eight inches larger than the
outside diameter of the bells of the carrier pipe.
         (b)   Carrier pipe shall be pushed or pulled through the completed
casing pipe.
         (c)   Chocks or skids shall be placed beneath the carrier pipe in
order to prevent metal-to-metal contact and to help center the carrier pipe
inside of the casing.
         (d)   To avoid transferring earth and live loads to the carrier pipe,
the space between the carrier and the casing pipes shall not be completely
filled.
      (4)   Service taps will be allowed only with the use of a saddle so that
the service line does not intrude on the inner diameter of the pipe.
   (J)   Backfilling.
      (1)   All backfill material shall be free from cinders, ashes, refuse,
vegetable or organic matter, boulders, rocks, stones, frozen soil or other
material that in the opinion of the owner is unsuitable.
      (2)   From one foot above the top of the pipe to the subgrade of the
pavement, material containing stones up to six inches in diameter in the
greatest dimension may be used.
      (3)   When the type of backfill is not specified tn the plans, the
excavated material may be used if it meets the criteria of these
specifications.
      (4)   If excavated material is used as the backfill and there is a
deficiency due to rejection of a part thereof, the required amount of sand,
gravel or other approved material shall be provided.
      (5)   Compaction shall be completed in ten-inch lifts to provide proper
compaction rates and to avoid problems that result from improper backfill
methods.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.046 SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND PEDESTRIAN ACCESS.
   (A)   Required improvements.
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated, unpaved portions
of the rights-of-way of all streets as shown in
Table 4-7 in division (B) below. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance
with city design standards.
      (2)   Six-inch vertical concrete curbs are required for all streets where
sidewalks are required by these regulations, or as required at the discretion
of the Commission.
      (3)   A grassed or landscaped median strip at least two feet wide shall
separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs. The median strip shall be improved
according to §
155.041(D) above.
   (B)   Pedestrian accesses. In order to facilitate pedestrian access from the
street to schools, parks, playgrounds or other nearby streets, the Commission
may require perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width. Those
easements shall be indicated on both the preliminary and final plats.
 
Table 4-7: Required Sidewalks
Street Type                                               Standard Width
All residential: place, local street, collector, arterial 5 feet
Nonresidential: local street, collector                   5 feet
Arterial                                                  6 feet
 
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.047 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Location.
      (1)   All utility lines, deluding but not limited to gas, electric power,
telephone and CATV cables shall be located underground throughout the
subdivision.
      (2)   Wherever existing lines are located above ground, except on public
roads and rights-of-way, they shall be removed and placed underground.
      (3)   All utility lines and other facilities existing and proposed
throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat or sketch
plan in the case of a minor subdivision.
      (4)   Underground service connections to the street property line of each
platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider's expense.
      (5)   At the discretion of the Commission, the requirements for service
connections to each lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be
retained in single ownership intended to be developed for the same primary use.
   (B)   Easements.
      (1)   Location of utility line easements shall be provided along the rear
or side lot lines as necessary for utility lines. Easements shall give access
for every lot, park or public grounds. Those easements shall be a minimum of 14
feet, and preferably 20 feet. Half of the total comes from each lot line.
Proper coordination shall be established between the subdivider and the
applicable utility companies for the coordination of utility easements with
those established in adjoining properties.
      (2)   All easements shall be indicated on preliminary and final plats.
      (3)   Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone and electric
company easements should be sought from all of the utility companies serving
the area. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to submit copies of
the approved preliminary plat to all appropriate public utility agencies.
      (4)   Whenever possible, the subdivider shall be encouraged to design for
the placement of utility lines underground, following the required standards
and specifications established by each utility company.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.048 PUBLIC USES.
   (A)   Parks, playgrounds and recreation areas.
      (1)   Recreation standards. The Commission may require that land be
reserved for parks and playgrounds or other recreational purposes in locations
designated on the Comprehensive Plan or otherwise where the reservations would
be appropriate. Each reservation shall be of suitable size, dimension,
topography and general character and shall have adequate road access for the
particular purposes envisioned by the Commission. The area shall be shown and
marked on the plat: "Reserved for Park and/or Recreational Purposes". When
recreation areas are required, the Commission may determine the number of acres
to be reserved from the
Table 4-8 in division (A)(1)(a) below, which has been prepared on the basis of
providing four acres of recreation area for every 100 dwelling units. The
Commission may refer the proposed reservations to the local government official
or agency in charge of parks and recreation for recommendation. If approved by
the official or agency, the developer shall either dedicate all the recreation
areas to the local government or shall provide in restrictive covenants of each
lot, as a condition of secondary approval.
         (a)   Recreation requirements. Recreation requirements are shown in
Table 4-8 below.
Table 4-8. Recreation Requirements
Single-Family Lots; Size of Lot Percentage of Total Land in Subdivision to be
                                Reserved for Recreation Purposes
Table 4-8. Recreation Requirements
Single-Family Lots; Size of Lot Percentage of Total Land in Subdivision to be
                                Reserved for Recreation Purposes
80,000 and greater SF           1.5%
50,000 SF                       2.5%
40,000 SF                       3.0%
35,000 SF                       3.5%
25,000 SF                       5.0%
15,000 SF                       8.0%
 
         (b)   Minimum size of park and playground reservations. In general,
land reserved for recreation purposes shall have an area of at least four
acres. When the percentages from
Table 4-8 above would create less than four acres, the Commission may require
that the recreation area be located in a suitable place on the edge of the
subdivision so that additional land may be added at such time as the adjacent
land is subdivided. In no case shall an area of less than two acres be reserved
for recreational purposes where it is impractical or impossible to secure
additional lands in order to increase its area. When recreational land in any
subdivision is not reserved, or land reserved is less than the percentage
indicated in division (A)(1) above, the provisions of division (A)(4) below
shall be applicable.
      (2)   Recreation sites. Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of
a character and location suitable for use as playground, play field or other
active recreation purposes and shall be relatively level and dry. It shall be
improved by the developer to the standards required by the Commission and the
cost of the improvements shall be included in the amount of the performance
bond. Passive recreation areas along stream valleys may be accepted by the
Commission as part of the required area if adequate flat land is also provided
for space-consuming recreation activities. A recreation site shall have a total
frontage on one or more streets of at least 200 feet, and no part of the site
shall be narrower or shallower than 200 feet except for stream-valley and other
linear passive recreation areas which shall at no point be narrower than 50
feet. The Commission may refer any subdivision intended to contain a dedicated
park to the local government official, department or agency in charge of parks
and recreation for a recommendation. All land to be reserved by dedication or
restrictive covenant to the city for park purposes shall have prior approval of
the city and shall be shown on the plat as "Reserved for Park and/or Recreation
Purposes."
      (3)   Applicability to land using average density provisions. Any
subdivision plat in which the principle of flexible zoning has been used shall
not be exempt from the provisions of this section except as to any portion of
the land area which is actually dedicated to the city for park and recreation
purposes.
      (4)   Other recreation reservations. The provisions of this section are
minimum standards. None of the preceding sections of this chapter shall be
construed as prohibiting a developer from reserving other land for recreation
purposes in addition to the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Other public uses.
      (1)   Plat to provide for public uses. Whenever a tract to be subdivided
includes a school, recreation areas (in excess of the requirements of division
(A) above) or other public uses as indicated on the Comprehensive Plan or any
portion thereof, the space shall be suitably incorporated by the applicant into
his or her sketch plan, except when an applicant uses planned unit development
procedures in which land is set aside by the developer for public use as
required under those procedures in
Chapter 156 of this code. After proper determination of its necessity by the
Commission and the appropriate city official or other public agency involved in
the acquisition and use of each such site and a determination has been made to
acquire the site by the public agency, the site shall be suitably incorporated
by the applicant into the preliminary and final plats. Upon such a
determination by the Commission, the following shall apply:
         (a)   Referral to public agency. The Commission shall refer the sketch
plan to the public agency concerned with acquisition for its consideration and
report. The Commission may propose alternate areas for the acquisition and
shall allow the public agency 30 days for reply. The public agency's
recommendation, if affirmative, shall include a map showing the boundaries and
area of the parcel to be acquired and an estimate of the time within five years
required to complete the acquisition; and
         (b)   Notice to property owner. Upon a receipt of an affirmative
report, the Commission shall notify the property owner and the Administrator
shall designate on the preliminary and final plats each area proposed to be
acquired by a public agency.
      (2)   Duration of land reservation. The acquisition of land reserved by a
public agency on the final plat shall be initiated within five years of
notification in writing from the owner that he or she intends to develop the
land. The letter of intent shall be accompanied by a site plan of the proposed
development and a tentative schedule of construction. Failure on the part of a
public agency to initiate acquisition within the prescribed five years shall
result in the removal of the "reserved" designation from the property involved
and the freeing of the property for development in accordance with these
regulations.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.049 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES.
   (A)   General. Existing features which would add value to the type of
intended development or to the city as a whole, such as trees, watercourses
falls, beaches, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be
preserved in the design of the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any
subdivision nor any change of grade of the land effected until primary approval
of the preliminary plat has been granted. All trees on the plat which are
required to be retained shall be preserved, and all trees, where needed, shall
be welled and protected against change of grade. The sketch plan shall show the
number and location of existing trees, as required by these regulations, and
shall indicate all those marked for retention and the location of all proposed
shade trees required along the street side(s) of each lot as required by these
regulations.
   (B)   Shade trees planted by developer.
      (1)   As a requirement for subdivision secondary approval, the applicant
shall plant trees on the property of the subdivision. The trees are to be
planted within five feet of the right-of-way of the street or streets within
and abutting the subdivision, or at the discretion of the Commission and the
City and/or County Engineer, within the right-of-way of the streets. One tree
shall be planted for every 40 feet of frontage along each street unless the
Commission, upon recommendation of the City and/or County Engineer, shall grant
a waiver in accordance with §
155.013 above. The waiver shall be granted only if there are existing trees
growing along such a right-of-way or on the abutting property which in the
opinion of the Commission comply with these regulations.
      (2)   New trees to be provided pursuant to these regulations shall be
approved by the City and/or County Engineer and shall be planted in accordance
with the regulations of the City and/or County Engineer. Those trees have a
minimum trunk diameter (measured 12 inches above ground level) of not less than
two inches. Only Oak, Honey Locust, Hard Maples, Ginkgo or other long-lived
shade trees acceptable to the City and/or County Engineer and to the
Commission, shall be planted.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.050 NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for
commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect
to the land shall meet the special provisions as the Commission finds
appropriate and requires.
      (2)   A nonresidential subdivision shall also be subject to all the
requirements set forth in
Chapter 156 of this code. Site plan approval and nonresidential subdivision
plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the Planning
Commission.
      (3)   A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the
requirements of these regulations as well as such additional standards required
by the Commission and shall conform to the proposed land use standards
established in the Comprehensive Plan, official map and Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code), except that where lot lines are to be established
incrementally they need not be shown on the sketch plan or the preliminary plat
for final approval.
      (4)   All shopping centers and other nonresidential subdivisions of
buildings for leasehold shall be subject to the relevant provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   In addition to the principles and standards in these regulations
which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the street, parcel and
block pattern proposed are appropriate for the uses anticipated and adequately
take into account other uses in the vicinity.
      (2)   The following principles and standards shall be observed:
         (a)   Proposed commercial or industrial parcels shall be suitable in
minimum area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated.
Proposals for incremental lot by lot subdivisions must be clear in a statement
on the preliminary plat which is satisfactory to the Commission;
         (b)   Street rights-of-way and pavement construction shall be adequate
to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated
thereupon;
         (c)   Special requirements may be imposed by the Commission upon
recommendation of the city or county, with respect to street, curb, gutter and
sidewalk design and construction;
         (d)   Special requirements may be imposed by the Commission with
respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and
storm water drainage and pre-processing of sewage. Special requirements may
also be imposed regarding the storage and disposal of toxic materials;
         (e)   Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas
from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision,
including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing onto existing or
potential residential development and provision of a permanently landscaped
buffer strip where necessary; and
         (f)   Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck
traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing
or potential residential areas.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.051 DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Design Review Committee (hereinafter
referred to as the "Review Committee") is to assure professional and technical
advice to the Administrator and the Plan Commission in the administration of
this chapter as specified elsewhere in this chapter.
   (B)   Membership. The Review Committee shall consist of one or more members
appointed by the Plan Commission.
   (C)   Territorial jurisdiction. The Review Committee shall have a
jurisdiction which is coterminous with that of the other sections of this
chapter.
   (D)   Subject matter jurisdiction. The Review Committee shall have advisory
authority only, and shall under this chapter make recommendations:
      (1)   To the Administrator and the Plan Commission as a checkpoint agency
for the review of planned developments; and
      (2)   To the Administrator regarding parking and landscaping plans filed
with applications for improvement location permits, except those for single-
family homes.
   (E)   Purpose. The purpose of the Review Committee is to provide
professional and technical advice to the Administrator and the Plan Commission
in the administration of this chapter as specified elsewhere in this chapter.
   (F)   Coordination with the Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 156 of this code) and this chapter.
      (1)   This Review Committee is established under this chapter to serve
the differing needs of these two ordinances.
      (2)   It shall be made up of the exact same members under both ordinances
in order to facilitate coordination of the decision-making with respect to the
design review aspects of these ordinances.
Table 4-9: Possible Representatives on Design Review Committee
Projects Within City Limits Projects Within County Jurisdictional Area
Table 4-9: Possible Representatives on Design Review Committee
Projects Within City Limits Projects Within County Jurisdictional Area
Street Department           Board of Zoning Appeals
Sewer/Wastewater Department County Plan Commission
Water Department            County Building Inspector
City Attorney               County Health Department
City Engineer               County Highway Department
Local Fire Department       County Building Inspector
City Building Inspector     County Drainage Board
-                           County Soil and Water Conservation District
-                           Appropriate Fire Department
-                           State Department of Natural Resources
 
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
§ 155.065 IMPROVEMENTS AND PERFORMANCE BOND.
   (A)   Completion of improvements. Before the plat is signed by the
designated officials, all applicants shall be required to complete, in
accordance with the Commission's decision and to the satisfaction of the City
and/or County Engineer, all the streets, sanitary and other public improvements
including lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivisions as
required by this chapter, specified in the approved construction plans and on
the final subdivision plat, and as approved by the Commission and to dedicate
the public improvements to the city and/or county, free and clear of all liens
and encumbrances on the property and public improvements thus dedicated.
   (B)   Performance bond.
      (1)   The Commission, in its sole discretion, may waive the requirement
that the applicant complete all public improvements prior to the approval of
the final subdivision plat or section thereof. In lieu thereof, the applicant
shall post bond securable to the city, hereinafter referred to as performance
bond, in an amount equivalent to 100% of the estimated cost of completion of
the required public improvements. This amount of bond shall be sufficient to
secure to the participating jurisdiction the satisfactory construction and
installation of the uncompleted portion of required public improvements, as
provided for in §§
155.027(G)(1)(a) and
155.028(A)(1) above.
      (2)   In lieu of such a bond, the subdivider may submit a certified check
made payable to the city in an amount equivalent to 100% of the estimated cost
of completion of the uncompleted portion of required public improvements as
provided for in §§
155.027(G)(1)(a) and
155.028(A)(1) above. Any such check shall be held by the City Clerk-Treasurer.
      (3)   In lieu of such a bond the subdivider may submit irrevocable
letters of credit on behalf of the subdivider and securable by the city in an
amount equivalent to 100% of the estimated cost of completion of the
uncompleted portion of required public improvements as provided in §§
155.027(G)(1)(a) and
155.028(A)(1) above. In the event an irrevocable letter of credit is used, it
shall be written for a maximum length of two years. The Commission, two months
prior to the expiration of the letter of credit, shall determine if the public
improvements have been accepted for maintenance by the city or other units of
government having jurisdiction over them, and if they have not been accepted
shall so notify the subdivider of the city's intent to secure the funds pledged
by such a letter of credit or, at the discretion of the Commission, to grant an
extension of the original period fixed by the Commission. No extension shall
exceed one year, and the subdivider filing with the Commission a new letter of
credit for the period so extended.
      (4)   In lieu of such a bond, the subdivider may submit a certificate of
deposit made out to either the city and the subdivider to be held by the County
Auditor or City Clerk-Treasurer, in an amount equivalent to 100% of the cost of
completion of the uncompleted portion of required public improvements as
provided for §§
155.027(G)(1)(a) and
155.028(A)(1) above. The subdivider must endorse the certificate of deposit
before submitting it to the Commission that the city may secure the funds.
      (5)   A performance bond furnished pursuant to this chapter shall comply
with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the Commission
Attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution as set forth in this
chapter. The period within which required public improvements must be completed
shall be specified by the Commission in the primary approval of the preliminary
plat and shall be incorporated into the bond and shall not in any event exceed
two years from date of secondary approval. The bond shall be approved by the
participating jurisdiction as to amount. The Commission may, upon proof of
difficulty, grant an extension of the completion date set forth in the bond for
a maximum period of one additional year, provided that the bond submitted for
this extension period meets all other requirements herein. The Commission may,
at any time during the term of the bond, accept a substitution of principal or
sureties on the bond.
   (C)   Temporary public improvements. The applicant shall build and pay for
all costs of temporary public improvements required by the Commission (or as
requested by the participating jurisdiction) and shall maintain same for the
period specified by the Commission. Prior to construction of any temporary
public facility or improvement, the subdivider shall file with the Commission a
separate suitable bond for temporary facilities. This bond shall insure that
the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained and removed
within two years.
   (D)   Cost of public improvements. All required public improvements shall be
made by the applicant at his or her expense without reimbursement by the
participating jurisdiction or any public improvement district therein, unless
sharing of expenses is agreed upon by the city (or other participating
jurisdiction, where applicable).
   (E)   Governmental units. Governmental units, to which these bond provisions
apply may file a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agencies
authorized to act in their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of
this section in lieu of the bond.
   (F)   Failure to complete public improvements. For subdivisions for which no
performance bond has been posted, if the public improvements are not completed
within the period specified by the Commission in the primary approval of the
preliminary plat, or the sketch plan in the case of a minor subdivision, the
approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where a performance
bond has been posted and the required public improvements have not been
installed within the terms of the performance bond, the participating
jurisdiction, may thereupon request the city to declare the bond to be in
default and cause all public improvements to be installed according to final
plat approval regardless of the extent of the building development at the time
the bond is declared to be in default.
   (G)   Acceptance of dedication offers. The approval by the Commission of a
subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by
the city (or other participating jurisdiction) of any street, easement or park
shown on the plat. The Commission may require the plat to be endorsed with
appropriate notes to this effect. The approval relates only to the real
property itself.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.066 INSPECTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   General procedure.
      (1)   If the participating jurisdiction finds upon inspection per §§
155.027(G)(1)(a) and
155.028(A)(1) above that any of the improvements have not been constructed in
accordance with the approved construction plans, the applicant shall be
responsible for completing the public improvements according to the plans.
      (2)   Where the cost of the public improvements is covered by a
performance bond, the applicant and the bonding company shall be severally and
jointly liable for completing the public improvements according to
specifications.
   (B)   Release or reduction of performance bond.
      (1)   Certificate of satisfactory completion. The city (or other
participating jurisdiction) shall not accept required public improvements, nor
the Commission release nor reduce a performance bond, until the city has
submitted to it a certificate stating that all required public improvements or
a pro rata part in case of a reduction have been satisfactorily completed. The
applicant's engineer or surveyor shall provide the participating jurisdiction
with detailed "as built" construction plans of the public improvements,
indicating location, dimensions, materials and other information required by
the Commission or participating jurisdiction. Upon the certification, the city
(or other participating jurisdiction) shall thereafter accept the public
improvements for maintenance in accordance with the established procedures
unless the city has reliable information as to non-compliance with the plans
and specifications.
      (2)   Reduction of performance bond. A performance bond shall be reduced
upon actual acceptance of public improvements, but only by the amount
originally estimated for the completion of the public improvements.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.067 MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The applicant shall be required to maintain all public improvements on
the individual subdivided lots and provide for snow removal on streets and
sidewalks (where required) until acceptance of the public improvements by the
city (or other participating jurisdiction).
   (B)   The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance bond with the
Commission, prior to acceptance, in an amount not to exceed 10% of the cost of
all public improvements, and in a form satisfactory to the Commission Attorney.
The maintenance bond is provided to assure the satisfactory condition of the
required public improvements for a period of three years after the date of
their acceptance by the city (or other participating jurisdiction).
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.068 ISSUANCE OF IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS.
   No improvement location permit shall be issued for the last 10% of lots in a
final subdivision plat or section thereof, or if 10% be less than two lots, for
the last two lots of a subdivision or section thereof, until all public
improvements required by the Commission for the plat with the exception of
sidewalks have been fully completed and accepted for maintenance by the
participating jurisdiction.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
SPECIFICATIONS FOR DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED
§ 155.080 SKETCH PLAN.
   Sketch plans submitted to the Commission, prepared in pen or pencil, shall
be drawn to a convenient scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch and shall
show the following information.
   (A)   Name.
      (1)   Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision;
      (2)   Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The
proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any subdivision plat previously
recorded nor for which primary approval is still in effect; and
      (3)   Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen. (This is
commonly the name by which the property is locally known.)
   (B)   Ownership.
      (1)   Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner or
agent of property, and citation of last instrument conveying title to each
parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantor,
grantee, date and land records reference;
      (2)   Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting
the property;
      (3)   A complete copy of any existing covenants on the property; and
      (4)   Name and address, including telephone number, of the professional
person(s) responsible for subdivision design, for the design of public
improvements, and for surveys.
   (C)   Description. Location of property, name of local jurisdiction, lot,
section, township, range and county, graphic scale, north arrow and date.
   (D)   Features to be included on sketch plans.
      (1)   Location of property lines, existing easements, burial grounds,
railroad rights-of-way, watercourses and existing wooded areas or trees eight
inches or more in diameter, measured four feet above ground level (see §
155.049(A) above); location, width and names of all existing or platted streets
or other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract, names of
adjacent and adjoining property owners (from the latest assessment rolls);
      (2)   Location, sizes, elevations and slopes of existing sewers, water
mains, culverts and other underground structures within the tract and
immediately adjacent thereto; existing permanent buildings and utility poles on
or immediately adjacent to the site and utility rights-of-way;
      (3)   Approximate topography, at the same scale as the sketch plan
(normally showing two-foot contour intervals but the Administrator may require
one-foot intervals on very flat land or permit five-foot intervals on very
steep slopes);
      (4)   The approximate location and widths of proposed streets;
      (5)   Preliminary proposals for connection with existing water supply and
sanitary sewage systems, or alternative means of providing water supply and
sanitary waste treatment and disposal; preliminary provisions for collecting
and discharging surface water drainage;
      (6)   The approximate location, dimensions and areas of all proposed or
existing lots;
      (7)   The approximate location, dimensions and areas of all parcels of
land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public use,
or for the use of property owners in the proposed subdivision;
      (8)   The location of temporary stakes to enable the Commission to find
and appraise features of the sketch plan in the field;
      (9)   Whenever the sketch plan covers only a part of an applicant's
contiguous holdings, the applicant shall submit, at a scale no more than 200
feet to the inch, a sketch in pen or pencil of the proposed subdivision area,
together with its proposed street system, and an indication of the probable
future street and drainage system of the remaining portion of the tract;
      (10)   A vicinity map showing streets and other general development of
the surrounding area. The sketch plan shall show all school and improvement
district lines with the zones properly designated; and
      (11)   If the subdivision is classified as a minor subdivision, the
sketch plan must also comply with §
155.081 below.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.081 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Preparation.
      (1)   The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor
at a convenient scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, may be prepared in
pen or pencil and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more than one
sheet is used and shall be of a size as is acceptable for filing in the office
of the County Recorder, but shall not be larger than 24 by 36 inches.
      (2)   It should be noted that the map prepared for the preliminary plat
may also be used for the final subdivision plat and, therefore, should be drawn
on tracing cloth, or reproducible Mylar; preparation in pencil will make
required changes and additions easier.
   (B)   Features. The preliminary plat shall show the following.
      (1)   The location of the property with respect to surrounding property
and streets, the names of all adjoining property owners of record or the names
of adjoining developments; and the names of adjoining streets;
      (2)   The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property
to be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot;
      (3)   The location of existing streets, easements, water bodies, streams
and other pertinent features such as swamps, flood plains, railroads,
buildings, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, bridges and topography (at the
same scale as the sketch plan);
      (4)   The location and width of all existing and proposed streets, alleys
and other public ways and their rights-of-way and of easements and building
set-back lines, utilities, fire hydrants and storm water facilities;
      (5)   The locations, dimensions, bearings and areas of all proposed or
existing lots;
      (6)   The location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set
aside for park or playground use, or other public or private reservation, with
designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication
or reservation;
      (7)   The name and address of the owner or owners of land to be
subdivided, the name and address of the subdivider if other than the owner, and
the name and registration number of the land surveyor;
      (8)   The date of the map, approximate true north point, scale and title
of the subdivision;
      (9)   Sufficient data acceptable to the City and/or County Engineer to
determine readily the location, bearing and length of all lines, and to
reproduce the lines upon the ground; also, the location of all proposed
monuments;
      (10)   Names of the subdivision and all new streets subject to approval
by the Commission;
      (11)   Indication of the use of any lot (single-family, two-family,
multi-family, townhouse) and ail uses other than residential proposed by the
subdivider;
      (12)   Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical
order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name
shall be numbered consecutively throughout the several additions;
      (13)   All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered. Outlots
shall be lettered in alphabetical order. If blocks are numbered or lettered,
outlots shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each block; and
      (14)   All information required on the sketch plan should also be shown
on the preliminary plat, and the following notation shall also be shown:
         (a)   Explanation of drainage easements, if any;
         (b)   Explanation of site easements, if any;
         (c)   Explanation of site reservations, if any; and
         (d)   Endorsement of owner, as follows:
            Owner _____________________________   Date _____________
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.082 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   (A)   General construction plans shall be prepared for all required
improvements.
   (B)   Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than one inch equals 50
feet, and map sheets shall be of the same size as the preliminary plat.
   (C)   The following shall be shown:
      (1)   Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations lines of all
streets. Where a proposed street intersects an existing street or streets, the
elevation along the center line of the existing street or streets within 100
feet of the intersection, shall be shown. Radii of all curves, lengths of
tangents and central angles on all streets;
      (2)   The Commission may require, where steep slopes exist, that cross-
sections of all proposed streets at 100-foot stations shall be shown at five
points as follows: On a line at right angles to the center line of the street,
and all elevation points shall be the center line of the street, each property
line, and points, 25 feet inside each property line;
      (3)   Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross-section
of street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements,
servitude, rights-of-way, manholes and catch basins; the location of street
trees, street lighting standards, and street signs; the location, size and
invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, storm water drains
and fire hydrants, showing connection to any existing or proposed utility
systems; and exact location and size of all water, gas or other underground
utilities or structures;
      (4)   Location, size, elevation and other appropriate description of any
existing facilities or utilities, including, but not limited to, existing
streets, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water bodies, streams, flood
plains and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings,
features noted on the official map or Comprehensive Plan at the point of
connection to proposed facilities and utilities within the subdivision, and
each tree with a diameter of eight inches or more, measured four feet above
ground level. The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of
the survey and the approximate high- and low-water elevations of the lakes or
streams. All elevations shall be referred to the U.S.G.S. datum plane. If the
subdivision borders a lake, river or stream, the distances and bearings of a
meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the ordinary high
water mark of the waterways;
      (5)   Topography at the same scale as the sketch plan with a contour
interval of two feet, referred to the sea-level datum. All data provided shall
be the latest applicable U.S. Coast and Geodesic Survey data and should be so
noted on the plat;
      (6)   All specifications and references required by the city's
construction standards and specifications, including a site-grading plan for
the entire subdivision;
      (7)   Notation of approval as follows:
         Owner _______________________________________   Date ______________
         Commission President __________________________   Date ______________
      (8)   Title, name, address, signature, registration number and seal of
the professional engineer and/or surveyor and date, including revision dates.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.083 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT.
   (A)   Preparation.
      (1)   The final subdivision plat shall be presented in India Ink on
tracing cloth or reproducible Mylar at an appropriate scale and contain the
same information as on the preliminary plat, except for any changes or
additions required by the conditions of primary approval.
      (2)   The preliminary plat may be used as the final subdivision plat if
it meets these requirements and is revised in accordance with the Commission's
approval. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor
licensed by the state.
   (B)   Features. All revision dates must be shown as well as the following:
      (1)   Notation of any self-imposed restrictions, and locations of any
building lines proposed to be established in this manner, if required by the
Commission in accordance with these regulations; and
      (2)   All monuments erected, corners and other points established in the
field shall be shown and noted in their places on the plat. The legend for
metal monuments shall indicate the kind of metal, the diameter, length and
weight per lineal foot of the monuments.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 155.084 EXEMPT DIVISIONS.
   The information that must be provided in order for the decision to be made
that a division is an exempt division varies as follows according to the
definition for each type of exempt division in §
156.004 below. Thus:
   (A)   For type "A" divisions a metes and bounds legal description of the
exempt division and the land from which it is being divided must be provided;
   (B)   For type "B" divisions the old legal and new legal descriptions must
be provided;
   (C)   For type "C" divisions a copy of the court decree showing by legal
description how the land is to be divided must be provided;
   (D)   For type "D" divisions a legal description and plot plan showing the
parcel and the location of the street right-of-way must be provided;
   (E)   For type "E" divisions a legal description and plot plan showing the
tract to be divided and the tract(s) to be added to must be provided; and
   (F)   For type "F" divisions a plat of the cemetery showing the layout of
the private drives, parking areas and size of burial lots must be provided.
(Ord. 615, passed 2-22-1999)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Title
   
156.002   Interpretation, conflict
   
156.003   Saving provision
   
156.004   Definitions
   
156.005   Exclusion
   
156.006   Effective date
   
156.007   Amendments
   
156.008   Designation of the Administrator
   
156.009   Design Review Committee
Districts
   
156.020   Kinds of districts; establishment
   
156.021   Boundaries; in general
   
156.022   Boundaries; flood plains
   
156.023   Subdivisions, cluster developments, planned developments,
condominiums and zero lot line developments
Authorized Uses
   
156.035   Primary uses
   
156.036   Accessory uses
   
156.037   Nonconforming uses and structures
   
156.038   (Reserved)
   
156.039   Home occupations
   
156.040   Adult businesses
   
156.041   Table of District Usage
Use Requirements and Restrictions
   
156.055   Height of structures
   
156.056   Maximum lot coverage; residential uses
   
156.057   Minimum lot size; residential uses
   
156.058   Minimum lot size; other uses
   
156.059   Standard setbacks
   
156.060   Setbacks; accessory buildings in residential districts
   
156.061   Setbacks; vision clearance at intersections
   
156.062   Setbacks; uses allowed as special uses
   
156.063   Buffering; minimum distances from residential districts
   
156.064   Buffering; fences and walls
   
156.065   Buffering; screen planting abutting residential use
   
156.066   Entrances and exits
   
156.067   Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements
   
156.068   Signs
   
156.069   Restrictions along streams
   
156.070   Water pollution
   
156.071   Noise, odors, radioactivity, electrical disturbances and vibration
   
156.072   Requirements and development standards for special uses
   
156.073   Minimum square footage
Planned Developments
   
156.085   Statement of purpose and intent
   
156.086   Classifications of planned development
   
156.087   Organization of proposals
   
156.088   Filing procedure
   
156.089   Preliminary plan hearing
   
156.090   Approval of final detailed plan
   
156.091   Covenants and maintenance
   
156.092   Recording
   
156.093   Permit
   
156.094   Construction
   
156.095   Extensions, abandonment and expiration
   
156.096   Rules of procedure
   
156.097   Limitation of rezoning
Board of Zoning Appeals, Variances, Special Uses and Appeals
   
156.110   Board of Zoning Appeals; membership and jurisdiction
   
156.111   Rules and procedures
   
156.112   Special uses
   
156.113   Variances
   
156.114   Appeals
Improvement Location Permits
   
156.125   Applicability
   
156.126   Certificate of occupancy
   
156.127   Site plan and construction drawings
   
156.128   Industrial uses; certificate of compliance
   
156.129   Manufactured homes and home subdivisions (R5)
   
156.130   Manufactured homes; Type II and III as temporary use in R1, R2 and R3
Districts
   
156.131   Other temporary facilities
   
156.132   Records
   
156.133   Issuance; denial
   
156.134   Appeals
   
156.135   Expiration
 
   
156.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Forms and certificates
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall hereafter be known and cited as the Zoning Ordinance
of Ligonier, Indiana.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.002 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT.
   (A)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application the provisions
of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   Conflict with public and private provisions.
      (1)   Public provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere
with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or
other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these
regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other provision of
law, those provisions which are more restrictive or impose higher standards
shall control.
      (2)   Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate
any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided
that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or regulations than the easement, covenant or other private
agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
Where the provisions of the easement, covenant or private agreement or
restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or higher standards
than the requirements of these regulations, or the determinations of the
Commission in enforcing these regulations, and those private provisions are not
inconsistent with these regulations or determinations thereunder, then the
private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations and
determinations made thereunder. Private provisions can only be enforced
privately unless a public agency such as the City Council or City Advisory Plan
Commission has been made a party to those agreements.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.003 SAVING PROVISION.
   This chapter shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under,
or by virtue of, prior existing zoning ordinance, or as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting
the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of
the city under any section or provision existing at the time of the effective
date of this chapter, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any
person, firm or corporation, by lawful action of the city except as shall be
expressly provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.004 DEFINITIONS.
   The purpose of this section is to explain the meaning of terms used in the
text of this chapter as well as additional terms which Planning Commissions and
Zoning Administrators often have to deal with. By making these meanings
explicit, the risk of arbitrary administrative decisions through lack of
understanding is reduced and fair administration of the chapter is enhanced.
Those preparing applications will have their tasks made easier if the purposes,
processes and requirements of the ordinance are more clearly comprehended.
Common understanding of the chapter will facilitate adherence to it and the
accomplishment of the stated public purposes for all parties affected by the
chapter in regard to adherence to its provisions and to the means of amending
its text and maps. Definitions that are illustrated in bold capital letters are
those which are explicitly used by the zoning and/or subdivision ordinances.
Definitions that are illustrated in bold letters are those which may be used by
developers, planners or other similar planning documents. For definitions
included in this chapter and for additional definitions not specifically
defined in this chapter refer to: The New Illustrated Book Of Development
Definitions, by Harvey S. Moskowitz and Carl G. Lindbloom, Center For Urban
Policy Research, Rutgers University, 1995 edition; Black's Law Dictionary,
sixth edition, West Publishing Company, 1990; Model Zoning Ordinance & Model
County Subdivision Regulations, HERPICC, Purdue University, 1988; and
Replacement Zoning Ordnance and Replacement Subdivision Control Ordinance,
Noble County, Indiana, 1987; "Indiana Code, 1993 Edition," West Publishing
Company, 1993; The Job of the Practicing Planner, Albert Solnit, American
Planning Association, 1988.
   ABANDONMENT. The relinquishing of property, or a cessation of the use of the
property, by the owner or lessee without any intention of transferring rights
to the property to another owner or of resuming the use of the property.
   ABUT. To physically touch or border upon; or to share a common property line
but not overlap.
   ACCESS. A way to means of approach to provide vehicular or pedestrian
physical entrance to a property.
   ACCESS POINT. The location of the intersection of a highway or street or
driveway with the highway.
   ACCESS ROAD. See STREET, LOCAL.
   ACCESSORY APARTMENT. A dwelling unit that has been added onto, or created
within, a single-family house which is also occupied full-time by its owner.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate structure, the use of which is incidental
to that of the dominant use of the primary building or land and has a
reasonable relationship to the primary use. Refers to a building or use which:
      (1)   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
      (2)   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building
or principal use served;
      (3)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants
in the principal building or principal use served; and
      (4)   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or
principal use served with the exception of accessory off-street parking
facilities located elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the principal
building or principal use served.
   ACCESSORY USE. A subordinate use which is incidental to that of the primary
use, has a reasonable relationship to the primary use, and is a use other than
human occupancy.
   ACRE. A unit of land measurement equal to 43,560 square feet (4,047 square
meters).
   Acreage. Any tract or parcel of land that has not been subdivided and
platted.
   ACTUAL CONSTRUCTION. See §
156.037 below.
   ADAPTIVE REUSE. The development of a new use for an older building or for a
building originally designed for a special or specific purpose.
   ADDITION. A structure added onto the original structure sometime after the
completion of the original; or an extension or increase in floor area or height
of a building or structure.
   ADJOINING LAND. See ABUT.
   ADJOINING LOT. See ABUT.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The officer appointed by and/or delegated the responsibility
for the administration of these regulations by the Planning Commission.
   ADULT ARCADE. A commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors
or similar machines, or other image producing machines, for viewing by five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, in which a substantial portion (30%
or more) of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material
which meets the definition of harmful to minors and/or represents or displays
sexual conduct.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial
establishment which has a substantial 30% or more portion of its revenues,
floor space or advertising associated with the sale or rental for any form of
consideration, of any one or more of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records,
CD-ROMS or other forms of visual or audio representations which meet the
definition of harmful to minors and/or represent or display sexual conduct;
and/or
      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with sexual conduct.
   ADULT BUSINESS. Any and all businesses classified as an adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult arcade, adult cabaret, adult
motion picture theater, adult theater, nude model studio, sexual encounter
center and/or peep show facility, as defined in this chapter.
   ADULT CABARET. Nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment which
features live performances which meets the definition of harmful to minors and/
or represents or displays sexual conduct to a clientele who pays any form of
consideration for the live performance.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An indoor or outdoor facility with a capacity
of six or more persons, where for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are
shown, and in which a substantial portion (30% or more) of the total revenue
derived from or substantial time (30% or more) is devoted to the showing of
material which meets the definition of harmful to minors and/or represents or
displays sexual conduct, for observation by patrons.
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment,
either indoor or outdoor, which for any form of consideration, regularly
features live performances, of which a substantial portion (30% or more) of the
total presentation time is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
activities which meet the definition of harmful to minors, and/or represent or
display sexual conduct.
   ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION. A Planning Commission serving a single local
government jurisdiction established as defined under the I.C. 36-7-1-2 (1983),
as amended. The City Plan Commission is an ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION.
   AESTHETIC. The perception of artistic elements or elements in the natural or
created environment that are pleasing to the eye.
   AGENCY. See PUBLIC AGENCY.
   Agricultural Building. Any building or structure used for agricultural
purposes. See FARM STRUCTURE.
   Agricultural Pollution. The liquid, gaseous and solid wastes from all types
of farming, including runoff from pesticides, fertilizers and feedlots, erosion
and dust from plowing, animal manure and carcasses, and crop residue and
debris.
   AGRICULTURE. The primary use of a tract of land for growing or production of
field crops, livestock and livestock products, including the harvesting,
storage and primary processing of agricultural products produced.
   Air Contaminant. Dust, fumes, gas, mist, smoke, vapors, odors or other air
impurities or any combination of them.
   Air Contaminant Source. Any source of emission of air contaminants, whether
derived from privately or publicly owned or operated sources.
   AIR POLLUTION. The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or more air
contaminants in sufficient quantities and of characteristics and duration to be
injurious to human, plant or animal life or property; or that unreasonably
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property.
   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance or vehicle designed for flight within or outside
of the earth's atmosphere.
   AIRPORT. Any area that is used or is intended to be used for taking off or
landing of aircraft and any appurtenant areas that are used or intended to be
used for accessory buildings or uses, including open spaces, taxiways and tie-
down areas.
   AISLE. The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces.
   ALLEY. A public or private way primarily designed to serve as a secondary
access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on
some other street and which is not intended for general traffic circulation.
   Amenity. A natural or created feature that enhances the aesthetic quality,
visual appeal or makes more attractive or satisfying a particular property,
place or area.
   AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA). A1990 federal law designed to bring
disabled Americans into the economic mainstream by providing them equal access
to jobs, transportation, public facilities and services.
   AMUSEMENT AND RECREATION SERVICES. Establishments engaged in providing
entertainment for a fee and including such activities as dance halls; studios;
theatrical productions; bands, orchestras and other musical entertainment;
bowling alleys and billiard and pool establishments; commercial facilities,
such as arenas, rings, rinks and racetracks; public golf courses; coin operated
devices; amusement parks; membership sports and health clubs; amusement and
bathing beaches; swimming pools; riding academies; carnival operations;
expositions; game parlors; and horse shows.
   Animal Hospital. See VETERINARY HOSPITAL.
   ANIMAL KENNEL. Any establishment in which animals are housed, boarded,
groomed, bred, trained or sold, for commercial gain. See KENNEL.
   ANNEXATION. The incorporation of a land area into an existing community with
a resulting change in the boundaries of the community.
   ANTENNA. A device used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic
waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based structures.
   APARTMENT BUILDING. A structure containing three or more dwelling units. See
DWELLING, MUFTI-FAMILY.
   Apartment Complex. Two or more apartment buildings clustered together.
   Apartment House. A structure containing three or more dwelling units. See
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.
   APARTMENT UNIT. One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities
comprising an independent, self-contained dwelling unit in a building
containing three or more dwelling units. See APARTMENT HOUSE and DWELLING,
MULTI-FAMILY.
   APPLICANT. The fee simple owner of land who makes application to the City
Plan Commission for action by the commission thereby affecting that land.
   APPROVED PLAN. A plan that has been granted final approval by the
appropriate approving authority.
   ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE. A prominent or significant part of element of a
building, structure or site.
   ARTERIAL (STREET OR ROAD). Either a primary arterial or secondary arterial
as defined in this section.
   ARTIFICIAL LAKE. A human-made body of water which has a surface area of six
acres or larger.
   ARTIFICIAL POND. A human-made body of water which has a surface area of less
than six acres.
   AUCTION HOUSE. A building or structure where art, furniture and other goods
are offered for sale to persons who bid on the object in competition with each
other.
   AUTOMATIC CAR WASH. A building, or a portion of a building, where
automobiles are washed by mechanical devices either automatically or
semiautomatically.
   AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR, MAJOR. A building, structure or facility where
automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers, recreational vehicles or buses are
repaired and where the repair includes, but is not limited to, engine
rebuilding, reconditioning or replacement; collision repair including body,
frame or fender straightening, repair or replacement; and overall painting of
vehicles.
   AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR, MINOR. A building, structure or facility used for
incidental automotive repair, replacement of parts and motor service to motor
vehicles, but not including any operation specifically included under
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR, MAJOR.
   AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION. A facility where gasoline or automotive fuel
(stored only in underground tanks), kerosene, lubricating oil or grease (for
operation of automotive vehicles) are offered for sale to the public on the
premises, along with minor accessories and service for automotive vehicles (but
not including major automotive repairs) and the washing of vehicles where no
chair conveyor, blower or steam cleaning device is employed.
   Automotive Wrecking Yard. Any place where two or more non-operable motor
vehicles or where vehicular parts are stored in the open and are not being
restored to operation; any land, structure or building used for storing,
cutting up, compressing or otherwise disposing of motor vehicles or parts
including the commercial salvaging of any other goods, articles or merchandise.
See JUNK YARD.
   AVERAGE DENSITY PROCEDURES. Procedures for calculating overall density of
development prescribed in this chapter as a flexible tool for maintaining
overall densities while allowing individual lot sizes to vary from the minimum
size allowed in a given zone.
   Awning. A temporary roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a
building and overhangs the public way.
   BAR. Premises used primarily for the sale or dispensing of liquor by the
drink for on-site consumption and where food may be available for consumption
on the premises as accessory to the principal use.
   Base Map. A map having sufficient points of reference, such as a state,
county or municipal boundary lines, streets, easements and other selected
physical features, to allow the plotting of other data.
   BASEMENT. A space wholly or partly underground and having more than one-half
of its height, measuring from the floor to its ceiling, below the average
adjoining finished grade. If the finished floor level directly above a BASEMENT
is more than six feet above finished grade at any point, the space is a story.
   Bed and Breakfast Inns.  Establishments ranging from four to 20 guest rooms
and may include restaurants that cater to the general public as well as to
overnight guests. These are treated as commercial enterprises. See also INN.
   BED AND BREAKFASTS; HOMESTAY. A small establishment, having one to three
bedrooms for rent to transients as an activity which is subordinate and
incidental to the main residential use of the building. These are generally
treated as tourist homes.
   BEDROOM. A private room planned and intended for sleeping, separated from
other rooms, by a door, and accessible to a bathroom without crossing another
bedroom.
   BILLBOARD. See OFF-PREMISE SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.
   Blighted Area. An area in which normal development and occupancy are
undesirable or impossible because of:
      (1)   Lack of development;
      (2)   Cessation of growth;
      (3)   Deterioration of improvements;
      (4)   Character of occupancy;
      (5)   Age;
      (6)   Obsolescence;
      (7)   Substandard buildings; or
      (8)   Other factors that impair values or prevent a normal use or
development of property.
(I.C. 36-7-1-3)
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets,
public lands, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of
waterways, boundary lines of municipalities or any other barrier to the
continuity of development.
   BLOCK FACE.  One side of a street between intersections.
   BOARD. The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals of the city.
   BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS. Referred to herein as the county so as not to
be confused with the Plan Commission, referred to herein as the Commission.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building, (other than a hotel or restaurant) not available
to transients, in which meals are regularly provided for compensation for at
least four inhabitants, but not more than 12 persons, who are not members of
the keeper's family, in addition to the owner occupant.
   BOARDING KENNEL. See ANIMAL KENNEL.
   BOND. Any form of security including cash deposit, surety bond, collateral,
property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the Plan
Commission. All BONDS shall be approved by the Commission wherever a bond is
required.
   BORROW PIT. An excavated area where material has been dug for use as fill at
another location.
   BUFFER LANDSCAPING. Any trees, shrubs, walls, fences, berms or related
landscaping features required under this chapter or the subdivision regulations
to be placed on private property and privately maintained or in public rights-
of-way for the purpose of buffering lots from adjacent properties, for
aesthetic purposes, and/or for creating sound barriers and/or visual privacy.
   BUILDING. Any roofed structure supported by columns or walls built for the
support, shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, animals, chattels or
moveable property of any kind (each part of such a structure that is separated
from the rest by unbroken party walls is considered to be a separate building
for the purposes of this chapter). Any structure with interior areas not
normally accessible for human use such as gas holders, oil tanks, grain
elevators, coal bunkers and other similar structures are not BUILDINGS.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A subordinate structure on the same lot as the
principal or main building or use.
   BUILDING AREA. The horizontal projected area of the buildings on a lot,
excluding open areas or terraces, unenclosed porches not more than one story
high, and architectural features that project no more than two feet.
   BUILDING CODE. That ordinance, statute or group of ordinances or statutes
establishing and controlling the standards for constructing buildings,
utilities, mechanical equipment and all forms of structures and permanent
installations.
   Building Front Line. The total length of all walls nearest to and parallel
with the front line.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average elevation
of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR.  The individual designated to enforce the provisions of
the Building Code. The construction official.
   BUILDING LINE. The line that establishes the minimum permitted distance on a
lot between the front line of a building and the street right-of-way line.
   BUILDING, NONCONFORMING.  A legally existing building that fails to comply
with the regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to the district in
which that building is located.
   BUILDING PERMIT. See IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the principal use of
the lot on which it is located, including a building that is attached to the
building in a substantial way, such as by a roof.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to the street line at a distance
regulated by the front yard requirements in this chapter.
   BULK. The size and mutual relationships of buildings and other structures,
as to the size; height; coverage; shape; location of exterior walls in relation
to lot lines, to the center line of streets, to other walls of the same
building, and to other buildings or structures, and to all open spaces relating
to the building or structure.
   Bulk Regulations.  Standards and controls that establish the maximum size of
buildings and structures on a lot and the buildable area within which the
building can be located, including coverage, setbacks, height, floor area ratio
and yard requirements.
   BULK STORAGE.  The storage of chemicals, petroleum products, grains and
other materials in structures for subsequent resale to distributors or retail
dealers or outlets and not directly to the consuming public.
   BUSINESS. The purchase, sale or exchange of goods or services, or the
maintenance for profit of offices or recreational or amusement enterprises.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  Refers to the General Business (GB) and Central Business
(CB) districts.
   BUSINESS SERVICES.  Services provided primarily to other businesses,
including but not limited to: advertising, personnel (temporary) services,
computer programming, data entry services, printing and duplication services,
building maintenance and management services, and tax return preparation
services. See PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
   CAMPGROUND. Any site, lot, field or tract of land under single ownership, or
ownership of two or more people, or publicly owned designed with facilities for
short term or temporary occupancy by recreational vehicles and other camping
equipment for recreation, education or vacation purposes but not including
mobile homes.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM.  A proposed schedule of all future projects,
listed in order of construction priority, together with cost estimates and the
anticipated means of financing each project. All major projects requiring the
expenditure of public funds, over and above the annual local government's
operating expenses, for the purchase, construction or replacement of the more
durable, longer lived physical assets for the community are included.
   CARPORT. A roofed structure providing space for the parking of motor
vehicles and enclosed on not more than three sides.
   CEMETERY.  Property used for the interning of the dead. Includes any
columbarium, crematory, mausoleum or mortuary operated in conjunction with and
on the same tract as the cemetery.
   CENSUS. An official periodic enumeration of designated geographic areas;
population, housing and other characteristics.
   Census Tract. Small areas into which large cities and adjacent areas have
been divided for statistical purposes.
   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CB). That part of the city, usually centrally
located, where historically its commercial activities are concentrated (such as
financial services, retail, government, entertainment and office), along with
traditional related residential uses. For the purpose of this chapter, CENTRAL
BUSINESS DISTRICT has been established to include the city’s core business
area.
   CENTRAL SEWERAGE SYSTEM. A community sewer system including collection and
treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a new subdivision or
an existing public sewer system. See PUBLIC SEWER.
   CENTRAL WATER SYSTEM. A community water supply system including existing and
new wells and/or surface water sources and intakes, treatment facilities and
distribution lines and includes such of the above facilities established by the
developer to serve a new subdivision.
   CERTIFICATE. The signed and attested document which indicates that a
subdivision has been granted secondary approval subsequent to proper public
notice.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.  A non-profit organization, with federal and state
tax exempt status, supported mainly by public and private donations, which are
held in trust to be used for the objects and purposes expressed in the
institution's articles, constitution, by-laws or charter for the promotion of
the welfare of others.
   CHECKPOINT AGENCY.  A public agency or organization called upon to provide
expert counsel with regard to a specific aspect of community development or
required by law to give its assent before subdivision may take place.
   CHILD-CARE CENTER. An establishment providing for the care, supervision and
protection of children. See DAY CARE CENTER.
   CHILDREN'S HOME.  A children's home, orphanage, institution or other place
maintained or conducted for receiving and caring for dependent, neglected,
disabled children or children in danger of becoming delinquent or for boarding
of children who are unattended by parents or guardian, or person in loco
parentis. See GROUP HOME.
   CHIMNEY.  A structure containing one or more flues for drawing off emissions
from stationary sources of combustion.
   CHURCH.  A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, that
by design and construction are primarily intended for conducting organized
religious services and associated accessory uses. See RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.
   CITY BUILDING CODE. See Building Code.
   CITY COUNCIL. Referred to herein as the CITY.
   City Government. The governmental body of the city empowered to adopt
planning and public policy ordinances: the city commission, herein referred to
only as the CITY.
   CITY PARK. Property owned by the city and designated for use as a park or
for recreational activities.
   CLINIC. An establishment in which patients are admitted for medical or
dental study or treatment and in which the services of at least two physicians
or dentists are provided.
   CLUSTER. A development design technique that concentrates buildings on a
part of the site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common
open space and preservation of environmentally sensitive features.
   CLUSTER HOUSING.  Developments in which dwelling units are clustered close
to their access streets or drives in order to permit aggregation of yard space
into larger common recreational spaces.
   COLLECTOR STREET. A street intended to move traffic from local streets to
secondary arterials as designated by and shown on the Thoroughfare Plan. (A
COLLECTOR STREET serves a neighborhood or large subdivision and shall if at all
possible, be designed so that no residential properties face onto it and no
driveway access to it is permitted except if the property is to be in multi-
family use for three or more dwelling units.)
   COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE.  See GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL.
   COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITY.  A recreation facility operated as a
business and open to the public for a fee, including theme parks, miniature
golf courses, driving ranges, batting cages, go-cart racing and the like. See
PRIVATE RECREATION FACILITY.
   COMMERCIAL USE. Activity involving the sale of goods or services carried out
for profit.
   COMMISSION. The City Advisory Plan Commission.
   COMMISSION ATTORNEY. The licensed attorney designated to furnish legal
assistance for the administration of this chapter or as provided by statute.
   Community Character. The image of a community or area as defined by such
factors as its built environment, natural features and open space elements,
type of housing, architectural style, infrastructure and the type and quality
of public facilities and services.
   COMPOSTING.  A controlled process of degrading organic matter by
microorganisms.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  A document which is intended to guide and direct the
pattern of physical and social development. Under state law a Comprehensive
Plan must contain at least the following elements:
      (1)   A statement of objectives for the future development of the
jurisdiction;
      (2)   A statement of policy for the land use development of the
jurisdiction; and
      (3)   A statement of policy for the development of public ways, public
places, public lands, public structures and public utilities.
(I.C. 36-7-4-501)
   Community Planning. The decision-making process in which goals and
objectives are established, existing resources and conditions analyzed,
strategies developed and legislation and policies enacted and adopted to
achieve the goals and objectives as they relate to communities.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use permitted in a particular zoning district upon
showing that the use in a specified location will comply with all the
conditions and standards for the location or operation of the use as specified
in the zoning ordinance and authorized by the approving agency.
   Conditional Use Permit. A permit issued stating that the conditional use
meets all conditions set forth in local ordinances.
   CONDOMINIUM. Real estate lawfully subjected to I.C. 32-1-6 (the Horizontal
Property Law) by the recordation of condominium instruments, in which undivided
interests in the common areas and facilities are vested in the condominium unit
owners.
   CONSTRUCTION PLAN(S). The maps or drawings showing the specific location and
design of improvements to be installed in accordance with prevailing ordinances
and statutes.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. Any retail establishment of 3,500 square feet or less
offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, newspapers and
magazines, and sandwiches and other freshly prepared foods, such as salads, for
off-site consumption.
   CORNER LOT. See LOT, CORNER.
   COUNTY. Noble County, Indiana.
   COUNTY ATTORNEY.  The licensed attorney designated by the county to furnish
legal assistance to the County.
   COUNTY AUDITOR. The Noble County official empowered to examine and settle
all accounts and demands that are chargeable against the county.
   COUNTY COMMISSIONERS. The Noble County governmental body empowered to adopt
planning and public policy ordinances. Not the County Plan Commission.
   COUNTY ENGINEER.  The licensed engineer designated by the county to furnish
engineering assistance.
   County Housing Code. See HOUSING CODE.
   COUNTY RECORDER. The Noble County official empowered to record and file land
description plats.
   COUNTRY CLUB. Land area and buildings containing golf courses, recreational
facilities, a clubhouse and customary accessory uses, open only to members and
their guests.
   COVENANT. An agreement written into deeds and other instruments promising
performance or nonperformance of certain acts of stipulating certain uses or
non-use of property.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A local street with only one combined inlet and outlet and
having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic
movement including public safety vehicles. The turnaround at the end of a dead-
end street.
   CULVERT. A drain, ditch or conduit, not incorporated in a closed system,
that carries drainage water under a driveway, roadway, railroad, pedestrian
walk or public way.
   CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION.  Job or business that is carried out by an
occupant from inside the occupant's place of residence, which is a subordinate
and incidental to the primary residential use of the property. See §
156.039 below for regulations governing home occupations. See HOME OCCUPATION.
   DAY CARE CENTER. Anyplace operated by a person, society, agency, corporation
or institution, or any other group wherein are received for pay three or more
children under 18 years of age for group care, without transfer of custody, for
less than 24 hours per day.
   DAY CARE HOME. See CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION.
   DEAD-END-STREET. A street or a portion of a street with only one vehicular
traffic outlet, and no turnaround at the terminal end.
   DEED. A legal document conveying ownership of real property.
   Deed Restriction. See RESTRICTIVE COVENANT.
   DENSITY. The number of families, individuals, dwelling units, households or
housing structures per unit of land.
   DEPARTMENT. See PUBLIC AGENCY.
   DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE.  A panel established by the city to provide
technical services, and recommendations, to the Plan Commission in the
administration of this chapter.
   DESIGN STANDARDS. A set of guidelines defining parameters to be followed in
site and/or building design and development.
   DESIGNATED OFFICIALS.  Those officials designated as required signatories
for the execution of secondary approval.
   DETACHED BUILDING. A building that has no structural connection with another
building.
   DEVELOPER. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land
included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option or
contract to purchase or other persons having enforceable proprietary interests
in such land.
   DEVELOPMENT. The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or
enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land
disturbance; and any use or extension of the use of the land.
   Development, Conventional. Development other than planned development or
cluster development.
   Development, Major. Any development not a minor development.
   Development, Minor.  Any development involving three or fewer lots and/or
involving a land area of less than five acres and not requiring the extension
of any new streets or other municipal or governmental services.
   DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
      (1)   Specific plans for the residential, commercial or industrial
development of property setting forth certain information and data required by
the Plan Commission.
      (2)   This information and data may include:
         (a)   The proposed name of the development;
         (b)   The name and address of developers;
         (c)   The location by public way, township and section;
         (d)   The legal description;
         (e)   A map including date, scale and point north, location, size,
capacity and use of all buildings and structures existing or to be placed in
the development;
         (f)   The nature and density of the operations involved in or
conducted in connection with the development;
         (g)   The site layout of the development including the location, size,
arrangement and capacity of area; to be used for vehicular access, parking,
loading and unloading;
         (h)   The name of public ways giving access to the development and
location, width and names of platted public ways, railroads, parks, utility
easements and other public open spaces;
         (i)   The layout of proposed public ways, their names and widths, and
the widths of alleys, walkways, paths, lanes and easements;
         (j)   A description of the use of adjacent property and identification
of the property;
         (k)   The location, size and arrangement of areas to be devoted to
planting lawns, trees and other site-screening activities;
         (l)   The proposals for sewer, water, gas, electricity and storm
drainage;
         (m)   The contours with spot elevations of the finished grade and the
directions of storm runoff;
         (n)   The layout of proposed lots with their numbers and dimensions;
and
         (o)   The land use density factors.
   DILIGENTLY.  Attentive and persistent; steadily applied; active; laborious;
a fair, proper and due degree of care and activity or attention as might be
expected from persons of ordinary prudence and activity.
   DISTRICT. A part, zone or geographic area within the city or its
jurisdictional area within which certain zoning or development regulations
apply.
   DOUBLE-WIDE.  Two manufactured housing components, attached side by side, to
make one complete housing unit. See MANUFACTURED HOME TYPE I, MANUFACTURED HOME
TYPE II and MANUFACTURED HOME TYPE III.
   DRIVE-IN. An establishment selling foods, frozen desserts or beverages to
consumers, the establishment being designed, intended or used for the
consumption of the items on the premises, but outside of the building in which
they were prepared.
   DRIVES, PRIVATE.  Vehicular streets and driveways, paved or unpaved, which
are wholly within private property except where they intersect with public
streets within public rights-of-way.
   DUPLEX. A building containing two single-family dwelling units totally
separate from each other by an un-pierced wall extending from ground to roof.
See DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.
   DWELLING. A building or part of a building that is used exclusively for
human habitation.
   Dwelling, Efficiency Unit. A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one
habitable room together with a kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities.
   Dwelling, Farm.  A single-family dwelling, located upon a farm.
   Dwelling, Flat.  An upper story apartment which is incidental to the
structure's primary use.
   DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT. One, two or three story multi-family structures,
generally built at a gross density of ten to 15 dwelling units per acre, with
each structure containing eight to 20 dwelling units and including related off-
street parking, open space and recreation. See DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building containing three or more dwelling units,
including units that are located one over the other.
   DWELLING, QUADRUPLED. Four attached dwellings in one building in which each
unit has two open space exposures and shares one or two walls with adjoining
unit or units. See DWELLING, MUFTI-FAMILY.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED.  A building containing one dwelling unit
and that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means and is surrounded
by open space and yards.
   Dwelling, Single-family, Semi-detached.  A one family dwelling attached to
one other one-family dwelling by a common vertical wall, with each dwelling
located on a separate lot. Single-family, semi-detached are permitted in R3 and
R4 districts. See DUPLEX for building requirements.
   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such
units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no
unit is over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by
one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls. See DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.
   DWELLING, TRIPLEX.  A building containing three dwelling units, each of
which has direct access to the outside or to a common hall. See DWELLING,
MULTI-FAMILY.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.  A building on a single lot containing two dwelling
units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an un-pierced wall
extending from ground to roof or an un-pierced ceiling and floor extending from
exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both
dwelling units. See DUPLEX.
   DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling or part of a dwelling used by one family as a
place of abode.
   EASEMENT. An authorization grant made by a property owner for use by another
of any designated part of his or her property for a clearly specified purpose
which is officially recorded.
   Efficiency Apartment.  See DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY.
   Emergency Shorter.  A facility providing temporary housing for one or more
persons who are otherwise temporarily or permanently homeless.
   EMISSION. A discharge of pollutants into the air.
   ENGINEER. See REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER.
   ENVIRONMENT.  All external conditions and influences affecting the life,
development and ultimately, the survival of an organism.
   ESCROW.  A deposit of cash in lieu of an amount required and still in force
on a performance or maintenance bond. The ESCROW funds shall be held by the
County Auditor or the Clerk-Treasurer of the city.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES.  Services and utilities needed for the health, safety
and general welfare of the community, such as underground, surface or overhead
electrical, gas, telephone, water, sewerage and other utilities and equipment
and appurtenances necessary for the systems to furnish an adequate level of
service for the area in which it is located.
   EXCEPTION. Permission to depart from the design standards. The design
standards are those outside this chapter, i.e., length of cul-de-sacs,
landscaping requirements and the like.
   Exclusionary Zoning. Development regulations that result in the exclusion of
low and moderate income and minority families from a community.
   EXEMPT DIVISIONS. See EXEMPT SUBDIVISION.
   EXEMPT DIVISIONS. Are subject only to the provisions of §§
155.029 and
155.084 of this code of ordinances, and shall be exempt from other provisions
of this chapter not specified or referred to in those sections.
   EXEMPT SUBDIVISION. The following kinds of divisions of existing parcels of
land are herein called EXEMPT DIVISIONS. These divisions are exempt from most
provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   A division of land into two or more tracts of which all tracts are
at least ten acres in size;
      (2)   A division of land for the transfer of a tract or tracts to correct
errors in an existing legal description, provided that no additional building
sites other than for accessory buildings are created by the division;
      (3)   A division of land pursuant to an allocation of land in the
settlement of a decedent's estate or a court decree for the distribution of
property;
      (4)   A division of land for federal, state or local government to
acquire street right-of-way;
      (5)   A division of land for the transfer of a tract or tracts between
adjoining lots provided that no additional principal use building sites are
created by the division. The lots so created hereunder shall have only one
principal use building site each. See PRINCIPAL USE BUILDING; and
      (6)   A division of land into cemetery plots for the purpose of burial of
corpses.
   EXISTING USE. The use of a lot or structure at the time of the enactment of
a zoning ordinance. The preexisting nonconforming use, legal at the time of the
passage of this chapter, but made nonconforming as a result of the ordinance,
which has a legal right to continue.
   EXTENDED CARE FACILITY.  A long-term facility or a distinct part of a
facility licensed or approved as a nursing home, infirmary unit of a home for
the aged, or a governmental medical institution.
   Facade. The exterior walls of a building exposed to the public view or that
wall viewed by persons not within the building.
   FACTORY. A building in which raw material and semifinished or finished
materials are converted to a different form or state or where goods are
manufactured, assembled, treated or processed. Use considered industrial.
   FAMILY.  One or more persons sharing meals and living as a single
housekeeping unit.
   FARM, CONFINEMENT FEEDING. Any operation involving the production of
livestock or fowl or related operations, indoors and outdoors, within buildings
or structures, or in paved or unpaved feed lots.
   FARM, GENERAL.  An area used for agricultural operations, including truck
gardening, forestry, the operating of a tree or plant nursery, or the
production of livestock and poultry. Note: the production of livestock and
poultry is considered confinement feeding and is permitted only in areas
specifically designated for agricultural use in §§
156.020 through
156.041 below.
   FARM, EQUIPMENT SALES OR SERVICE. Land whose primary purpose is for the sale
or repair of farm machinery.
   FARM STRUCTURE. Any building or structure used for agricultural purposes.
See AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS.
   FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT. An establishment whose principal business is the sale
of pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a ready-
to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building, in cars
on the premises, or off the premises.
   Feedlot. A confined area or structure, pen or corral, used to fatten
livestock prior to final shipment.
   FENCE. An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of
materials erected to enclose, screen or separate areas.
   FINAL PLAT. The map, drawing or plan described in this chapter of a
subdivision and any accompanying material submitted for secondary approval, and
which if approved and signed by the designated officials, may be submitted to
the County Recorder for recording.
   FLAT. See DWELLING, FLAT.
   FLEA MARKET. An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or
structure where groups or individual sellers offer goods for sale to the
public.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Those flood plains which have not been adequately
protected from flooding caused by the regulatory flood, and are shown on the
zoning map and/or on the flood hazard or floodway-flood boundary maps of the
Federal Insurance Administration or maps provided to the Commission from the
State Natural Resources Commission or by ordinance.
   FLOOD PLAIN. The area adjoining the river or stream which has been or may
hereafter be covered by flood water from the regulatory flood.
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE. The elevation of the lowest floor of a building,
including the basement, which shall be two feet above the elevation of the
regulatory flood.
   FLOODWAY.  See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The portion of the flood plain lying outside the floodway,
which is inundated by the regulatory flood.
   FOUNDATION. The supporting member of a wall or structure.
   FRONT LINE. With respect to a building, means the foundation line that is
nearest the front lot line. See BUILDING FRONT LINE.
   FRONT LOT LINE. The side of a lot abutting on a street or way. Lots shall
not be considered to front on stub ends of streets and corner lots will be
considered to front on both intersecting streets or ways. (No access for any
one lot is permitted to more than one street and that street generally will be
the one calculated to have lower traffic volumes.)
   FRONT YARD. A space extending the full width of the lot between any building
and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at the
closest point to the front lot line.
   FRONTAGE. See FRONT LOT LINE.
   FRONTAGE STREET.  Any street to be constructed by the developer or any
existing street in which development shall take place on both sides.
   FUNERAL HOME. A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial
and the display of the deceased and rituals connected therewith before burial
or cremation. See MORTUARY.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL. A structure that is accessory to a residential
building and that is used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned and
operated by the residents thereof and that is not a separate commercial
enterprise available to the general public. See ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.
   Garage, Public. Any building or structure other than a private garage which
is used for the storage, repair, rental, greasing, washing, servicing,
adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other motor vehicles.
   GARDEN APARTMENT.  See DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT.
   GENERAL INDUSTRIAL USE.  See INDUSTRIAL, GENERAL.
   GOVERNING BODY. The body of the relevant local government having the power
to adopt ordinances.
   GRADE.
      (1)   The average elevation of the land around a building; and
      (2)   The percent of rise or descent of a sloping surface.
   GREENHOUSE. A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or
other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and
humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season
plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.
   GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL. A greenhouse used to raise flowers, shrubs or plants
for sale. See GREENHOUSE, NURSERY.
   Ground Cover. Grasses or other plants and landscaping grown to keep soil
from being blown or washed away.
   GROUND FLOOR. The first floor of a building other than a cellar or basement.
   GROUND FLOOR AREA. The area of a building in square feet, as measured in a
horizontal plane at the ground level within its largest outside dimensions,
exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages and exterior
stairways.
   GROUP HOME. A single self-contained children's home established and operated
by the County Department of Welfare, licensed private child placement agency or
licensed incorporated group established for the purpose of receiving and caring
for up to eight children who are attended by house "parents." See CHILDREN'S
HOME.
   Growth Management. Techniques used by the government to control the rate,
amount, location, timing and type of development.
   HARDSHIP. A perceived difficulty with regard to one's ability to improve
land stemming from the application of the development standards of this
chapter, which may or may not be subject to relief by means of variance. In and
of themselves, self-imposed situations and claims based on a perceived
reduction of or restriction on economic gain shall not be considered HARDSHIPS.
Self-imposed situations include: the purchase of land with actual or
constructive knowledge that, for reasons other than physical characteristics of
the property, the development standards herein will inhibit the desired
improvement; any improvement initiated in violation of the standards of this
chapter; any result of land division requiring variance from the development
standards of this chapter in order to render that site buildable.
   HARMFUL TO MINORS. As defined in I.C. 35-49-2-2 (and as it may from time to
time be amended). A matter or performance is harmful to minors for purposes of
this chapter, if:
      (1)   It describes or represents, in any form, nudity, sexual conduct,
sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse;
      (2)   Considered as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest in sex
of minors;
      (3)   It is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult
community as a whole with respect to what is suitable matter for or performance
before minors; and
      (4)   Considered as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value for minors.
   HEALTH CARE FACILITY.  A facility or institution, whether public or private,
principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance and the
treatment of mental or physical conditions.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT and HEALTH OFFICER. The agency and person designated to
administer and enforce the health regulations.
   HEAVY INDUSTRIAL. See INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY.
   HEIGHT. With respect to a building, means the vertical distance from the lot
ground level to the highest point, for a flat roof; to the deck line, for a
mansard roof; and to the mean height between eaves and ridges, for a gable, hip
or gambrel roof.
   HIGH DENSITY. Those residential zoning districts in which the density is
equal to or greater than one dwelling unit per 10,000 square feet.
   HIGHWAY, LIMITED ACCESS.  A freeway, or expressway, providing for through
traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands
and other persons have no legal right to access to or from the same, except at
points and in a manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over such a highway.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT.  A district or zone designated by a local authority or
state or federal government in which the buildings, structures, appurtenances
and places are of basic and vital importance because of their association with
history; or because of their unique architectural style and scale, including
color, proportion, form and architectural detail; or because of their being a
part of or related to a square, park or area the design or general arrangement
of which should be preserved and/or developed according to a fixed plan based
on cultural, historical or architectural motives or purposes.
   HISTORIC PRESERVATION. The protection, rehabilitation and restoration of
districts, sites, buildings, structures and artifacts significant in history,
architecture, archaeology or culture. See ADAPTIVE REUSE.
   HISTORIC SITE.  See HISTORIC DISTRICT.
   HOME OCCUPATION.  Any activity earned out for gain by a resident and
conducted as a customary, incidental and accessory use in the resident's
dwelling. See CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION.
   Home Professional Office. A home occupation consisting of the office of a
practitioner of a recognized profession.
   HOME SERVICE. The use of a home for a business or professional service which
does not involve treating or attending a person or animal, except consultation
or treatment by members of the medical and dental professions, beauticians,
seamstresses and day care homes, which is established entirely within a
dwelling unit and is conducted only by members of the family residing in the
same dwelling unit. See CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION.
   HOSPITAL. An institution providing primary health services and medical or
surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness,
disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions and
including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities, such as
laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, medical offices and
staff residences.
   HOTEL. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general
public and providing additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms,
entertainment and recreational facilities.
   HOUSING CODE. The ordinance controlling the continuing safety and
healthfulness of buildings for human occupation.
   HOUSING UNIT. A room or group of rooms used by one or more individuals
living separately from others in the structure, with direct access to the
outside or to a public hall and containing separate bathroom and kitchen
facilities. See DWELLING UNIT.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. See SIGN, ILLUMINATED.
   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.  A document issued under §§
156.125 through
156.135 of this chapter permitting a person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish
any building or structure within its jurisdiction, or cause the same to be done
or to change the use or condition of the land.
   IMPROVEMENTS. See LOT IMPROVEMENTS or PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   Incentive zoning. The granting by the approving authority of additional
development capacity in exchange for the developer's provision of a public
benefit or amenity.
   INCLUSIONARY ZONING.  Regulations that increase housing choice by
establishing requirements and providing incentives to construct housing to meet
the needs of low and moderate income households.
   INDIANA CODE. The laws of the State of Indiana as published by the Indiana
Legislative Council or The Burns Indiana Statutes Code Edition, which codifies
all state statutes for reference purposes. The latest edition with any amending
supplements must be referred to for the laws "now" in force and applicable.
Usually abbreviated as I.C. herein.
   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.  A system for the treatment and disposal
of sanitary sewage in the ground on the lot upon which the primary use is
located.
   INDUSTRIAL, GENERAL.  Industrial zones that are intended to provide areas
for fabricating, manufacturing and processing industries where the operation is
enclosed within a building and conducted in such a manner that no adverse
impacts are created or emitted outside the building. Parameters for general
industrial zones are outlined in §
156.020(K) below.
   INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY. Industrial zones that are intended to provide areas for
intense industrial uses such as fabricating, manufacturing, processing,
extraction, heavy repair and dismantling industries where outside operations
and storage areas may be required. Parameters for heavy industrial zones are
outlined in §
156.020(L) below.
   INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT. Industrial zones that are intended to provide areas in
which goods are produced for direct consumption by consumers. Parameters for
light industrial zones are outlined in §
156.020(J) below.
   INDUSTRIAL PARK. A tract of land that is planned, developed and operated as
an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses, with
consideration to transportation facilities (rail and highway), circulation,
parking, utility needs, aesthetics, environmental regulations and
compatibility.
   INFRASTRUCTURE. Facilities and services needed to sustain industry,
residential, commercial and all other land use activities.
   INN. A commercial facility for the housing and feeding of transients.
   INTERESTED PARTIES.  Those parties who are owners of properties adjoining or
adjacent to the property for which a zoning change is being sought.
   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot.
   INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY. A facility that provides, on a regular basis,
personal care, including dressing and eating and health-related care and
services, to individuals who require such assistance but who do not require the
degree of care and treatment that a hospital or skilled nursing facility
provides.
   JOINT OWNERSHIP. The equal estate interest of two or more persons. JOINT
OWNERSHIP among persons shall be construed as the same owner; "constructive
ownership".
   JUICE BAR. An adult cabaret which does not serve alcoholic beverages.
   JUNK YARD. A place, usually outdoors, where waste or discarded used property
other than organic matter, including but not limited to automobiles, farm
implements and trucks, is accumulated and is or may be salvaged for reuse or
resale.
   JURISDICTIONAL AREA. A "buffer" or "fringe" area located outside of the
municipal boundaries of the city, extending up to two miles from the corporate
boundaries, which is under the planning and zoning jurisdiction of the city.
   KENNEL. Any establishment in which dogs or domesticated animals are housed,
groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold, all for a fee or compensation. Also,
see ANIMAL KENNEL.
   LAND DIVIDER. The owner of a parcel of land to be further divided through
making an exempt division.
   LAND USE. A term used to indicate the utilization of any piece of land. The
way in which land is being used is the LAND USE. A study of the existing use of
land usually provides the basis for the formulation of a land use plan in a
community and the establishment of district boundaries in a zoning ordinance.
   Land Use Plan. The proposed or projected utilization of land. It is usually
presented in a map form, indicating areas best suited for residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural and other types of uses. The map is
supported by a written text explaining the underlying policy and the principles
upon which it is based. It is one of the major components of a community's
comprehensive plan.
   LANDFILL. A disposal site in which refuse and earth, or other suitable cover
material, are deposited and compacted in alternative layers of specified depth
in accordance with an approved plan. See SANITARY LAND FILL.
   LANDSCAPING. See BUFFER LANDSCAPING, SCREENING and SHADE TREES.
   LARGE LOT DEVELOPMENT. Low density residential development that requires a
large parcel of land (one acre or more) for each dwelling.
   LAUNDROMAT. An establishment providing washing, drying or dry-cleaning
machines on the premises for rental use to the general public.
   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL. See INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT.
   LOADING BERTH. An off-street space or berth used for the loading or
unloading of cargo, products or materials from vehicles.
   LOCAL STREET. A street intended to provide access to other streets from
individual properties and to provide right-of-way beneath it for sewer, water
and storm drainage pipes.
   LODGING HOUSE.  A building, not available to transients, in which lodgings
are regularly provided for compensation for at least three persons in addition
to the owner occupant.
   LOT. A tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or of building development.
   LOT AREA. The horizontal projected area of a lot measured from the front lot
line, to the rear lot line, to both side lot lines. Does not include public
rights-of-way.
   LOT, CORNER.  A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the
interior angle of the intersection not exceeding 135 degrees. A lot with
streets abutting more than two sides shall also be a CORNER LOT.
   LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of the lot area that is represented by the
building area.
   LOT GROUND LEVEL.
      (1)   For a building having walls abutting (that is, generally parallel
to and not more than five feet from) one street only, means the elevation of
the sidewalk at the center of the wall abutting the street;
      (2)   For a building having walls abutting more than one street, means
the average of the elevations of the sidewalk at the centers of all walls that
face streets; and
      (3)   For a building having no wall abutting a street, means the average
level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
   LOT IMPROVEMENT.  Any building, structure, work of art or other object, or
improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical
betterment of real property, or any part of the betterment. Certain LOT
IMPROVEMENTS shall be properly bonded.
   LOT LINE.  A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from another
lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
   LOT WIDTH. The distance between the side lot lines as measured on the front
building line.
   LOW DENSITY. Those residential zoning districts in which the density is
equal or less than one dwelling unit per 40,000 square feet.
   MAJOR STREET.  A collector or arterial street.
   MAJOR STREET PLAN.  See OFFICIAL MAP.
   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision.
Such a subdivision of land is regulated under the
Chapter 155 of this code.
   Mall. A shopping center where stores front both sides of a pedestrian way,
which may be open or closed.
   MANEUVERING AISLE. A maneuvering space which serves two or more parking
spaces, such as the area between two rows of parking spaces and/or the driveway
leading to those spaces.
   MANEUVERING SPACE. An open space in a parking area which: is immediately
adjacent to a parking space; is used for and/or is necessary for turning,
backing or driving forward a motor vehicle into the parking space; but is not
used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, fabricated in an off-site manufacturing
facility, which is transportable in one or more sections and is designed for
uses as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. Such a structure may or may not be built on an integral
chassis. The term MANUFACTURED HOME shall not include a "recreational vehicle."
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A parcel of land designed for the use by one or more
Type II or Type III manufactured homes which provides the infrastructure and
utilities necessary for single-family occupancy of those homes.
   MANUFACTURED HOME, TYPE I.  A single-family dwelling unit designed and built
in a factory, installed as a permanent residence, which bears a seal certifying
that it was built in compliance with the federal Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Law (1974 (U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.)) and which
also complies with the following specifications:
      (1)   Shall have been constructed after January 1,1981 and must exceed
950 square feet of occupied space per I.C. 36-7-4(d);
      (2)   Is attached to a permanent underfloor foundation of masonry
construction, which is not pierced, except for required ventilation and access;
and has a permanent perimeter enclosure constructed in accordance with the One
and Two Family Dwelling Code;
      (3)   Has wheels, axles and towing chassis removed;
      (4)   Has a pitched roof with a minimum rise of 2/12;
      (5)   Consists of two or more sections which, when joined, have a minimum
dimension of 20 feet by 47.5 feet in length or width enclosing occupied space;
and
      (6)   Have siding and roofing material of a type customarily used on
dwellings constructed on-site;
   MANUFACTURED HOME, TYPE II.  A structure, fabricated in an off-site
manufacturing facility for installation of assembly at a building site, bearing
a seal certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.) or  I.C.
22-15-4-1 (as opposed to a Type I manufactured home which is built in the
conformance with the State One and Two Family Dwelling Code). To be considered
a Type II manufactured home, the structure must:
      (1)   Contain at least 950 square feet of occupied space per dwelling
unit;
      (2)   Be a double or multiple section unit;
      (3)   Be placed on a permanent under-floor foundation installed in
conformance with the State One and Two Family Dwelling Code and according to
the manufacture's installation specifications;
      (4)   Be placed onto a permanent perimeter enclosure in conformance with
the State One and Two Family Dwelling Code;
      (5)   Have the wheels, axles and hitch mechanisms removed;
      (6)   Have siding and roofing material of a type customarily used on
dwellings constructed on-site;
      (7)   Be connected to all the utilities necessary for the occupancy of
the unit in conformance with the State One and Two Family Dwelling Code; and
      (8)   Have been constructed after January 1,1981.
   MANUFACTURED HOME, TYPE III. A structure, fabricated in an off-site
manufacturing facility, which is transportable in one or more sections and is
designed for use as a single-family dwelling. A mobile home would meet this
definition. To be considered a TYPE III MANUFACTURED HOME, the structure must:
      (1)   Be properly connected to all utilities necessary for the occupancy
of the unit; and
      (2)   Be set on piers and properly skirted, with wheels and axles
removed, in a manufactured home park.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A parcel of land platted for subdivision and
designed or intended for lots to be conveyed by deed to individual owners for
residential occupancy by manufactured homes.
   MAP. A representation of a part or the whole of the earth's surface, in
signs and symbols, on a plane surface, at an established scale, with a method
of orientation indicated.
   MARKER. A stake, pipe, rod, nail or any other object which is not intended
to be a permanent point for record purposes.
   MASTER PLAN.  See COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE. The greatest amount, percentage, of structure coverage
permitted on a lot.
   MEDIUM DENSITY.  Those residential zoning districts in which the density is
between 10,000 and 40,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
   MILE. A linear measure equal to 5,280 feet, 1,760 yards or 1.6 kilometers.
   MINERAL EXTRACTION.
      (1)   Mining or quarrying; and
      (2)   Removal of earth materials.
   MINI-MALL. A shopping center of 80,000 to 150,000 square feet on a site of
eight to 15 acres where tenants are located on both sides of a covered walkway
with direct pedestrian access to all establishments from the walkway.
   Mini-Warehouse. See SELF SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY.
   MINIMUM LOT AREA. The least amount of square footage required for a lot to
be approved for a particular use.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. The division of any previously divided parcel into not
more than three parcels or lots and requiring no new streets or easements of
access, and which division is not in conflict with any other provisions,
provided however, there shall be no more than one minor plat resulting from one
root parcel.
   MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT. The development of a tract of land, building or
structure with a variety of complementary and integrated uses, such as, but not
limited to, residential, office, manufacturing, retail, public or
entertainment, in a compact urban form.
   Mixed-Use Zoning.  Regulations that permit a combination of different uses
within a single development.
   MOBILE HOME. Any vehicle without motive power designated by the manufacturer
or maker with hitch and undercarriage to permit attachment of axles and wheels,
and so designed to permit its being used as a conveyance upon public streets
and highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed as will permit the
vehicle to be used as a single-family dwelling. See MANUFACTURED HOME, TYPE
III.
   Mobile Home Park. A subdivision containing spaces with the required
improvements and utilities for the long term placement of mobile homes. See
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.
   Mobile Home Space. A plat of land for placement of a single mobile home
within a mobile home park.
   MODEL HOME.  A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typifies the kind of units that will be constructed in the subdivision. The
dwelling units may be erected, at the discretion of the Commission, by
permitting a portion of a major subdivision involving no more than two lots to
be created according to the procedures for minor subdivisions, as set out in
these regulations.
   Modular Housing.  See MANUFACTURED HOUSING.
   MONUMENT. A physical structure which marks the location of a corner or other
survey point.
   MORTUARY.  A place where dead bodies are kept before burial or cremation.
See FUNERAL HOME.
   MOTEL. An establishment providing sleeping accommodations with a majority of
all rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing
through the main lobby of the building.
   National Ambient Air Quality Standards. Standards promulgated by the federal
Environmental Protection Agency for specified air pollutants, including
suspended particulates, sulfur dioxide, ozone, hydrocarbons and lead.
   NEIGHBORHOOD. An area of a community with characteristics that distinguish
it from other areas and that may include distinct ethnic or economic
characteristics, housing types, schools or boundaries defined by physical
barriers, such as major highways and railroads or natural features, such as
rivers.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A building, structure or use of land existing at the time
of enactment of this chapter, which does not conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is situated.
   NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION.  A subdivision whose intended use is other than
residential, such as commercial or industrial. The subdivision shall comply
with all applicable provisions.
   NONRESIDENTIAL USE.  Any use other than residential.
   NOXIOUS CHEMICALS.  Chemicals that can only be manufactured in I3 (Heavy
Industrial) districts. These include ammonia, acetylene, carbide, carbon black,
caustic soda, cellulose, fertilizer, hydrogen, nitrates, oxygen, plastics,
proxylene, potash, synthetic resins and turpentine. NOXIOUS CHEMICALS do not
include pharmaceutical products, household chemicals, cleaning products, ink,
glue, sizing, paint, lacquers, shellac, varnish, reducers and removers, tanning
materials, tar products and other similar products; these may be manufactured
in I2 (General Industrial) districts.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  A place where a person who appears in a state of nudity
is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any other form of consideration, in
which the display is characterized by an emphasis on activities which meet the
definition of harmful to minors and/or represent or display sexual conduct.
This definition shall not apply to colleges or universities who are accredited
by a nationally recognized accrediting organization.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the
showing of covered male genitals in a discernable turgid state. BUTTOCK means
either of the two rounded prominences on the human torso that are posterior to
the hips and formed by the gluteal muscles to the hips and underlying
structures.
   NURSERY.  Land or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs and plants for
sale. See GREENHOUSE.
   NURSING HOME.  See INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY, EXTENDED CARE FACILITY,
HOSPITAL.
   OCCUPIED SPACE. The total area of earth horizontally covered by the
structure, excluding garages, patios and porches and other accessory
structures.
   OFFICE BUILDING. A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a
business, profession, service, industry or government or like activity, and may
include ancillary services for office workers, such as a restaurant, coffee
shop, newspaper or candy stand, and child-care facilities.
   OFF-SITE. Any premises not located within the area of the property to be
subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for
subdivision approval.
   OFF-PREMISE SIGN.  Billboard or display used for advertising. See SIGN.
   OFF-SITE PARKING.  Parking which is provided in a separate location from the
business or use which it is intended to serve.
   OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE. A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that
is directly accessible to an access aisle and that is not located on a
dedicated street right-of-way.
   OFFICIAL MAP.  The map or maps established by the city pursuant to law
showing the existing and proposed streets, highways, parks, drainage systems
and set-back lines theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law, and
any amendments or additions thereto adopted by the city or additions thereto
resulting from the approval of subdivision plats by the Commission and the
subsequent filing of the approved plats.
   OFFICIAL MASTER PLAN. See Comprehensive Plan.
   ON-SITE. Located on the lot that is the subject of an application for
development.
   ON-SITE PARKING. Parking which is located adjacent to the use which it
serves.
   ON-STREET PARKING SPACE. A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that
is located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
   ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE, INDIANA.  The nationally recognized model
building code adopted by the State Department of Fire Prevention and Building
Safety as mandated by Public Law 360, Act of 1971, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et
seq., and, which includes those supplements and amendments promulgated by this
agency.
   OPEN SPACE. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and
set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners, occupants and their guests of
land adjoining or neighboring the open space.
   OPEN USE. The use of a lot without a building, or a use for which a
building, with a floor area no larger than 5% of the lot area, is only
incidental.
   ORDINANCE. Any legislative action, however denominated, of a local
government which has the force of law, including any amendment or repeal of any
ordinance.
   Outdoor Advertising. Billboard or display used for advertising. See SIGN.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or having
sufficient proprietary interest in the land.
   PARCEL.  A part or portion of land having a legal description formally set
forth in a conveyance together with the boundaries thereof, in order to make
possible its easy identification.
   PARK.  A tract of land, designated and used by the public for active and
passive recreation.
   PARKING AREA. A group of parking spaces, exclusive of any part of a street
or alley, designed or used for the temporary parking of motor vehicles.
   PARKING GARAGE. A garage, where parking but not repairs are available to the
public.
   PARKING SPACE. An open space exclusive of maneuvering aisle and driveway for
the parking of a motor vehicle.
   PEEP SHOW FACILITY. An establishment utilizing a device operated manually,
mechanically, magnetically, electrically or electronically which exhibits,
displays, projects or illuminates photographed, videotaped or magnetically
reproduced images, or exposes live entertainment to the viewer, in which the
viewer is in a booth or stall distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting sexual conduct or nudity for observation by patrons thereof.
   PERIMETER STREET. Any existing street to which the parcel of land to be
subdivided abuts on only one side.
   PERMANENT FOUNDATION. A structural system for transposing loads from a
structure to the earth at a depth below the established frost line without
exceeding the safe bearing capacity of the supporting soil.
   PERMANENT PERIMETER ENCLOSURE. A permanent perimeter structural system
completely enclosing the space between the floor joists of the home and the
ground, except for necessary openings, constructed in accordance with the One
and Two Family Dwelling Code.
   PERMIT. Written governmental permission issued by an authorized official,
empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law but not
allowed without authorization.
   PERSON. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, unit of
government or any other group that acts as a unit, as well as a natural person.
   PETROLEUM BULK STORAGE and DISTRIBUTION FACILITY.  A facility designed as an
above ground storage facility for petroleum or petroleum products.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT or PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A means of land regulation
which permits large scale, unified land development in a configuration and
possibly a mix of uses not otherwise permitted as-of-right under the City
Zoning Ordinance but requiring under that ordinance a special review and
approval process. See §§
156.085 through
156.097 below for requirements.
   Planner. Professional who assist in the planning and development process and
who provides technical assistances to the communities for whom they work.
   PLANNING. The process of setting development goals and policy, gathering
information, evaluating that information and developing alternatives for future
action based on previous analysis is commonly referred to as PLANNING. In a
community, PLANNING is a joint effort of the citizens, elected officials,
Planning Commission and planning staff. It consists of identifying the
physical, social and economic factors that affect an area part of the
community; defining the community's goals and objectives; and after careful
evaluation of the information and possible alternatives for the future,
selecting a course of action most likely to bring the community closer to its
desired goals.
   PLANNING COMMISSION.
      (1)   A group of citizens appointed by the mayor or chairperson of the
board of county commissioners to research, survey, analyze and make
recommendations on current and long-range land development policies, resource
management, ordinances and administrative decisions such as subdivisions plats,
shoreline permits and rezone request.
      (2)   The PLANNING COMMISSION functions as a fact-finding and advisory
board to the elected officials, but its main function is to recommend a
comprehensive plan and implement measures to be adopted by the city council or
board of county commissioners.
      (3)   I.C. 36-7-4-207 states that the membership of an Advisory Planning
Commission, such as the one in the city, in a city having a park board and city
civil engineer shall consist of nine members, as follows:
         (a)   One member appointed by the city legislative body from its
membership;
         (b)   One member appointed by the park board membership;
         (c)   One member or designated representative appointed by the city
works board; and
         (d)   The city civil engineer or a qualified assistant appointed by
the city civil engineer.
   PLAT. A map indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of land filed or
intended to be filed for record with the County Recorder.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT.  The preliminary drawing or drawings indicating the
proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted for approval.
   PRIMARY APPROVAL (PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL).  An approval (or an approval
with conditions imposed) granted to a subdivision after having determined in a
public hearing that the subdivision complies with the standards prescribed.
   PRIMARY ARTERIAL. A street intended to move through-traffic to and from the
major attractions as central business districts, regional shopping centers,
colleges and/or universities, military installations, major industrial areas
and similar traffic generators within the city or county, and/or as a route for
traffic between communities; a major intra or intercity thoroughfare as
designated by and shown on the Thoroughfare Plan.
   PRINCIPAL USE BUILDING. A building in which the principal use of the lot or
parcel on which it is located is conducted. Standards recognized by the State
Department of Fire Prevention and Building Safety shall be used to determine
whether a given structure constitutes one or more buildings in cases where
ambiguities exist.
   PRIVATE CAMP.  An area of land used or designed to be used to accommodate
groups or organized camping parties, including cabins, tents, food service and
recreational facilities.
   PRIVATE GARAGE. A garage whose principal use is to house motor vehicles for
the accommodation of related dwelling units or related business establishments.
   PRIVATE RECREATION FACILITY. A recreational facility operated by a nonprofit
organization and open only to bona fide members and guest of the nonprofit
organization. See COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITY.
   PRIVATE SCHOOL. A school other than a public school.
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. An office used by members of a recognized profession
including but not limited to accountants, architects, artists, dentists,
engineers, lawyers, musicians, physicians, surgeons or pharmacists, Realtors
and insurance agents and brokers.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. See PROFESSIONAL OFFICE.
   PUBLIC AGENCY. An agency or government department acting under the aegis of
and representing an elected or appointed council, commission or other policy-
making or advisory body of federal, state or local government for whom it is
responsible.
   PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building, structure, facility or complex used by the
general public, whether constructed by any state, county or municipal
government agency or instrumentality or any private individual, partnership,
association or corporation, including, but not limited to, assembly buildings,
such as auditoriums, libraries, public eating places, schools and theaters;
business buildings, such as offices; and factories and industrial buildings.
   PUBLIC DOMAIN. All lands owned by the government.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any drainage ditch, street, highway, parkway, sidewalk,
pedestrian-way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other
facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an
improvement for which local government responsibility is established. All those
IMPROVEMENTS shall be properly bonded.
   PUBLIC NOTICE. The advertisement of a public hearing in a paper of general
circulation, and through other media sources, indicating the time, place and
nature of the public hearing and where the application and pertinent documents
may be inspected.
   PUBLIC SEWER. Any system, other than an individual septic tank, tile field
or individual well, that is operated by a municipality, governmental agency or
a public utility for the collection, treatment and disposal of wastes.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. A closely regulated enterprise with a franchise for
providing to the public a utility service deemed necessary for the public
health, safety and welfare.
   QUADRUPLED. See DWELLING, QUADRUPLES.
   Quarry. A place where rock, ore, stone and similar materials are excavated
for sale or for off tract use.
   REAR LOT LINE. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line. In the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line
ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line.
   REAR YARD. A space extending across the full width of the lot between the
principal building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to the
building to the closest point of the rear lot line.
   RECREATION FACILITY. See PRIVATE RECREATION FACILITY or COMMERCIAL
RECREATION FACILITY.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A portable vehicular structure designed as a temporary
dwelling for travel and vacation uses which:
      (1)   Is identified on the unit by the manufacturer as a travel trailer
or a motor home; and
      (2)   Of a size that is street legal, or:
         (a)   Is a structure mounted on an automobile or truck; and
         (b)   Is designed to be used for sleeping and human habitation.
   RECYCLING. The process by which waste products are reduced to raw materials
and transformed into new and often different products.
   RECYCLING CENTER.  A lot or parcel of land, with or without buildings, upon
which used materials are separated and processed for shipment for eventual
reuse in new products.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Includes the following activities:
      (1)   Acquiring real property in blighted areas;
      (2)   Replatting and determining the proper use of real property
acquired;
      (3)   Opening, closing, relocating, widening and improving public ways;
      (4)   Relocating, constructing and improving sewers, utility services,
off-street parking facilities and levees;
      (5)   Laying out and constructing necessary public improvements,
including parks, playgrounds and other recreational facilities;
      (6)   Restricting the use of real property acquired according to law;
      (7)   Repairing and maintaining buildings acquired, if demolition of
those buildings is not considered necessary to carry out the redevelopment
plan;
      (8)   Rehabilitating real or personal property, whether or not acquired,
to carry out the redevelopment or urban renewal plan;
      (9)   Disposing of property acquired on the terms and conditions and for
the uses and purposes that best serve the interests of the units served by the
redevelopment commission;
      (10)   Making payments required or authorized by I.C. 8-23-17 (State
Department of Transportation relocation assistance); and
      (11)   Performing all acts incident to the statutory powers and duties of
a redevelopment commission. See ADAPTIVE REUSE.
(I.C. 36-7-1-18)
   REFURBISHED.  To renovate or to make fresh.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor properly licensed and registered
or through reciprocity permitted to practice in the state.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer properly licensed and
registered in the state or permitted to practice in the state through
reciprocity.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a peak discharge which can be equaled or
exceeded on the average of once in a 100-year period, as calculated by a method
and procedure which is acceptable to and approved by the State Natural
Resources Commission; this flood is equivalent to a flood having a probability
of occurrence of 1% in any given year.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION. The maximum elevation, as established by the
State Department of Natural Resources, reached by the regulatory flood at the
locations in question relevant to approval of a given subdivision under
consideration.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the flood plains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river
or stream and, is that area covered by flood waters in significant downstream
motion or covered by significant volumes of stored water during the occurrence
of the regulatory flood.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which
is used primarily for religious worship of a supreme being or beings.
   RENOVATE. To restore or make like new. See ADAPTIVE REUSE, HISTORIC
PRESERVATION.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Those districts, areas, whose primary use is for
housing. They are classified as R1, R2, R3, R4 and R5 as described under §
156.020.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and
consumed primarily within the principal building, but may also provide take-out
service and where ordering may also take place from an automobile.
   RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS. Limitations of various kinds on the usage of lots or
parcels of land within a subdivision which are proposed by the subdivider and
in the case of public health, safety and welfare by the jurisdiction, that are
recorded with the plat and run with the land.
   RESUBDIVISION. A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat
if the change affects any street layout on the map or area reserved thereon for
public use, or any lot line, or setback; or if it affects any map or plan
legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivisions.
   RETAIL SALES. Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the
general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services
incidental to the sale of those goods.
   Retail Sales, Outdoor. The display and sale of products and services
primarily outside of a building or structure, including vehicles, garden
supplies, gas, tires and motor oil, food and beverages, boats and aircraft,
farm equipment, motor homes, burial monuments, building and landscape materials
and lumber yards.
   Retail Services.  Establishments providing services or entertainment, as
opposed to products, to the general public for personal or household use,
including eating and drinking places, hotels and motels, finance, real estate
and insurance, personal service, motion pictures, amusement and recreation
services, health, educational and social services, museums and galleries.
   REZONING. A change in the designation or boundaries of the zoning ordinance.
Rezoning is a legislative act and can be legal only if enacted by the governing
body. REZONING can take two forms: a comprehensive revision or modification of
the zoning text and map; and a change in the map, such as the zoning
designation of a particular parcel or parcels. Or the change of text, which
might further or lessen the restrictions on a particular district.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, pedestrian way, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or
gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, special landscaping, or
for another special use. The usage of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY for land platting
purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on
a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining
the right-of-way and not included in the dimensions or areas of such lots or
parcels. RIGHTS-OF-WAY intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary
sewers, storm drains, screening or special landscaping, or any other use
involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by
the subdivider on whose plat the right-of-way is established.
   ROAD(S). See STREET(S).
   RURAL AREA.  A sparsely developed area, with a population density of less
than 100 persons per square mile and where the land is undeveloped or primarily
used for agricultural purposes.
   SALE or LEASE. Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or possessory
interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise, intestate
succession, or transfer, of an interest in a subdivision or part thereof,
whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease, devise,
intestate succession or other written instrument.
   SAME OWNERSHIP. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity,
partnership or unincorporated association; or ownership by different
corporations, firms, partnerships, entities or unincorporated associations, in
which a stockholder, partner or associate, or a member of his or her family
owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity or
unincorporated association.
   SANITARY LAND FILLING. A planned method of solid waste disposal in which the
solid waste is spread in thin layers, compacted to reduce its volume, and
covered with earth at the end of each working day.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. A disposal site in which refuse and earth, or other
suitable cover material, are deposited and compacted in alternative layers of
specified depth in accordance with an approved plan: See LAND FILL, DUMP.
   SANITARY SEWERS. Pipes that carry domestic or commercial sanitary sewage and
into which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. See
PUBLIC SEWER.
   SCALE. The relationship between distances on a map and actual ground
distances; the proportioned relationship of the size of parts to one another.
   SCRAP METAL YARD. A general industrial use established independent or
ancillary to and connected with another general industrial use, which is
concerned exclusively in new and salvaged metal pipes, wire, beams, angles,
rods, machinery, parts, filings, clippings and all other metal items of every
type, and which acquires those items incidental to its connection with the
other general industrial use or by purchase, consignment or bailment which
stores, grades, processes, melts, cuts, dismantles, compresses, cleans or in
any way prepares the items for reuse by the connected other general industrial
use or for sale and shipment and use in other industries or businesses
including open hearth, electric furnaces and foundry operations; such an
establishment shall not include junk yards, dumps or automobile graveyards. The
storage, dealing in or the permitting of the accumulation of significant
quantities of combustible, organic or nonmetal scrap materials such as wood,
paper, rags, garbage, bones and shattered glass on the premises of such an
establishment will disqualify it from being classified as a SCRAP METAL YARD,
and the same will be classified as either a junk yard, a sanitary fill or
refuse dump depending on the content of the accumulated matter.
   SCREENING. A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or
nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms or densely
planted vegetation. SCREENING is often used to improve the aesthetic appearance
of parking or industry.
   SECONDARY APPROVAL (FINAL PLAT APPROVAL). The stage of application for
formal approval of a final plat of a subdivision the construction of which has
been completed or substantially completed, which if approved and signed by the
designated officials may be submitted to the County Recorder for filing.
   SECONDARY ARTERIAL. A street intended to collect and distribute traffic in a
manner similar to primary arterials, except that these streets service minor
traffic generating areas such as community-commercial areas, primary and
secondary educational plants, hospitals, major recreational areas, churches and
offices, and/or designed to carry traffic from collector streets to the system
of primary arterial's as designated by and shown on the Thoroughfare Plan.
   SECTION. A unit of a manufactured home at least ten feet in width and 30
feet in length.
   SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. A structure containing separate, individual
and private storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on individual
leases for varying periods of time.
   SEPTIC SYSTEM. An approved underground system with a septic tank used for
the decomposition of domestic wastes.
   SETBACK. A line parallel to and equidistant from the relevant lot line
(front, back, side) between which no buildings may be erected as prescribed in
this chapter.
   SEWAGE. The total of organic waste and wastewater generated by residential,
industrial and commercial establishments.
   SEWAGE SYSTEM. Devices for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage.
See SEWER.
   SEWER. Any pipe or conduit used to collect and carry away sewage or storm
water runoff from the generating source to treatment plants or receiving
streams. Note: A sewer that conveys household, commercial and industrial waste
is called a sanitary sewer; if it transports runoff from rain or snow it is a
storm sewer, if storm water runoff and sewage are transported in the same
system, then it is a combined sewer.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT.  As defined in I.C. 35-49-1-9 (and as it may from time to
time be amended):
      (1)   Sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct;
      (2)   Exhibition of the uncovered genitals in the context of masturbation
or other sexual activity;
      (3)   Sado-masochistic abuse; or
      (4)   Sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct with an animal.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. An enterprise that as one of its business purposes,
offers for any form of consideration:
      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex where one or more persons appears in a state of nudity or where the
activities in divisions (1) and (2) herein are characterized by an emphasis on
activities which meet the definition of harmful to minors and/or represent or
display sexual conduct.
   SHADE TREE.  A tree in a public place, special easement or right-of-way
adjoining a street as provided in these regulations.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed
and managed as a total entity, with customer and employee parking provided on
site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic
considerations and protection from the elements, and landscaping and signage in
accordance with an approved plan.
   SIDE LOT LINE. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
   SIDE YARD. A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between
the principal building and the side lot line and measured perpendicular from
the side lot line to the closest point on the principal building.
   SIGN. A visual device or structure used for advertising, display or
publicity purposes.
   Sign, Illuminated. A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting
either by lights on or in the sign or directed toward the sign.
   SIGN, NET AREA. The area shall be measured by the smallest square,
rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof which will encompass the
entire sign face.
   SIGN, ON-PREMISE. A sign which contains the name and other advertisement
material for activities which are conducted on the property upon which it is
located.
   Sign, Outdoor Advertising. A structural poster panel or painted sign, either
freestanding or attached to a building, for the purpose of conveying
information, knowledge or ideas to the public about a subject unrelated to the
activities on the premises upon which it is located.
   SIGN, PORTABLE. A free-standing, on-premise advertising device which is
designed to be moved from one location to another and is not permanently
affixed to the ground or to a structure, or is only affixed by means of the
down straps or stakes;
   SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. See DWELLING SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED.
   Single-Family, Semi-Detached. See DWELLING SINGLE-FAMILY, SEMI-DETACHED.
   Single Wide. See MANUFACTURED HOME TYPE I, MANUFACTURED HOME TYPE II,
MANUFACTURED HOME TYPE III.
   SITE PLAN. The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the
existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including topography, vegetation,
drainage, flood plains, wetlands and waterways; landscaping and open spaces;
walkways; means of ingress and egress; circulation; utility services;
structures and buildings; signs and lighting; berms, buffers and screening
devices; surrounding development; and any other information that reasonably may
be required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving
authority.
   SKETCH PLAN. The initially submitted graphic representation of a proposed
major subdivision, drawn to approximate scale, either superimposed upon a print
of a topographic survey, or presented in any other suitable graphic medium or
form acceptable; and in the case of a minor subdivision, the drawing or
drawings indicating the proposed manner of layout of the subdivision meeting
the conditions of
Chapter 155 of this code to be submitted for primary approval.
   SPECIAL LANDSCAPING. Areas of tree planting, shrubs or other landscape
features serving a public purpose and maintained by the city. See also BUFFER
LANDSCAPING and SCREENING.
   SPECIAL USE.  The authorization of a use that is designated as such by this
chapter as being permitted in the district concerned if it meets special
conditions, and upon application, is specifically authorized by the Advisory
Board of Zoning Appeals.
   STATE ACTS. The legislative acts of the state as they affect these
regulations.
   STATE PLANE COORDINATES SYSTEM.  A system of plane coordinates, based on the
Transverse Mercator Projection for the Western Zone of Indiana, established by
the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey for the state.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the next floor above, or if there is no floor above it, then
the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it; also any portion of
a building used for human occupancy between the topmost floor and the roof. A
basement shall not be counted as a STORY unless the height of the surface of
the first floor above the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the
front of the building exceeds four feet.
   Story, Half.  A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of
which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above
the floor of the story.
   STREET, DEAD-END.  A street or portion of a street with only one vehicular-
traffic outlet.
   STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH. The distance between property lines measured at
right angles to the center line of the street.
   STREET(S). A right-of-way that is purchased by a governmental unit or is
established by a recorded plat and publicly maintained to provide the principal
means of access to abutting property.
   STREETS, CLASSIFICATION. For the purpose of providing for the development of
the streets, highways and rights-of-way in the governmental unit, and for their
future improvement, reconstruction, realignment and necessary widening,
including provisions for curbs and sidewalks, each existing street, highway and
right-of-way, and those located on approved and filed plats, have been
designated on the official map and classified therein. The classification of
each street, highway and right-of-way is based on its location in the
respective zoning districts of the town and its present and estimated future
traffic volume and its relative importance and function as specified in the
City Comprehensive Plan.
   STRUCTURAL CHANGE. A substantial change in a supporting member of a
building, such as a bearing wall or partition, column, beam or girder, or in an
exterior wall or the roof.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on or in
the ground or attachments to something having a location on or in the ground.
   Studio Apartment. See DWELLING, EFFICIENCY UNIT.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person who, having proprietary interest in land, causes it,
directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision; or who, directly or
indirectly sells, leases or develops, or offers to sell, lease or develop, or
who advertises for sale, lease or development, any interest, lot, parcel site,
unit or plat in a subdivision; or who engages directly, or through an agent, in
the business of selling, leasing, developing or offering for sale, lease or
development a subdivision of any interest, lot, parcel site, unit or plat in a
subdivision; and who is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct,
or indirect common control with any of the foregoing.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots,
parcels, sites, units, plats or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease
or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms and conditions, including resubdivision. SUBDIVISION includes the
division of development of land zoned for residential and nonresidential uses,
whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map,
plat or other recorded instrument. See MINOR SUBDIVISION, MAJOR SUBDIVISION,
EXEMPT SUBDIVISION.
   SUBDIVISION AGENT. Any person who represents, or acts for or on behalf of, a
subdivider or developer, in selling, leasing or developing, or offering to
sell, lease or develop any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site or plat in a
subdivision, except an attorney-at-law whose representation of another person
consists solely of rendering legal services, and is not involved in developing,
marketing or selling real property in the subdivision.
   SUBDIVISION, EXEMPT. See EXEMPT SUBDIVISION.
   SUBDIVISION, MAJOR. See MAJOR SUBDIVISION.
   SUBDIVISION, MINOR. See MINOR SUBDIVISION.
   SWALE. A depression in the ground that channels water.
   TAVERN. An establishment used primarily for the serving of liquor by the
drink to the general public, primarily for on site consumption, and where food
or packaged liquors may be served or sold only as an accessory to the primary
use. (See BAR.)
   TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT. Improvements built and maintained by a subdivider
during construction of the subdivision and intended to be replaced by a
permanent improvement prior to release of the performance bond or turnaround
improvements at the ends of stub streets intended to be replaced when the
adjoining area is developed and the through street connection made.
   TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION. The city and the contiguous unincorporated areas
outside of the city extending approximately two miles from the corporate
limits.
   THOROUGHFARE, MAJOR. Refers to Indiana 5 and U.S. 33.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. Refers to the major stated thoroughfares of the County
Comprehensive Plan.
   THROUGH LOT. A lot fronting on two parallel or approximately parallel
streets and includes lots fronting on both a street and a watercourse or lake.
   TOURIST HOME. See BED AND BREAKFAST, HOMESTAY.
   TOWNHOUSE. See DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE.
   TRACT. An area, parcel, site, piece of land or property that is the subject
of a development application.
   TRADE OR BUSINESS SCHOOL. A secondary or higher education facility teaching
usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade, business or vocation.
   Trailer Park. See MOBILE HOME PARK.
   Transitional Care Home. A facility in which individuals live for a short
period while receiving physical, social or psychological therapy and counseling
to assist them in overcoming physical or emotional problems.
   TRIPLEX. See DWELLING, TRIPLEX.
   TRUCK TERMINAL. An area and building where trucks load and unload cargo and
freight and where the cargo and freight may be broken down or aggregated into
smaller or larger loads for transfer to other vehicles or modes of
transportation.
   Uniformity. The requirement that all properties in a zoning district be
treated alike.
   USE. The employment or occupation of a building, structure or land for a
person's service, benefit or enjoyment.
   USE VARIANCE. The approval of a parcel use other than that prescribed by
this chapter. Changes of allowed uses are not permitted by this chapter except
by zoning map amendment.
   UTILITY EASEMENT. The right-of-way acquired by a utility or governmental
agency to locate utilities, including all types of pipelines, telephone and
electric cables, and towers.
   VACANCY. Any unoccupied land, structure or part thereof that is available
and suitable for occupancy.
   VARIANCE. A specific approval granted by the Advisory Board of Zoning
Appeals in the manner prescribed by this chapter, to deviate from the
development standards (such as height, bulk, area) that the ordinance otherwise
prescribes.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL.  A place where animals are given medical care and the
boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital
use.
   WAREHOUSE. A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
   WHOLESALE PRODUCE TERMINAL. Warehouse facility used for the storage of fresh
fruits, vegetables and other food items.
   WETLANDS. Land areas where excess water is the dominant factor determining
the nature of soil development and the types of plant and animal communities
living at the soil surface. WETLAND soils retain sufficient moisture to support
aquatic or semiaquatic plant life.
   YARD. An open space that lies between the principal building or buildings
and the nearest lot line. The minimum required YARD as set forth in this
chapter is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as
otherwise authorized by this chapter. (See FRONT YARD, REAR YARD and SIDE
YARD.)
   ZERO LOT LINE. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one
or more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line.
   ZONING. The delineation of districts and the establishment of regulations
governing the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The ordinance which delineates districts and establishes
regulations governing the use, placement, spacing and size of land and
buildings. The City of Ligonier's Zoning Ordinance (this chapter).
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999; Ord. 870-2015, passed 9-14-2015)
§ 156.005 EXCLUSION.
   Nothing in this chapter or in any rules, regulations or orders issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to restrict or regulate or to
authorize any unit of government, legislative body, Plan Commission or Board of
Zoning Appeals now or hereafter established, to restrict or regulate the
exercise of the power of eminent domain by the state or by any state agency, or
the use of property owned or occupied by the state or any state agency. As used
in this section, the term STATE AGENCY shall mean and include all state
agencies, boards, commissions, departments and institutions, including state
universities of the state.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.006 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter takes effect immediately upon passage and approval and legal
publication as required by law.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.007 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety and general
welfare, the city, on recommendation of the Commission, may from time to time
amend the text of this chapter and/or the zoning map(s) incorporated by
reference in this chapter.
   (B)   Public hearings on all proposed amendments shall be held by the
Commission and/or the city in the manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.008 DESIGNATION OF THE ADMINISTRATOR.
   The city shall designate an Administrator for the purposes of implementing
this chapter. The Administrator shall have principal responsibility for
enforcing this chapter.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.009 DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Review Committee is to assure professional
and technical advice to the Administrator and the Plan Commission in the
administration of this chapter as specified elsewhere in this chapter.
   (B)   Membership. The Design Review Committee (hereinafter referred to as
the Review Committee) shall consist of one or more members appointed by the
Plan Commission.
   (C)   Territorial jurisdiction. The Review Committee shall have a
jurisdiction which is coterminous with that of the other sections of this
chapter.
   (D)   Subject matter jurisdiction. The Review Committee shall have advisory
authority only, and shall under this chapter make recommendations: to the
Administrator and the Plan Commission as a checkpoint agency for the review of
planned developments; and to the Administrator regarding parking and
landscaping plans filed with applications for improvement location permits,
except those for single-family homes.
   (E)   Purpose. The purpose of the Review Committee is to provide
professional and technical advice to the Administrator and the Plan Commission
in the administration of this chapter as specified elsewhere in this chapter.
   (F)   Coordination with this chapter and Subdivision Ordinance (
Chapter 155). This Review Committee is established under this chapter to serve
the differing needs of these two ordinances. It shall be made up of the exact
same members under both ordinances in order to facilitate coordination of the
decision-making with respect to the design review aspects of these ordinances.
Table 7-1: Possible Representatives on Design Review Committee
Projects Within City Limits Projects Within County Jurisdictional Area
Table 7-1: Possible Representatives on Design Review Committee
Projects Within City Limits Projects Within County Jurisdictional Area
Street Department           Board of Zoning Appeals
Sewer/Wastewater Department County Plan Commission
Water Department            County Building Inspector
City Attorney               County Health Department
City Engineer               County Highway Department
Local Fire Department       County Building Inspector
City Building Inspector     County Drainage Board
-                           County Soil and Water Conservation District
-                           Appropriate Fire Department
-                           State Department of Natural Resources
 
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
DISTRICTS
§ 156.020 KINDS OF DISTRICTS; ESTABLISHMENT.
   The city and its jurisdictional area is divided into the following
districts:
   (A)   Agriculture Districts, designated A, are established to include
substantial areas where little or no urbanization has occurred or is likely to
occur in the near future and where the predominant use of land involves crop
production, raising livestock or similar farming.
   (B)   Conservancy Districts, designated CD, are established to protect
environmentally sensitive areas, as well as include areas for public parks and
recreation areas. No principal structures should be permitted for any use in a
conservancy district. These areas may be used for agriculture, conservation or
may be included in computation of residential lots, yards or other open spaces.
   (C)   Residence Districts 1, designated R1, are established to include areas
for low density single-family residences with a density of one dwelling unit or
less per gross acre if connected to public sewer, otherwise one dwelling unit
or less per two acres.
   (D)   Residence Districts 2, designated R2, are established to include areas
for low density single-family residences with a density of four dwelling units
or less per gross acre, if connected to public sewer.
   (E)   Residence Districts 3, designated R3, are established to include areas
for medium density single-family, and two-family residential development with a
density of ten dwelling units or less per gross acre, if connected to public
sewer.
   (F)   Multi-family Districts, designated R4, are established to include
areas for relatively high density, multi-family residential development. All R4
development must be connected to public sewer.
   (G)   Manufactured Home Parks and Subdivisions, designated R5, are for
manufactured home park subdivisions, for the placement of Type II and Type III
manufactured homes, as herein defined with exclusive occupancy as residences.
Residential units that are classified as either a manufactured home Type II or
Type III, are restricted to an R5 subdivision.
   (H)   General Business Districts, designated GB, are established to include
areas that are appropriate for a variety or combination of businesses, services
and light industrial uses.
   (I)   Central Business District, designated CB, is established to include
the city's core business area.
   (J)   Light Industrial Districts, designated as I1, are established to
include areas in which goods are produced for direct consumption by consumers.
Light industrial uses typically involve final assembly of goods produced from
prepared materials, finished products or parts, or wholesale and/or storage
activities.
      (1)   These districts are intended for those industries which do not
create adverse impacts on surrounding land uses. The I1 district may serve as a
buffer between heavier industrial districts and business or residential
districts.
      (2)   Uses must conform with all federal, state and local environmental
laws and regulations, including but not limited to air emissions, water
discharge and solid and hazardous waste generation and disposal. New
residential uses are not permitted in I1 zoning districts.
      (3)   The following uses are permitted in an I1 district:
         (a)   All uses permitted in a GB district; excluding adult businesses;
         (b)   Accessory building and use;
         (c)   Boat dry dock facilities;
         (d)   Carpentry, wood working or cabinet shop;
         (e)   Central dry cleaning plants or laundries;
         (f)   Ceramic pottery, figurines or other similar ceramic product
fabrication;
         (g)   Creamery and/or dairy;
         (h)   Electrical receiving and transforming station;
         (i)   Feed or grain storage;
         (j)   Machine shops: metal anodizing, buffing, galvanizing, plating
and/or polishing shops;
         (k)   Metal molding and plastic molding and extrusion shops;
         (l)   Warehouse/distribution facilities for storage, wholesale and
distribution of manufactured products, supplies and equipment, provided that
storage is within an enclosed building (excluding auto wrecking, junk and
salvage, automobile tires, scrap materials or storage of materials that are
flammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized
offensive conditions);
         (m)   Tool and/or die shop;
         (n)   Utility service yard; and
         (o)   Welding shop.
   (K)   General Industrial Districts, designated I2, are established to
include areas for fabricating, manufacturing and processing industries where
the operation is enclosed within a building and conducted in such a manner that
no adverse impacts are created or emitted outside of the building(s).
      (1)   Uses must conform with all federal, state and local environmental
laws and regulations including but not limited to air emissions, water
discharge and solid and hazardous waste generation and disposal.
      (2)   The following uses are permitted in an I2 district:
         (a)   All uses permitted in an I1 district;
         (b)   Accessory building and use;
         (c)   Brewing and distilling;
         (d)   Freight yard, truck yard or terminal;
         (e)   Fuel yard, including bulk storage of petroleum products for
local distribution, as distinguished from a petroleum products terminal for an
extensive storage and regional distributing process;
         (f)   Manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or
merchandise from previously prepared materials, excluding agricultural
implements and machinery, aircraft, automobiles, boats, motorcycles and
recreational vehicles;
         (g)   Manufacture, compounding, packaging and processing of
pharmaceutical products, household chemicals, cleaning products, ink, glue and
sizing, paint, lacquers, shellac, varnish and reducers and removers, tanning
materials, tar products and other similar products;
         (h)   Manufacture of products, art goods, cosmetics and toiletries,
baked goods, confections, ice cream, non-alcoholic beverages, jewelry, clothing
and garments, electrical appliances and fixtures, draperies, novelty articles,
advertising displays, notions, tobacco products, gauges, jigs, optical goods,
luggage and leather products, toys and household supplies, personal
accessories, paper, wood, plastic or rubber molded products;
         (i)   Manufacture of metal products not otherwise listed which do not
involve drop hammer or foundry work;
         (j)   Manufacture and processing of food products such as
slaughtering, sugar refining, meat or fish processing, custom meat packing or
butchering, poultry dressing and similar processes including smoking, curing or
canning;
         (k)   Motor vehicle towing service, excluding motor vehicle storage
yard;
         (l)   Recycling facility (excluding outdoor storage); however, any use
which meets the definition of a junk and salvage yard shall not be permitted;
         (m)   Painting of finished products; and
         (n)   Sheet metal production fabrication, treatment or assembly of
products, which does not involve forging, hammer or foundry work.
   (L)   Heavy Industrial Districts, designated I3, are established to include
areas for intense industrial uses such as fabricating, manufacturing,
processing, extraction, heavy repair and dismantling industries where outside
operations and storage areas may be required.
      (1)   Due to the nature of these industries, districts are typically
located away from residential areas and districts. I3 districts should be
buffered by less intensive industrial or commercial districts to minimize
adverse impacts on surrounding land uses.
      (2)   Uses must conform with all federal, state and local environmental
laws and regulations including but not limited to air emissions, water
discharge and solid and hazardous waste generation and disposal.
      (3)   The following uses are permitted in an I3 district:
         (a)   All uses permitted in an I2 district;
         (b)   Accessory building and use;
         (c)   Chemical or gas manufacturing not otherwise listed;
         (d)   Fabricating, manufacturing and processing industries, not
otherwise listed;
         (e)   Forging, drop hammer and foundry uses;
         (f)   Fuel refinery or refining of petroleum products,
         (g)   Fuel yard for the bulk storage of petroleum products for region-
wide distribution;
         (h)   Leather processing facility/tannery;
         (i)   Manufacture and/or assembly of agricultural implements and
machinery, aircraft, automobiles, boats, motorcycles, recreational vehicles and
any associated parts;
         (j)   Manufacture of brick, refractories and clay products not
otherwise listed;
         (k)   Manufacture of chemicals not otherwise listed such as ammonia,
acetylene, carbide, carbon black, caustic soda, cellulose, fertilizer,
hydrogen, nitrates, oxygen, plastics, proxylene, potash, synthetic resins and
turpentine;
         (l)   Manufacture of ready-mix concrete, plaster or asphalt;
         (m)   Manufactured home construction facility;
         (n)   Metal casing and fabrication, including ferrous metals;
         (o)   Recycling processing facility (including outdoor storage),
however any use which meets the definition of a junk and salvage yard shall not
be permitted;
         (p)   Sawmill or planing mill for the processing of timber or lumber;
         (q)   Tire or rubber manufacturing; and
         (r)   Warehouse/distribution facilities for storage, wholesale and
distribution of manufactured products, supplies and equipment.
   (M)   Planned Development Districts, designated PD-R (residential), PD-B
(business) and PD-I (industrial), are established for the purposes and
conditions set forth in §§
156.085 through
156.097 below.
   (N)   Note: All structures that are not connected to public sewer may not
exceed a density of one unit per two acres, and must have a minimum lot size of
two acres (87,120 square feet).
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999; Ord. 924-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 156.021 BOUNDARIES; IN GENERAL.
   (A)   The boundaries of the districts established by §
156.020 above are as shown on the zone map which is a part of this chapter, and
hereafter known as the official zoning map for the city.
      (1)   The official zoning map shall hereafter be kept in the custody of
the Administrator. Except as provided by §
156.022 below, the boundaries and the official zoning map shall be changed only
by amendment to the official zoning map.
      (2)   Upon the amendment, the city shall within five days of passage of
the amendment, certify a copy of the amendment to the Administrator, who shall
immediately change the official zoning map in accordance with the amendment.
The Administrator shall cause the official zoning map to show the ordinance
number and date of adoption of all the amending ordinances.
   (B)   When the exact boundaries of a district are uncertain, they shall be
determined by use of the scale of the zoning map.
   (C)   When the maps are caused to be changed by amendment the change shall
be to the center of any and all abutting rights-of-way.
   (D)   If the boundary line of a district divides a lot having frontage on a
street so that the front part of the lot lies in one district and the rest of
the lot lies in another, use requirements and restrictions that apply to the
front part of the lot apply to the entire lot.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.022 BOUNDARIES; FLOOD PLAINS.
   (A)   Development in areas that lie within the regulatory flood plain
boundary must acquire prior approval from the State Department of Natural
Resources (DNR). Regulatory flood boundaries have been determined by the State
Department of Natural Resources and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, and are illustrated by the flood boundary and floodway map, Noble
County, Panel numbers 180186 0001-0001,180186 0001-0004 and 180186 0001-0005.
   (B)   Flood plains may be changed if the State Natural Resources Commission,
after investigating the land involved, determines: that the requested change
would not endanger the public welfare; and that the elevation of the land is at
or above the elevation of the regulatory flood. The determination shall be made
in writing upon the request of the applicant who shall provide the State
Natural Resources Commission with a scale drawing identifying the location,
dimensions and elevations related to the U.S.G.S. datum of the land.
   (C)   All buildings or structures permitted on lands within 100 feet of the
flood plain shall be required to comply with the flood protection grade as
established by the State Natural Resources Commission.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.023 SUBDIVISIONS, CLUSTER DEVELOPMENTS, PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS,
CONDOMINIUMS AND ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   The subdivision of land shall be pursuant to the requirements of the
Subdivision Ordinance and shall be permitted in the following districts: A, R1,
R2, R3, R4, R5, CB, GB, I1, I2 and I3. The intended principal use of each of
the proposed lots within a proposed subdivision shall govern the specific
district or districts appropriate to the land to be subdivided, as per §§
156.035 through
156.041 below.
   (B)   However, the following classifications of subdivisions shall only be
permitted in R1, R2, R3, R4 or R5 districts: major subdivisions intended
entirely for residential use, and any portions of major subdivisions intended
for residential use.
   (C)   Planned developments shall be permitted as per §
156.086 below, in order to provide greater design flexibility, and to encourage
innovative land development techniques and a more efficient use of land, the
design and development of uses within these districts may be permitted to
deviate from the standards prescribed by §§
156.055 through
156.068 below, when a comprehensive development plan has been formally approved
by City Plan Commission and all checkpoint offices, boards and commissions for
the affected area.
   (D)   Subdivision regulations are governed by the city. Deviation from these
standards must be formally approved by both the City Advisory Plan Commission
and the City Council.
   (E)   Condominiums, as defined and regulated in I.C. 32-1-6 (the Horizontal
Property Law), cluster developments, zero lot line developments and all
developments of the minimum sizes specified in §
156.086, and larger shall be considered for zoning purposes to be planned
developments, and consequently shall be permitted only as approved by the City
Planning Commission as per §
156.086 of this chapter.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 32-1 was repealed by P.L.2-2002, Sec. 128.
AUTHORIZED USES
§ 156.035 PRIMARY USES.
   (A)   A PRIMARY USE is the principal use of the land authorized in the
districts established by or under §
156.020 above. Primary uses are authorized in the districts established by or
under §
156.020 above as shown by an "X" in the table in §
156.041 below.
   (B)   Where the use is designated for the district with an "S", the use is
permitted in that district only if a special use has been approved under §
156.112 below.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.036 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   An ACCESSORY USE is a subordinate use which is incidental to that of
the primary use, has a reasonable relationship to the primary use, and is a use
other than human occupancy.
   (B)   Accessory uses such as the following are authorized in all districts
subject to the provisions of any and all recorded restrictive covenants running
with the land:
Bird baths and bird houses accessory buildings*
Curbs*
Driveways*
Fences* **
Hedges**
Lamp posts
Mail boxes
Name plates
Private swimming pools enclosed by a 6-foot high fence or 6-foot vertical
enclosure integral with an above ground pool*
Retaining walls
Trees, shrubs, plants and flowers
Walks
* Improvement location permit required
** Provided that, in any residence district, orna-mental fences and hedges
shall not exceed six feet in height in the side yards, or as provided in §
156.061 below. Hedges shall not exceed three feet in the required front yard.
Fences or walls are not permitted in any front yard.
 
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.037 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Intent.
      (1)   Within the districts established by this chapter or by amendments
that may later be adopted, there may exist:
         (a)   Nonconforming lots;
         (b)   Nonconforming structures;
         (c)   Nonconforming uses of land;
         (d)   Nonconforming uses of land and structures in combination; and
         (e)   Nonconforming characteristics of use.
      (2)   These were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, but
they are prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or
may be prohibited, regulated or restricted under future amendments hereto, it
is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconforming uses or structures
to continue until they are removed, abandoned or discontinued but not to
encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that
nonconforming uses or structures shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses which are
prohibited elsewhere in the same district. Note: Illegal uses existing at the
time this chapter is enacted shall not be validated by virtue of its enactment.
      (3)   Whenever a nonconforming use or structure has been discontinued or
abandoned for a period of 12 months or more, the discontinuance shall be
considered as an intent to abandon the structure or use. Any future use of the
property shall conform to the provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to structures and
uses which become nonconforming due to any zoning reclassification, annexation
or other inclusion.
      (5)   An applicant or owner claiming the existence of a nonconforming use
or structure shall bear the burden of supplying the Administrator with adequate
documentation verifying that the use or structure is a legal nonconforming use
or structure.
   (B)   Incompatibly of nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses are declared by
this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts in which
the use is located. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of
land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination shall not
be extended, expanded or enlarged upon passage of this chapter.
   (C)   Avoidance of undue hardship. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this
chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or
designated use of any building or development on which actual construction was
lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter and upon which actual building construction has been carried on
diligently. Where demolition or removal of an existing building has been
substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, the demolition or removal shall
be deemed to be actual construction, provided that the work shall be carried on
diligently. ACTUAL CONSTRUCTION is hereby defined as work done which is beyond
the preparation stage and into that stage where the changes or additions are
made permanent.
   (D)   Single nonconforming lots of record. Note: This section shall apply
only to single-family residences. In any district in which single-family
dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory
buildings may be erected on any single lot of record after the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter notwithstanding limitations imposed by
other provisions of this chapter. The lots must be in separate ownership or
included in a subdivision of record in the office of the County Recorder at the
time of passage of this chapter. This provision shall apply even though the
lots fail to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are
generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and
requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lots
shall conform to the regulations for the district in which the lots are
located. Also, see §
156.057(C) below. Variances of requirements listed in §§
156.055 through
156.072 of this chapter, other than lot area or lot width shall be obtained
only through action of the Board of Zoning Appeals as provided in §
156.113 below.
   (E)   Nonconforming lots of record in combination. If two or more lots or a
combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single
ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter and
if all or part of the lots with no buildings do not meet the requirements
established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to
be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter and no portion of the
parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with the
lot width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any
division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the
requirements stated in this chapter.
   (F)   Nonconforming uses of land. Where, at the time of adoption of this
chapter, lawful uses of land exist which would not be permitted by the
regulations imposed by this chapter, the uses may be continued so long as they
remain otherwise lawful, provided:
      (1)   No nonconforming uses shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter;
      (2)   No nonconforming uses shall be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by the uses at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
      (3)   If any such nonconforming uses of land are discontinued or
abandoned for a period of 12 months or more (except when government action
impedes access to the premises), any subsequent use of the land shall conform
to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which the land
is located; and
      (4)   No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this
chapter shall be erected in connection with the nonconforming use of land.
   (G)   Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not now be
built under the terms of this chapter, such structure may be continued so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be
altered to decrease its nonconformity.
      (2)   Should the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of
structure be destroyed by any means to the extent of more than 50% of the fair
market value of the building immediately prior to the damage, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Should the structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
   (H)   Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and land in
combination. If a lawful use involving individual structures, or if a structure
and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this chapter that would not now be allowed in the district under the terms
of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.
      (2)   A nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for the use at the time of
adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside the building.
      (3)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which
a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform
to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not
thereafter be resumed.
      (4)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in
combination is discontinued or abandoned for 12 months or more, the structure
or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
      (5)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
   (I)   Repairs and maintenance. On any nonconforming structure or portion of
a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of
12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-
bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding 10% of
the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure and market value of
real estate, or nonconforming portion of the structure, whichever the case may
be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall
not be increased. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof
declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public
safety, upon order of the official. If a nonconforming structure or portion of
a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or
unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored,
repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district
in which it is located.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.038 (RESERVED).
§ 156.039 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   In order to qualify as a home occupation, the proposed use must comply with
all of the following:
   (A)   The home occupation shall be operated only by residents of the
dwelling; no outside employees shall be permitted;
   (B)   The home occupation must be incidental and secondary to the principal
use of the dwelling as a residence, and shall not change the residential
character of the structure or immediate area;
   (C)   The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling
unit or permitted accessory structure;
   (D)   No equipment or process of the home occupation shall be used which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odors; involves the disposal of waste
into a septic system or public sewer system other than normal household waste;
involves open storage of any materials; involves any material or process which
is combustible, toxic or otherwise impairs or endangers the public health,
safety, welfare and morals; or in any way disrupts normal residential uses. No
equipment or process shall be used which creates any visible or audible
interference with any radio, television or other communication receiving or
transmission system;
   (E)   The home occupation shall not occupy more than 20% of the gross floor
area of a dwelling unit or 25% of a permitted accessory structure, but not
both, including any space used for storage for the home occupation. All storage
related to the home occupation shall be contained within the dwelling unit or
accessory structure;
   (F)   The home occupation shall not display or create any external evidence
of the operation of the occupation.
   (G)   No structural alterations shall be made to the dwelling to accommodate
the home occupation. No separate entrances or building additions shall be added
for the use of the home occupation;
   (H)   A home occupation shall be permitted as a special use in a single-
family, two-family or multiple-family dwelling unit. See table in §
156.041 below.
   (I)   To avoid negative impacts on the character of the surrounding
neighborhood, clients or customers are not permitted to come to the home and
the address of the home may not be used in any advertising, except for
advertising such as printed literature or business cards; and
   (J)   No retail sales shall be permitted on the property.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.040 ADULT BUSINESSES.
   (A)   In addition to all the other limitations and provisions contained in
this chapter, adult businesses shall:
      (1)   Not be located within 1,000 feet of any property zoned for any
residential use (R1, R2, R3, R4 or R5);
      (2)   Not be located within 500 feet of any property permitted for use as
a religious institution, or public or private school containing any grade of
kindergarten through grade 12;
      (3)   Not be located within 500 feet of any city park; and
      (4)   Not be located within 500 feet of any another adult business
established through a special use permit, or a pre-existing nonconforming use
which is an adult business. However, more than one adult business may be
located on the same parcel of property so long as it meets the other provisions
of this section and the other provisions of this chapter.
      (5)   The applicant shall have certified all distance measurements by a
land surveyor registered by the state, who shall certify that there are no
residential properties, public or private schools with grade kindergarten
through twelfth grade, city park, another adult business established through a
special use permit, or a preexisting nonconforming use which is an adult
business within the distances stated above.
   (B)   In addition to all other procedures listed above, the petitioner for a
special use permit for an adult business shall send notice to not only the
abutting property owners, but the applicant shall send notice by certified
mail, return receipt requested to all property owners of property within 1,000
feet of the property requested for a special use permit for an adult business.
A list of all the property owners shall be given to the Advisory Plan
Commission at the time of filing the application. Should the petitioner fail to
comply with the notice requirements herein, before the second regular meeting
of the Board of Zoning Appeals following the date the petition is filed, the
petition shall be withdrawn by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (C)   The distances provided in divisions (A) and (B) above shall be
measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings,
structures or other obstacles, from the nearest point of the property upon
which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point of the property
or land use district boundary line from which the proposed land use is to be
separated.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.041 TABLE OF DISTRICT USAGE.
   (A)   X = Primary Use.
   (B)   S = Special Use.
 Districts in Which Permitted
 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
                                           Districts in Which Permitted
                                           R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
RESIDENTIAL USE
Dwelling, Single-Family
Single-family, detached (1)                X  X  X                       X
Manufactured home, Type I(1)               X  X  X                       X
Manufactured home, Type II (1)(2)                      X
Manufactured home. Type III (1)(2)                     X
Manufactured home park or subdivision                  X
Dwelling, Two-Family
Accessory apartment                              X  S                    S
Duplex                                        S  X  S
Dwelling, Multi-Family
Apartment building (3 or more units in              X        S
building)
Garden apartment                                 X  X
Triplex                                          X  X
Quadruplex                                       X  X
Townhouse                                        X  X
Residential apartments on the ground floor                   X
of a building
Extended Care Facilities
Children's home                            S  S  S  X                    S
Group home                                 S  S  S  X                    S
Hospital                                                  X     X
Intermediate care facility                          X
Nursing home or extended care facility              X
Lodging Establishments
Bed and breakfast; home stay                  S              S           S
Hotel, motel, inns                                        X     X
AGRICULTURAL USE
Agriculture building                                                     X
Artificial lake of 3 or more acres         S                             X
Commercial greenhouse or nursery                                S        X
 
 Districts in Which Permitted
 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
                                             Districts in Which Permitted
                                             R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
AGRICULTURAL USE Cont'd
Commercial facility for breeding and raising                               S
non-farm fowl and animals
Farm, confinement feeding                                                  X
Farm equipment, sales, service and repair                   X     X        S
Farm, general                                                              X
Hay, grain and feed stores                                  X     X        S
Landscaping, lawn and garden services                                      X
Sales barn for livestock resale                                            S
INDUSTRIAL USE
Agricultural equipment mfg.                                             X
Brick, refractories or other clay products                              X
Brewing and distilling                                               X  X
Ceramic pottery mfg. or similar business                          X  X  X
Central dry cleaning/laundry facility                             X  X  X
Chemicals manufacturing, except noxious                              X  X
Chemicals mfg., noxious                                                 X
Communication relay tower                                                  S
Dairy or creamery                                                 X  X  X
Electrical receiving and transforming                             X  X  X
station
 
 Districts in Which Permitted
 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
                                             Districts in Which Permitted
                                             R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
INDUSTRIAL USE Cont'd
Electronics, instruments and industrial                              X  X
machinery mfg.
Explosives manufacturing, storage or use                                   S
Feed mill, grain elevators, flour mill                            X  X  X
Food and kindred products processing/                                X  X
manufacturing
Fuel storage and distribution, local                                 X  X  S
Fuel storage and distribution, regional                              X  X
Furniture and wood products manufacturing                         X  X  X
Glass and stone products mfg.                                        X  X
Junkyard                                                                   S
Leather products mfg.                                                X  X
Leather processing, tannery                                             X
Liquid fertilizer storage and distribution                              S  S
Machine shops: buffing, metal anodizing,                          X  X  X
galvanizing, plating and/or polishing shops
Manufactured home construction facility                                 X
Metal casing and fabrication                                            X
Metal molding and plastic molding and                             X  X  X
extrusion
Metal products mfg., except foundry and drop                         X  X
hammer
 
 Districts in Which Permitted
 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
                                            Districts in Which Permitted
                                            R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
INDUSTRIAL USE Cont'd
Metal foundry and drop hammer work                                     X
Mineral extraction, borrow pit, topsoil                                   S
removal and storage areas
Paper products processing and manufacturing                         X  X
Petroleum bulk storage and distribution                                   S
facility
Petroleum fuel refinery                                                X
Plastic and rubber molding                                          X  X
Ready-mix concrete, plaster or asphalt                                 X
manufacturing
Recycling facility with outdoor storage                                X
Recycling facility without outdoor storage                          X  X  S
Sawmill or planing mill for processing                                 X
timber or lumber
Scrap metal yard                                                          S
Slaughter house                                                           S
Textile and apparel mfg.                                            X  X
Tire or rubber manufacturing                                           X
Tobacco products mfg.                                               X  X
Tool and/or die shop                                             X  X  X
Transportation equipment manufacturing                                 X
Truck terminal or truck yard                                        X  X
Utility service yard                                             X  X  X
 
 Districts in Which Permitted
 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
                                             Districts in Which Permitted
                                             R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
INDUSTRIAL USE Cont'd
Warehouse (storage)                                               X  X  X
Welding shop                                                      X  X  X
Wholesale business                                                X  X  X
PUBLIC FACILITIES USE
Airport                                                                    S
Bus station                                                 X  X  X
Church or temple                             S  S  S        S  S        S
Commercial sanitary fill, commercial compost
facility, refuse dump, garbage disposal                                    S
plant, trash transfer station
Commercial sewage disposal plant                                           S
Governmental offices                                        X  X  X
Day care center                                    S  S  S  S     S
Day care (home service)                      S  S  S                       S
Penal or correctional institution                                          S
Police station or fire station               S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S
Public library or museum                                    S  X
Public park                                  X  X  X  X  X                 X X
Public or private swimming pool                       S  S  S                S
Parking lot or parking garage                               S  S  S
Post office                                                 S  X
School; public, parochial, private           S  S                 S        S
Telephone exchange or public utility                        X     X  X  X  S
substation
Trade or business school                                    S
 
 Districts in Which Permitted
 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
                                      Districts in Which Permitted
                                      R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
BUSINESS USE Cont'd
Appliances
Electric appliance service and sales                 X  X  X
Radio, TV and music service and sales                X  X  X
Satellite dish sales and service                     X  X  X
Other similar uses                                   X  X  X
Automobile Service
Automatic car wash                                   X  X  X
Car wash                                             X  X  X
Automobile sales and service                         X  X  X
RV and camper sales and service                      X  X  X
Automobile parts sales                               X  X  X
Automotive repair, minor                             X  X  X
Automotive repair, major                             X  X  X
Gasoline station, with repair                        X  X  X
Gasoline station without repair                      X  X  X
Other similar uses                                   X  X  X
Clothing Services
Dressmaking shop                                     X  X  X
Dry cleaning, laundry establishment,                 X  X  X
laundromat
Millinery shop                                       X  X  X
Self-service laundry                              S  X  X  X
 
 Districts in Which Permitted
 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
                                     Districts in Which Permitted
                                     R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
BUSINESS USE Cont'd
Clothing Services Cont'd
Shoe repair shop                                    X  X  X
Tailor and pressing shop                            X  X  X
Other similar uses                                  X  X  X
Food Sales and Service
Baker - retail                                      X  X  X
Dairy - retail                                      X  X  X
Delicatessen                                        X  X  X
Drive-in                                            X     X
Fast-food restaurant                                X     X
Grocery, including convenience store                X  X  X
Meat market                                         X  X  X
Restaurant, w/o alcoholic beverage                  X  X  X
Restaurant, with alcoholic beverage                 X  S  X
Roadside food sales stand                           S  S           S
Wholesale produce terminal                          S     S        S
Other similar uses                                  S  S
Personal, Business and Professional Services
Barber shop                                         X  X  X
Beauty shop                                         X  X  X
Business and professional services                  X  X  X
Financial institutions                              X  X  X
Health spa or fitness center                        X  X  X
 
 Districts in Which Permitted
 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
                                                 Districts in Which Permitted
                                                 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
BUSINESS USE Cont'd
Personal, Business and Professional Services Cont'd
Professional offices                                            X  X  X
Tanning salon                                                   X  X
Other similar uses                                              X  X  X
Recreation
Adult businesses (subject to restrictions in §                 S
156.040 above)
Bait sales                                                      X     X
Bar, tavern                                                     S
Billiard room                                                   X  X  X
Bowling alley                                                   X     X
Campground                                                                     S S
Country club and golf course                                                   S
Dancing, aerobics or gymnastics studio                          X  X  X
Lodge or private club                                           X  X  X        S
Night club                                                      S
Commercial recreation facility                                  X     X
Private recreation facility                                     S              S
Private camp                                                                   S
Riding stable and trails                                                       S
Roller or ice skating rink                                      X     X
Theater, indoor                                                 X  S  X
Theater, outdoor                                                               S
Video rental store                                              X  X  X
 
 Districts in Which Permitted
 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
                                          Districts in Which Permitted
                                          R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
BUSINESS USE Cont'd
Retail Sales
Antique shop                                             X  X  X
Apparel shop                                             X  X  X
Building materials or garden supply store                X     X
Camera/photography store                                 X  X  X
Department or variety store                              X  X  X
Drugstore                                                X  X  X
Flower shop                                              X  X  X
Furniture store                                          X  X  X
Gift shop                                                X  X  X
Hardware store                                           X  X  X
Hobby, toy or craft store                                X  X  X
Jewelry store                                            X  X  X
Liquor store                                             X  S  X
Luggage and leather store                                X  X  X
Newsdealer                                               X  X  X
Office supplies store                                    X  X  X
Optical goods store                                      X  X  X
Pet store                                                X  X  X
Record shop                                              X  X  X
Sewing/piece goods store                                 X  X  X
Stationery and book store                                X  X  X
Sporting goods                                           S  S  S
Used merchandise or consignment store                    X  X  X
 
 Districts in Which Permitted
 R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
                                                Districts in Which Permitted
                                                R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 GB CB I1 I2 I3 A CD
BUSINESS USE Cont'd
Miscellaneous
Auction house                                                  X     X
Boat sales, service and storage                                X     X
Building trades contractors                                    X     X
Clinic                                                         X     X
Home occupation (subject to restrictions in §  S  S  S  S  S                 S
156.039 above)
Equipment rental store                                         X     X
Flea market                                                    S              S
Kennel, boarding                                                              S
Manufactured home sales                                        X     X
Mortuary/funeral home                                          X  S  X
Office building                                                X  X  X
Photographic studio                                            X  X  X
Phone utility
Private cemetery                                                              S
Public cemetery or crematory                                   X     X        S
Radio and TV broadcasting and related services                 S  S  S
Shopping center                                                X     X
Self-service storage facility                                        S
Veterinary hospital, including boarding                        X     X
 
   (C)   Footnotes. That special use for this usage shall, in addition to any
other conditions imposed by the Board of Zoning Appeals, include the following
conditions:
      (1)   Condition of repairs: it will be stipulated that manufactured homes
shall be considered a "building or structure" and subject to any unsafe
Building Code, either heretofore adopted by the city, or henceforth adopted,
together with any amendments thereto; and
      (2)   When permanent foundations are not provided, the structure shall
contain skirting, which is in new or presentable condition and which conceals
all plumbing, anchors and stands underneath the home.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999; Ord. 617, passed 6-14-1999; Ord. 631, passed 2-14-
2000; Ord. 661, passed 8-8-2002; Ord. 688, passed 2-23-2004; Ord. 694, passed
11-8-2004; Ord. 722, passed 9-25-2006; Ord. 721, passed 11-27-2006; Ord. 870-
2015, passed 9-14-2015; Ord. 890-2016, passed 9-26-2016; Ord. 924-2018, passed
9-24-2018)
USE REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS
§ 156.055 HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by this section, no structure may be
erected or changed so as to make its height greater than 30 feet if it is in an
R1, R2, R3 or R5 District, or 40 feet if it is in an A, R4, CB or GB District,
or 50 feet if it is in an I1, I2 or I3 District.
   (B)   Spires, church steeples, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads,
fire towers, penthouses for mechanical equipment, stacks, tanks, water towers,
transmission towers for electric lines, and necessary mechanical appurtenances
may be erected or changed to any height that is not otherwise prohibited
elsewhere in this chapter.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.056 MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE; RESIDENTIAL USES.
   Residential buildings on any lot may not exceed in coverage the following
percentages of total lot area:
 
Maximum Lot Coverage
District               R1  R2  R3  R4  R5  CB* A
Percentage of coverage 25% 30% 40% 50% 65% 60% 25%
*There is no maximum lot coverage if the entire first story contains
nonresidential uses.
 
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999; Ord. 924-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 156.057 MINIMUM LOT SIZE; RESIDENTIAL USES.
   (A)   Except as provided for in division (C) below, a lot on which a
dwelling is erected or changed may not be smaller in area, in square feet per
dwelling unit, than that prescribed for it in the following table. CHANGED
shall mean increased in number of dwelling units contained therein, but shall
not be construed to mean only refurbished, rehabilitated or expanded in size.
 
Minimum Lot Size in Square Feet And District, per Unit, if Connected to
Public Sewer
Dwelling Type R1     R2    R3    R4     R5    CB    A
Single-family 43,560 7,200 6,000 6,000  5,000 6,000 30,000
Two-family    -      -     3,000 3,000  -     3,000 -
Multi-family  -      -     -     2,000* -     800   -
*This figure applies for each of the first 3 dwelling units; add 1,000
square feet for each additional unit.
 
 
Minimum Lot Size in Square Feet And District, per Unit, Without Public
Sewer
Dwelling Type R1     R2  R3  R4  R5  CB A
Single-family 87,120 N/A N/A N/A N/A -  43,560
Two-family    -      -   N/A N/A -   -  -
Multi-family  -      -   -   N/A -   -  -
 
   (B)   Except as provided for in division (C) below, a lot on which a
dwelling is erected or changed may not be smaller in width, in linear feet,
than that prescribed for it by the following table. CHANGED shall mean
increased in number of dwelling units contained therein, but shall not be
construed to mean only refurbished, rehabilitated or expanded in size.
 
Minimum Lot Width in Feet and District
Dwelling Type R1       R2      R3      R4      R5      CB      A
Single-family 100 feet 60 feet 50 feet 60 feet 50 feet 60 feet 150 feet
Two-family    -        -       60 feet 60 feet -       60 feet -
Multi-family  -        -       70 feet 70 feet -       70 feet -
 
   (C)   A single-family dwelling may be located on any lot in any district in
which single-family dwellings are permitted if the lot was in separate
ownership or included in a subdivision of record in the office of the County
Recorder at the time of the passage of this chapter, even though the lot does
not have the minimum lot width or the minimum lot area, or both, specified for
the district by this chapter.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999; Ord. 924-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 156.058 MINIMUM LOT SIZE; OTHER USES.
   A lot on which one of the following uses is located may not be smaller in
area than the area prescribed for that use opposite it in the following table:
Minimum Lot Sizes By Use
Use Minimum Lot Area
Minimum Lot Sizes By Use
Use                                   Minimum Lot Area
Airport                               80 acres
Cemetery or crematory*                20 acres
Clinic                                15,000 square feet
Commercial facilities for raising and 5 acres
breeding non-farm fowl and animals
Junk yard or scrap metal yard         10 acres
Kindergarten or day care center       110 square feet per child
Penal or correctional institution**   320 acres
Private camp or campground            5 acres
Public or commercial garbage disposal 5 acres
plant
Public or commercial sanitary fill,   40 acres
refuse dump or trash transfer station
Riding stable                         40,000 square feet plus 10,000 square
                                      feet for every horse over four
* Does not apply to old or existing cemeteries
** Does not apply to a city, town or county jail
 
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999; Ord. 924-2018, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 156.059 STANDARD SETBACKS.
   (A)   In any district except the CB district, where there is no such
requirement, minimum depth of front yard for a lot abutting a street shall be
as follows:
 
Minimum Front Yard
Street Type     R1      R2      R3      R4      R5      GB      I*      A
Local streets   30 feet 20 feet 15 feet 20 feet 15 feet 15 feet 30 feet 40 feet
Arterial
highway (State  40 feet 30 feet 25 feet 30 feet 30 feet 25 feet 40 feet 50 feet
Roads 5 and 33)
* Applies to I1, I2 and I3
 
      (1)   Arterials are designated by the adopted Thoroughfare Plan;
collectors are designated by resolution of the Plan Commission.
      (2)   However, along a local street in a residence district or business
district other than CB, where 50% of lots in that block face are occupied by
principal use buildings, minimum depth of front yard for that block shall be
the average depth of front yard for those buildings, provided that the front
yard shall be no less than ten feet. But buildings to be removed to make way
for a new building shall not be included when calculating average depth of
front yard to be applied to the new building.
      (3)   A through lot has a front yard on each abutting street.
      (4)   For any corner lot, these front yard setback standards shall also
apply to the side yard(s) abutting a arterial highway, local street or place.
      (5)   Where a lot does not abut a street, minimum depth of front yard
shall be 25 feet, measured from a designated front lot line.
      (6)   For any accessory building, minimum depth of front yard shall be
the same as for the principal use building.
   (B)   Minimum depth of rear yard, in feet, for primary and accessory
building shall be as follows:
 
Zoning District       Residential Use   Nonresidential Use
                      Primary Accessory Primary Accessory
R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, A 20 feet 5 feet    20 feet 5 feet
GB                    20 feet 20 feet   20/40*  20/40*
CB                    0       0         0       0
I1, I2, I3            -       -         20/40*  20/40*
* Where rear lot line abuts a residential district.
 
   (C)   Minimum depth of side yard, in feet, for primary or accessory
buildings shall be as follows:
 
Zoning District Residential Use Nonresidential Use
R1, R4, R5, A   15 feet         15 feet
R2, R3,         7.5 feet        15 feet
GB              0               10 feet
CB              0               0
I1, I2, I3      -               0/30*
* Where side lot line abuts a residential district.
 
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999; Ord. 631, passed 2-14-2000; Ord. 924-2018, passed
9-24-2018)
§ 156.060 SETBACKS; ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   In a residential district, an accessory building may be located no
closer to a side lot line than six feet and no closer to the front lot line
than the minimum front yard for a principal building.
   (B)   If an interior lot abuts a corner lot or an alley separating them and
the front yards of the two lots are perpendicular to each other, an accessory
building on the rear lot line of the corner lot may be located no closer to the
street abutting the interior lot than the principal building on the interior
lot.
   (C)   If a fence is otherwise permitted by this chapter, then there shall be
no setback requirement for that fence, so long as: the owner of the lot or
parcel can demonstrate to the City Building Inspector that the fence will be
placed upon the owner's property as shown by stakes, markers, pins or other
such monuments placed by a registered land surveyor, evidencing the boundary
line upon which the fence is to be placed; or with the written consent of the
adjoining property owner, whose property abuts the owner's property line upon
which the fence is to be constructed.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999; Ord. 617, passed 6-14-1999; Ord. 676, passed 6-9-
2003)
§ 156.061 SETBACKS; VISION CLEARANCE AT INTERSECTIONS.
   At the street intersection of each corner lot, the triangular space
determined by the two lot lines at that corner and by a diagonal connecting the
two points on those lot lines that are 25 feet respectively from the corner
shall be kept free of any obstruction to vision between the heights of two and
one-half and 12 feet above the established grade.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.062 SETBACKS; USES ALLOWED AS SPECIAL USES.
   When permitted by grant of special use per §
156.112 below, the following uses are subject to the special setbacks
prescribed, in feet, by the following table. If no figure appears for a front
yard setback, the standard setback prescribed by §
156.060 above applies.
Setbacks In Feet By Use
Use Front Side Rear
Setbacks In Feet By Use
Use                                                 Front    Side     Rear
Bottled gas storage and distribution                300 feet 300 feet 300 feet
Cemetery or crematory                               50 feet  50 feet  50 feet
Clinic                                              30 feet  10 feet  30 feet
Commercial facilities for raising and breeding non- 100 feet 100 feet 100 feet
farm fowl and animals
Junk yard or scrap metal yard                       300 feet 300 feet 300 feet
Kindergarten or day care center                     20 feet  15 feet  20 feet
Liquid fertilizer storage and distribution          300 feet 300 feet 300 feet
Mineral extraction, borrow pit or top soil removal  150 feet 150 feet 150 feet
and their storage areas
Outdoor theater                                     100 feet 40 feet  40 feet
Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise          40 feet  40 feet  40 feet
Penal or correctional institution                   300 feet 300 feet 300 feet
Petroleum tank farm                                 300 feet 300 feet 300 feet
Private recreational development                    40 feet  40 feet  40 feet
Private camp or campground                          100 feet 40 feet  40 feet
Public or commercial sanitary fill, refuse dump,
garbage disposal plant, trash transfer center or    300 feet 300 feet 300 feet
recycling center
Public or commercial sewage disposal plant          300 feet 300 feet 300 feet
Riding stable                                       100 feet 100 feet 100 feet
Sales barn for livestock sale                       300 feet 300 feet 300 feet
 
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.063 BUFFERING; MINIMUM DISTANCES FROM RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   A mineral extraction area, borrow pit or topsoil removal area
(including storage area), penal or correctional institution, public or
commercial sewage disposal plant, sales barn for livestock sale, truck terminal
or wholesale produce terminal may not be located closer to an R1, R2, R3, R4 or
R5 District than 1,000 feet. A junk yard may not be located closer to such a
district than 1,320 feet.
   (B)   A parking area or loading berth for any of the following uses may not
be located closer to a residential district than the distance, in feet, listed
opposite it in the following table:
Minimum Distance in Feet From a Residential District
Use Parking Area Loading Berth
Minimum Distance in Feet From a Residential District
Use                                                 Parking Area Loading Berth
Airport                                             25 feet      100 feet
Commercial facilities for raising and breeding non- 25 feet      100 feet
farm fowl and animals
Commercial greenhouse                               25 feet      50 feet
Junk yard or scrap metal yard                       1320 feet    1320 feet
Mineral extraction, borrow pit or topsoil removal,  300 feet     300 feet
and their storage areas
Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise          50 feet      50 feet
Penal or correctional institution                   300 feet     300 feet
Private recreational development                    25 feet      25 feet
Sales barn for livestock sale                       100 feet     100 feet
Truck terminal                                      100 feet     100 feet
Wholesale produce terminal                          100 feet     100 feet
 
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.064 BUFFERING; FENCES AND WALLS.
   The following uses shall be fenced or walled as respectively prescribed by
the following table:
Use Category Enclosure
Use Category                                                                Enclosure
                                                                            8-foot
Airport or heliport (where located at ground level)                         chain link
                                                                            fence
Artificial lake of three or more acres, if accessible to public (or see §  6-foot
156.065 below)                                                              chain link
                                                                            fence
                                                                            6-foot
Kindergarten or day care center (play area only)                            chain link
                                                                            fence
                                                                            Solid wall
                                                                            or solid
                                                                            painted
Junk yard, scrap metal yard, sanitary fill or refuse dump                   fence
                                                                            sufficient
                                                                            to hide
                                                                            from view
Manufactured home subdivision (or see §                                    4-foot
156.065 below)                                                              chain link
                                                                            fence
                                                                            8-foot
Mineral extraction, borrow pit, topsoil removal, and their storage areas    chain link
                                                                            fence
                                                                            8-foot
Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise                                  chain link
                                                                            fence
                                                                            8-foot
Outdoor theater                                                             solid
                                                                            opaque
                                                                            fence
                                                                            6-foot
                                                                            chain link
Private swimming pool                                                       or solid
                                                                            opaque
                                                                            fence
                                                                            Solid wall
                                                                            or solid
Commercial sewage disposal plant, public or commercial sanitary fill,       painted
refuse dump, garbage disposal plant or trash transfer station               fence
                                                                            sufficient
                                                                            to hide
                                                                            from view
                                                                            6-foot
Self service storage facility                                               chain link
                                                                            fence
                                                                            6-foot
Wholesale produce terminal                                                  chain link
                                                                            fence
                                                                            6-foot
Truck terminal                                                              chain link
                                                                            fence
 
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.065 BUFFERING; SCREEN PLANTING ABUTTING RESIDENTIAL USE.
   (A)   Tight screen planting, effective at all times to block the view from
abutting residential uses, shall be provided for the following uses in
accordance with the following table, the dimensions of the screen to be the
minimum five years after the use is established.
   (B)   The screens should consist of both seasonal and evergreen plantings.
   (C)   Hardy plants that require low levels of maintenance are recommended.
Screening Of Uses
Use Screen
Screening Of Uses
Use                                                                             Screen
                                                                                6-foot
Artificial lake of three acres or more, if accessible to the public (or see §  high;
156.064 above)                                                                  3-foot
                                                                                wide
                                                                                6-foot
Commercial facilities for raising and breeding non-farm fowl and animals        high;
                                                                                3-foot
                                                                                wide
                                                                                6-foot
Manufactured home subdivision (or see §                                        high;
156.064 above)                                                                  6-foot
                                                                                wide
                                                                                6-foot
Private recreational development                                                high;
                                                                                3-foot
                                                                                wide
                                                                                6-foot
Private camp or campground                                                      high;
                                                                                3-foot
                                                                                wide
                                                                                6-foot
Riding stable                                                                   high;
                                                                                3-foot
                                                                                wide
 
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.066 ENTRANCES AND EXITS.
   (A)   This section limits to one the number of entrances and exits to an
arterial street, state, federal or federal aid highway (State Highway 5, U.S.
33, U.S. 6 and Old 33 (Lincoln Way West). However, it does not apply to
entrances for emergency use only.
   (B)   Each of the following uses is limited to two entrances:
      (1)   Airport;
      (2)   Cemetery; and
      (3)   Hospital.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.067 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   In order to reduce traffic problems and hazards by eliminating
unnecessary on-street parking, every use of land must include on-premises
parking sufficient for the needs normally generated by the use, as provided for
in this section.
      (2)   Parking spaces or bays contiguous to the street, required by
subdivision or other city ordinances, are in addition to and not in place of
the spaces so required.
   (B)   Applicability. No new building or structure shall be constructed or
used in whole or in part, and no building or part thereof shall be altered,
enlarged, reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used unless off-street
parking is provided in accordance with the following conditions:
      (1)   No existing off-street parking spaces shall be eliminated by the
replacement or enlargement of an existing building or structure, unless they
are replaced by spaces provided in accordance with this section;
      (2)   Enlargements or alterations which result in an increase in the
ground coverage or the usable floor area of a building or structure shall
require additional off-street parking spaces in accordance with the provisions
of this section, but only to the extent that the increase exceeds 5% of the
ground coverage or 15% of the floor area existing at the time this section
becomes effective;
      (3)   Changes in the use of existing buildings, structures or of land
shall require additional off-street parking spaces in accordance with the
provisions of this section, but only to the extent of the change;
      (4)   Restoration of an existing building or structure that has been
damaged or destroyed by fire or other disaster shall be permitted without
conforming to the requirements of this division if the restoration or
rebuilding complies with the following requirements:
         (a)   The restoration of the building does not increase the ground
coverage that was occupied by the structure being replaced by more than 5%;
         (b)   The restoration does not increase the usable floor space by more
than 15% over that which was in the building being replaced; and
         (c)   The restoration does not reduce the number of parking spaces
that were available to the subject structure, and were in existence, prior to
the restoration.
      (5)   In order to encourage the renovation and adaptive reuse of existing
commercial structures, and to maintain a tight and cohesive downtown,
additional parking spaces are not required for the reuse of existing structures
in the central business district, labeled CB.
   (C)   Required off-street parking spaces.
      (1)   Parking spaces shall be provided as follows.
Parking Requirements by Use
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Parking Requirements by Use
Uses                                    Required Parking Spaces
                                        1 per 2 seats or arcade devices
Adult arcade                            (whichever is greater) plus 1 per
                                        employee of largest working shift
Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or 1 for each 200 square feet of floor
adult video store                       space
Adult cabaret or juice bar              1 per 2 seats plus 1 per employee of
                                        largest working shift
Adult motion picture theater or adult   1 per 4 seats plus 1 per employee of
theater                                 largest working shift
Airport or heliport                     1 per 2 employees plus 1 per based or
                                        daily transient aircraft
Artificial lake of 3 acres or more, if  1 per 2 users
accessible to the public
Lawn and garden equipment, boat,        1 per 3,000 square feet of outdoor
agricultural implements, automobile, RV sales area and 1 per 400 square feet of
and camper sales                        gross floor area
Motor vehicle repair                    1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
                                        area
Banks, business offices, professional   1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
offices, similar business uses, post    area
office and similar service uses
Boarding or lodging house               1 per occupant plus 2 for the resident
                                        owner
Bowing alley                            3 per lane
Cemetery or crematory                   1 per 2 employees plus 1 per 4 seats in
                                        chapel, if provided
Church or temple                        1 per 2 seats in main auditorium
Clinic                                  1 per employee plus 3 per doctor for
                                        patients
Communication relay tower               1 plus 1 per 3 employees
                                        1 per 200 square feet of county club
Country club or golf course             space plus 1 per 2 employees plus 4 per
                                        golf hole
Dancing, aerobics or gymnastics         1 per 200 square feet, of gross studio
                                        floor area
Department store, antique shop, apparel
shop, flower shop, drugstore, hardware
store, stationery and book store,
newsdealer, record shop, photo studio,
barbershop, beauty shop, health spa or
fitness center, bakery, restaurant,
delicatessen, liquor store, meat
market, grocery (including convenience
stores), roadside food sales stand,     1 per 200 square feet gross floor area
electrical appliance shop, radio-TV
shop, dress-maker, millinery, tailor
and pressing shop, self-service
laundry, dry-cleaning and laundry
establishment, billiard room, night
club, tavern, furniture and large
appliance sales, video rental and
sales, auction house, automobile parts
shop, ice or roller rink
Greenhouse (commercial), facilities for 1 per 2 employees plus 1 per 125 square
raising or breeding non-farm fowl or    feet of sales area
animals (commercial)
                                        1 per 2 beds plus 1 per doctor plus 1
Hospital                                per 2 employees plus 1 per hospital
                                        vehicle
Hotel or motel                          1 per 2 employees plus 1 per sleeping
                                        room
Industrial uses generally               1.5 per employee on largest shift
Junk yard or recycling center           1 per employee
Kindergarten, day care center or        1 per 2 employees plus 1 per 5 children
children's home
Mortuary                                1 per 3 seats in main auditorium
Nude model studio                       1.5 per 2 customers or students plus 1
                                        per employee of largest working shift
Nursing home, group home or halfway     1 per 7 persons plus 1 per employee on
house                                   largest shift
Outdoor commercial recreational use     1 per employee plus 1 per 500 square
                                        feet of use area
Penal or correctional institution       1 per 3 employees plus 1 per 10 inmates
                                        (capacity)
Police station or fire station          2 per employee on largest shift
Private club or lodge                   1 per 200 square feet
Private recreational development        1 per 200 square feet of use area
Private camp or campground              2 per camp site plus 1 per cabin plus 1
                                        per employee
Public library or museum                2 per 1,000 square feet gross floor
                                        area
Public or commercial sewage disposal    1 per employee on largest shift
plant
Bus station                             1 per 10 seats in waiting room plus 1
                                        per 2 employees of connected retail use
Residential use, including apartments   2 per dwelling unit
Riding Stable                           1 per 5,000 square feet
                                        1 per staff member plus 1 per 5,000
School                                  square feet plus 3 per 5 students
                                        enrolled if a high school
Sexual encounter center or peep show    1 per 2 customers plus 1 per employee
facility                                of largest working shift
Shopping centers                        5 per 1,000 square feet gross leasable
                                        area
Commercial swimming pools               1 per 100 square feet of pool area
Telephone exchange or public utility    1 per employee
substation
Theater (indoor)                        1.5 per 2 seats
Theater (outdoor)                       1 per 2 employees
Tourist home or bed and breakfast       1 per employee plus 1 per guest bedroom
Trade or business school                1 per 2 students and staff
Truck terminal                          1 per 2 employees plus 4 for customers
Veterinary hospital or clinic or        1 per 3 animal spaces (cages or pens)
boarding kennel
Wholesale produce terminal              1 per 2 employees
Others                                  1 per 200 square feet of use area
 
      (2)   Drive-up services, including but not limited to bank teller, photo
pick-up, car washes, fast food order and pick-up, shall provide waiting space
for queuing of vehicles awaiting use of drive-up windows.
         (a)   The requirements are: two 20 foot car-length waiting spaces for
each drive-up lane (excluding the space where the transaction takes place),
plus one additional space per drive-up lane where the waiting space can be in a
common lane for multiple drive-up windows.
         (b)   Drive-up waiting space requirements are in addition to any off-
street parking requirement.
   (D)   General regulations.
      (1)   Parking spaces shall not be located in the required front yard
except in business and industrial districts.
      (2)   All parking areas must conform to the location requirements
prescribed in this chapter.
      (3)   Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required
off-street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall be
not less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses
computed separately. This provision shall apply to a building having space
occupied by two or more uses.
      (4)   When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces
required by division (C) above results in a requirement of a fractional space,
any fraction of one-half or more shall be counted as one parking space.
      (5)   Every company car, truck, tractor and trailer normally stored at a
business site shall be provided with off-street parking space. The space shall
be in addition to the parking requirements of division (C) above.
   (E)   Off-site parking facilities. Required parking for a nonresidential
development may be located off-site under certain circumstances. Requests for
variances allowing the substitution of off-site for on-site parking must meet
the following requirements.
      (1)   The off-site parking shall be located so that it will adequately
serve the use for which it is intended. In making this determination the
following factors, among other things, shall be considered:
         (a)   Proximity of the off-site parking facilities;
         (b)   Ease of pedestrian access to the off-site parking facilities;
and
         (c)   The type of use the off-site parking facilities are intended to
serve, i.e. off-site parking may not be appropriate for high turnover uses such
as retail.
      (2)   A written agreement shall be drawn to the satisfaction of the City
Attorney and executed by all parties concerned assuring the continued
availability of off-site parking facilities for the use they are intended to
serve.
   (F)   Development standards. Each parking area shall comply with the
standards as hereinafter set forth.
      (1)   Design.
         (a)   Parking spaces and maneuvering aisles shall have the minimum
dimensions set forth in the following table:
 
Minimum Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions for Parking Areas (in Feet)
Angle of Parking Width of Parking Length of     Maneuvering   Maneuvering Aisle
                 Space            Parking Space Aisle (1-Way) (2-Way)
76-90            10 feet          22 feet       22 feet       22 feet
61-75            10 feet          22 feet       20 feet       22 feet
46-60            10 feet          22 feet       18 feet       22 feet
0-45             10 feet          22 feet       16 feet       22 feet
 
         (b)   Driveways shall be arranged for the free flow of vehicles at all
times, and all maneuvering spaces and aisles shall be so designed that all
vehicles may exit from and enter into a public street by being driven in a
forward direction, except that residential and employee parking spaces may
back-in from alleys.
         (c)   Each required off-street parking space shall be designed so that
any motor vehicle may proceed to and from the space without requiring the
moving of any other vehicle or by passing other vehicle or by passing over any
other parking space, except where the parking area is limited to employees.
         (d)   On any parking area in any district, all paved portions of all
parking spaces and maneuvering aisles shall be set back five feet from any wall
of a building, and five feet from any private or public way, or any lot line of
any land in residential districts or used for residential purposes.
      (2)   Construction.
         (a)   All required parking spaces, maneuvering aisles, and driveways
except in A districts shall have a durable, dustless, all-weather surface, such
as bituminous concrete or cement concrete, and shall provide for a satisfactory
disposal of surface water by grading and drainage in such a manner that no
surface water shall drain onto any lot in other ownership and the surfaces
shall be well maintained.
         (b)   Parking areas in all districts shall be provided with curbing,
wheel stops or other devices to prevent motor vehicles from being parked or
driven within required setback areas or onto the required landscaped open
space.
         (c)   In any parking area, the surface shall be painted, marked or
otherwise delineated so that each parking space is apparent.
         (d)   Spaces shall be made available and conform to Americans with
Disabilities Act standards.
      (3)   Landscaping.
         (a)   For an outdoor parking area containing 20 or more parking
spaces, at least one tree shall be planted for every ten parking spaces on any
side of the perimeter of the parking area that abuts the side line of a private
or public way, or abuts the lot line of land in residential districts or land
used for residential purposes.
         (b)   In any outdoor parking area, a landscaped open space having an
area of not less than 10% of the outdoor parking area on the lot shall be
provided. A minimum of one-half of the required landscaped open space shall be
located in the interior of the parking area and contain ornamental or shade
trees and/or shrubs and/or other appropriate plant materials to provide shade
and color easily visible when the lot is full of cars.
         (c)   Trees required by the provisions of this section shall be at
least two inches in diameter at a height of five feet at the time of planting
and shall be of a species characterized by rapid growth and by suitability and
hardiness for location in a parking lot. To the extent practicable, existing
trees shall be retained and used to satisfy the provisions of this division.
      (4)   Screening. Any parking area which abuts residential districts or
uses shall be screened from the residential districts or uses and any parking
area shall be screened from a public or private way in accordance with the
following requirements.
         (a)   Materials. Plant materials characterized by dense growth which
will form an effective year-round screen shall be planted, or a fence or a wall
shall be constructed, to form the screen except as prohibited in §§
156.036 and
156.061 above. Where a grill or openwork fence or wall is used it shall be
suitable in appearance and materials. Screening may consist of both natural and
human-made materials. To the extent practicable, existing trees shall be
retained and used to satisfy the provisions of this division. Plant material
shall also be of a type whose roots will not interfere with utilities.
         (b)   Height. Screening shall be at least three feet in height. Plant
materials when planted, may be not less than two and one-half feet in height if
of a species or variety which shall attain the required height and width within
two years of planting. Height shall be measured from the finished grade.
         (c)   Width. Screening shall be in a strip of landscaped open space at
least five feet wide, and so located as not to impair visibility of or from
approaching traffic or create potential hazards for pedestrians.
         (d)   Maintenance. All required plant materials shall be maintained in
a healthy condition and whenever necessary replaced with new plant materials to
ensure continued compliance with screening requirements. All required fences
and walls shall be permanently maintained in good repair and presentable
appearance and whenever necessary they shall be repaired or replaced.
         (e)   Lighting. All artificial lighting used to illuminate a parking
area, maneuvering space or driveway shall be arranged and shielded so as to
prevent direct glare from the light sources into any public street or private
way or onto adjacent property.
         (f)   Earth berms. Where appropriate and recommended by the Design
Review Board, landscaped earth berms may be used to help in screening or
separating uses or for other useful purposes.
   (G)   Off-street loading. There shall be provided off-street loading berths
not less than the minimum requirements specified in this section in connection
with any building or structure which is to be erected or substantially altered,
and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by
trucks or similar vehicles.
      (1)   Location. All required off-street loading berths shall be located
on the same lot as the use to be served, and no portion of the vehicle shall
project into a street or alley. No permitted or required loading berth shall be
located within 25 feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets,
nor shall it be located in a required front yard, or side yard adjoining a
street. Some uses are also subject to §§
156.062 and/or
156.063 above.
      (2)   Size. Off-street loading berths for over-the-road tractor-trailers
shall be at least 14 feet in width by at least 80 feet in length with an 80-
foot maneuvering apron, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least 15
feet. For local pick-up and delivery trucks, off-street loading berths shall be
at least 12 feet in width by at least 30 feet in length with a 30-foot
maneuvering apron, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least 12 feet.
      (3)   Access. Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed
with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner
which will least interfere with traffic movements.
      (4)   Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be improved
with a compacted base not less than six inches thick, or equal, surfaced with
not less than two inches of asphaltic concrete or some comparable all-weather,
dustless material.
      (5)   Space allowed. Space allowed to any off-street loading berth shall
not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements of any off-
street parking areas or portions thereof.
      (6)   Off-street loading space requirements. One off-street loading berth
shall be provided for every 10,000 square feet of gross floor area but no more
than a total of two spaces up to 40,000 square feet of gross floor area, one
space for each additional 40,000 square feet up to 160,000 square feet, and one
space for every 80,000 additional square feet.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.068 SIGNS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to permit signs that will not,
by reason of their size, location, construction or manner of display, endanger
the public safety of individuals, confuse, mislead or obstruct the vision
necessary for traffic safety, or otherwise endanger public health, and morals;
and to permit and regulate signs in such a way as to support and complement
land-use objectives set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Exempt signs. The following types of signs shall be exempted from the
requirements of this section:
      (1)   Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only
property numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants of premises;
      (2)   Flags and insignia of any government, college, university or
veterans organization, except for the height of the structure;
      (3)   Signs erected by or by order of governmental bodies;
      (4)   Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
letters, trademarks, logos, moving parts, moving or flashing lights; and
      (5)   Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private
property, but bearing no advertising matter.
   (C)   On-premise signs.
      (1)   In any district, except as noted, the provisions of this division
shall be applied to effect the safety of motorists and facilitate traffic
movement.
         (a)   No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where, by
reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, shape or color, it may
obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with any
authorized traffic control sign, signal or device.
         (b)   No sign shall contain or make use of any phrase, symbol, shape,
form or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse
moving traffic.
         (c)   No exterior sign shall be permitted to display flashing,
intermittent, revolving, rotating or animated lighting or illumination, nor any
illumination which simulates or displays motion.
         (d)   Except as permitted in division (C)(7) below, portable signs are
prohibited.
         (e)   All signs not expressly exempted or permitted by this chapter
are prohibited.
      (2)   In all districts, the provisions of this division (C)(2) shall
apply.
         (a)   No part of any sign which is attached to the exterior wall of a
building shall be erected to a height above the roof or parapet line of the
building.
         (b)   No illuminated sign shall be permitted in or within 50 feet of
property in any residence district.
         (c)   No sign shall extend beyond or overhang any exterior wall of the
building upon which they are secured.
         (d)   The minimum setback of free-standing signs from street rights-
of-way shall not be less than those given below. Setback shall be measured to
the nearest point of the sign to the edge of the right-of-way.
 
Minimum Sign Setbacks
Area of Sign per Face   Minimum Setback
5 square feet or less   2 feet
5 to 14.9 square feet   10 feet
15 to 49.9 square feet  20 feet
50 to 99.9 square feet  50 feet
100 or more square feet 80 feet
 
         (e)   The area of a sign shall be determined by the smallest circle,
triangle or rectangle that can be used to enclose the sign, exclusive of
supporting members that bear no message.
         (f)   No free-standing sign shall be erected or maintained on or
within any easement or right-of-way, public or private.
      (3)   In any residence district, the provisions of this section shall
apply.
         (a)   Multi-family developments may display identification signs. The
sign shall not exceed nine square feet in area.
         (b)   Nonresidential uses are permitted one bulletin board or
identification sign. The sign shall not be erected to a height greater than
four feet high and shall not exceed 12 square feet in area unless erected along
an abutting street or road having a speed limit in excess of 45 mph; then the
area of the sign shall not exceed 30 square feet.
         (c)   For each use listed in divisions (C)(3)(a) and (b) above
eligible to display a sign, only one sign per street frontage shall be
permitted, except that uses occupying extended frontages shall be permitted one
such sign per 500 feet of frontage.
      (4)   In any business district, except as herein provided, the provisions
of this section shall apply.
         (a)   Multi-family developments shall be subject to the provisions of
division (C)(3) above.
         (b)   Signs shall be permitted as accessory uses for nonresidential
uses according to the number and net area of signs set forth below:
 
Business Use Signs and Sign Area
District  Number of Signs Net Sign Area (Each Sign)
GB and CB 3               40 square feet
 
      (5)   In any industrial district, each business or industrial use shall
be permitted identification signs on the lot only as incidental uses, not to
exceed two such signs or a total net area of 300 square feet.
      (6)   In any agriculture district, the provisions of this section shall
apply:
         (a)   Agricultural uses shall be permitted one sign not to exceed 30
square feet.
         (b)   Industrial uses shall be permitted a maximum of two signs not to
exceed a combined area of 100 square feet.
         (c)   Business uses shall be permitted two signs not to exceed 30
square feet each.
         (d)   Other nonresidential uses shall be permitted, one bulletin board
or identification sign, indicating nothing other than name and/or address of
the premises, and schedule of services or other information relevant to the
operation of the premises. The sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area
unless erected along an abutting street or road having a speed limit in excess
of 45 mph; then the area of the sign shall not exceed 30 square feet. Only one
sign per street frontage shall be permitted, except that uses occupying
extended frontages shall be permitted one such sign per 500 feet of frontage,
         (e)   Residential uses are subject to the provisions of division (C)
(3) above.
      (7)   The signs permitted by this section shall be allowed in any
district.
         (a)   One "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign not more than nine square feet
in area for each dwelling unit, garage or other quarters where appropriate.
         (b)   One sign, not more than nine square feet in area, for
construction and development, giving the name of the contractors, engineers or
architects, shall be permitted but only during the time that construction or
development is actively underway. Also, one portable sign on premise, not in
excess of the number or size provisions of division (C)(4)(b) may be permitted
by the Administrator up to, but not to exceed 30 days, if the portable sign is
being used in lieu of a permanent sign, or during the period while commercial
construction or remodeling is actively underway, to be removed when the
permanent sign is erected in the first case, or when construction is completed
under that improvement location permit in the second case. In no case shall a
portable sign be permitted beyond 30 days.
         (c)   For an event of public interest sponsored by a church,
governmental agency, school, political organization or charitable organization,
one portable sign not over 50 square feet in area, on the premises on which the
event will take place, shall be permitted; the sign shall not be erected more
than 30 days before the event in question and shall be removed immediately
after the event. Also, directional signs, may be permitted not more than three
square feet in area, showing only a directional arrow and the name of the event
of public interest; the signs shall not be erected more than 14 days before the
event in question and shall be removed immediately after the event.
         (d)   For each real estate subdivision that has been recorded in
accordance with the subdivision regulations, one sign, not over 50 square feet
in area, advertising the sale of property in the subdivision shall be
permitted, but only when located in some portion of the subdivision being
advertised for exclusive of any border, trim, ornamental base, apron, supports,
embellishments and other structural members, if the exclusions do not exceed
20% of the sign area. The area shall be measured by the smallest square,
rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof which will encompass the
area affected.
   (D)   All signs not expressly exempted or permitted by this chapter are
prohibited.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.069 RESTRICTIONS ALONG STREAMS.
   (A)   No building or structure may be erected within a regulatory floodway
unless a permit has been issued to construct in a floodway by the State
Department of Natural Resources.
   (B)   Water well, water lines and sewage facilities located within a flood
plain shall be constructed to eliminate contamination by flood water.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.070 WATER POLLUTION.
   (A)   No authorization of a use under this chapter includes the authority to
discharge liquid or solid wastes into public waters except as permitted under
I.C. 13-18.
   (B)   Plans and specifications for proposed sewage and other waste treatment
and disposal facilities must be approved by the State Department of
Environmental Management and/or the State Board of Health, and any other state
department or agency authorized to review and approve the facilities.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.071 NOISE, ODORS, RADIOACTIVITY, ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES AND VIBRATION.
   No activity that may produce undesirable noise, odors, vibration or other
form of disturbance or pollution is permitted in the industrial areas, greater
than that which is allowed for by the county, the state and the federal
government. Note: when two separate standards have been created the stricter of
the two shall apply.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.072 REQUIREMENTS AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL USES.
   Apartment buildings in a Central Business District:
   (A)   A minimum of one off-street parking space (being at least nine feet by
20 feet in size) located within 300 feet of the apartment building shall be
provided for each apartment;
   (B)   One bedroom apartments shall have at least 450 square feet of living
area and two bedroom apartments shall have at least 600 square feet of living
area;
   (C)   All ground level apartments located in CB district shall be no less
than 800 square feet for a one-bedroom apartment.
      (1)   All ground level apartments located in a CB district shall be no
less than 1,000 square feet for a two-bedroom apartment.
      (2)   All ground level apartments located in a CB district shall be no
less than 1,200 square feet for a three-bedroom apartment.
      (3)   A ground level apartment cannot take up more room than 50% of the
ground level square footage.
      (4)   All ground level apartments are to be located in the rear of the
building with the front being defined as abutting Cavin or Main Streets or
Lincolnway West.
      (5)   In the event the ground level apartment cannot meet the required
square footage for a one-, two-, or three-bedroom apartment within the 50% of
the ground level square footage, no apartment shall be permitted.
      (6)   A two hour fire rated wall must separate the ground level apartment
in the rear and the retail space in the front.
      (7)   Each ground floor apartment must have an entrance and an exit. None
of these required exits for ground level apartments shall go to or through the
front side of the building. A properly installed egress window may be used as
an exit.
      (8)   All ground floor apartments' electrical system shall be up to code.
      (9)   All ground floor apartments must keep all sidewalks, alley, and
public easements free from obstruction.
   (D)   The owner or developer of the apartments shall comply with all state
laws, rules and regulations applicable to apartment usage and safety.
(Ord. 688, passed 2-23-2004; Ord. 870-2015, passed 9-14-2015; Ord. 890-2016,
passed 9-26-2016)
§ 156.073 MINIMUM SQUARE FOOTAGE.
   The minimum square footage for a single-family detached dwelling shall be
950 square feet.
(Ord. 1001-2023, passed 12-11-2023)
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
§ 156.085 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purposes of these regulations are to provide greater design
flexibility in the developments of land when consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan, I.C. 36-7-4, 1400 Series, and intent of this chapter.
   (B)   The use of planned development shall be encouraged when the use of
those regulations:
      (1)   Promotes a harmonious variety of uses;
      (2)   Provides for an economy of shared services and facilities;
      (3)   Are compatible with surrounding areas;
      (4)   Foster the creation of attractive, healthful, efficient and stable
environments for living, shopping or working; and
      (5)   Provides development which is uniquely sensitive to the surrounding
natural environment.
   (C)   The planned development regulations and procedures may apply to the
redevelopment of presently developed lands, or the development of open or
vacant lands, and may apply to parcels of relatively small size as well as
large-scale developments and their relationship with other surrounding uses and
the overall characteristics of the area in which located.
   (D)   Planned development regulations are intended to encourage innovations
in land development techniques so that the growing demands of the community may
be met with greater flexibility and variety in type, design and layout of sites
and buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open spaces and
other amenities generally enhancing the quality of life.
   (E)   Planned development projects should also encourage a more efficient
use of land which reflects the changes in the technology of land development so
that resulting economies may accrue to the benefit of the community at large.
   (F)   In furtherance of the purpose and intent of a planned development, the
provisions of §§
156.055 through
156.068 above, inclusive of this chapter shall not be applied, or be
applicable, to or in a planned development, except that the planned development
shall take into consideration existing and future zoning classifications of
surrounding areas.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.086 CLASSIFICATIONS OF PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Upon preliminary review of a planned development proposal by the
Administrator as provided by this chapter, the proposal shall be identified by
the general character of the dominant use of the development.
   (B)   The proposals shall be classified by the following designations.
      (1)   PD-R Residential. Any development consisting of not less than three
acres in which more than 80% of the interior floor area of all buildings to be
included in the development are used for residential purposes or those
accessory purposes customarily related to residential use. Residential planned
developments may be permitted in R1, R2, R3, R4 and R5 districts.
      (2)   PD-B Commercial. Any development consisting of not less than four
acres in which more than 80% of the interior floor area of all buildings to be
included in the development is to be used for commercial purposes. Commercial
planned development may be permitted in CB and GB districts.
      (3)   PD-I Industrial. Any development consisting of not less than five
acres in which more than 80% of the interior floor area of all buildings to be
included in the development are used for industrial or manufacturing purposes
or the accessory uses customarily relating to industrial uses with the balance
of the interior floor area, if any, being intended for the commercial uses as
reasonably relate to the support or convenience of the intended industrial uses
other occupants. Industrial planned developments are only permitted in I1, I2
and I3 districts.
Figure 6-1. Approval Process for Planned Developments
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/657f5231589e4e9d72860ce82f8ac4b2aa23298e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1652.jpg]
 
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.087 ORGANIZATION OF PROPOSALS.
   Any person, corporation, partnership or association having an ownership
interest in a proposed development, or any group of owners united in interest,
acting jointly and in pursuance to an agreement to carry out the proposal in
separate ownership may propose a planned development in accordance with the
procedures hereinafter established, where the individual owner or group of
owners in making such proposal intends to act as developer or sponsor of the
development if the zoning change is adopted and indicates the requisite
capabilities to carry out the proposal. A parcel, or site proposed for planned
development need not be under single ownership where the proposed development
consists of a group of structures or improvements capable of being developed
separately but in accordance with a single, unitary plan and in which the
separate owners have given their expressed intentions to enter into the private
agreements between or among themselves as will facilitate their mutual
enterprise, and assure its completion as planned to the satisfaction of the
Plan Commission.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.088 FILING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The authorization of a planned development shall be subject to the
procedures expressed herein.
   (B)   Submission of a petition and all other documents required for rezoning
for the appropriate classification, which petition shall be signed by the owner
or owners of all real estate involved in the petition for the planned
development, or which petition shall have attached thereto the notarized
consent of all the owners to the filing of the petition, and to the change to
another classification of their real estate included.
   (C)   The petition, which shall include a preliminary plan and plat for any
area proposed for development as a planned development shall be filed with the
Administrator. The preliminary plan and plat shall include:
      (1)   Proposed layout of streets, open space and other basic elements of
the plan;
      (2)   Identification of location and types of structures and their use
categories within the area, including proposed densities of the uses;
      (3)   Proposals for handling traffic, parking, water supply, sewage
disposal, storm drainage, tree preservation and removal, landscaping, lighting,
signage and other pertinent development features;
      (4)   A separate location map to scale shall show the boundary lines of
adjacent land and the existing zoning of the area proposed to be developed as
well as the adjacent land;
      (5)   The condominium declaration (if applicable), a document creating an
owners' association and any covenants to be made a part of the planned
development as well as the order and estimated time of development;
      (6)   A statement of the proposed order of development of the major
elements of the project, including whether the development will be accomplished
in phases, and, if so, the order and content of each phase; and
      (7)   Any other material requested by the Plan Commission to help explain
the intent of the development, such as character sketches, photographs,
examples of similar developments and the like.
   (D)   The preliminary plan shall be presented in triplicate. The preliminary
plan may include any additional graphics which will explain the features of the
development. It shall also be provided to the following checkpoint agencies for
their review and comment:
      (1)   Design Review Board;
      (2)   City Engineer;
      (3)   Police Department;
      (4)   Fire Department;
      (5)   Park Board;
      (6)   Noble County Health Department;
      (7)   School Corporation;
      (8)   County Soil and Water Conservation District; and
      (9)   If the planned development requires the subdivision of land it must
also be approved by the City Planning Commission.
   (E)   Within 25 days after filing, the Administrator shall meet with the
petitioner regarding the preliminary plan and checkpoint agency comments.
Checkpoint agency personnel may attend this meeting to provide comments. After
the consultation, the petitioner may make modifications to the petition.
   (F)   After the meeting described in division (E) above and after making any
modifications to the proposed preliminary plans the petitioner shall file in
triplicate a "final proposed preliminary plan" which shall:
      (1)   Include all documents included in the preliminary plan;
      (2)   Include an index identifying all documents included in the
preliminary plan;
      (3)   Include a cover sheet indicating that it is the final proposed
preliminary plan and indicating the date and zoning case number; and
      (4)   Be bound or stapled together and all documents therein reduced to a
size no larger than eight and one-half by 14 inches, except for the maps,
sketches and plat.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.089 PRELIMINARY PLAN HEARING.
   (A)   The petition, if and as modified, shall then be heard by the Plan
Commission as a petition for zoning map amendment and subject to the procedures
applicable thereto. The Plan Commission may recommend approval or disapproval
of the plan and may impose any reasonable condition(s) with its affirmative
recommendation. If disapproval is recommended, the application shall not be
certified to the Council of the city. If approval is recommended, the
preliminary plan shall be stamped "approved preliminary planned development"
and be signed by the President and Secretary of the Plan Commission. One copy
shall be permanently retained in the office of the Plan Commission, one copy
shall be returned to the petitioner and one copy and all conditions shall be
certified as described in division (B) below.
   (B)   The approved preliminary planned development shall then be certified
to the Council of the city for adoption as a planned development district
pursuant to the laws governing proposals to change zoning maps. Upon adoption
by the legislative body, the petitioner shall prepare the final detailed plan.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.090 APPROVAL OF FINAL DETAILED PLAN.
   (A)   Before any development takes place, the petitioner shall file with the
Plan Commission a minimum of seven sets of the final detailed plan specifying
the location, composition and engineering features of all lots, storm drainage,
sanitary sewage, water supply facilities, public or private streets, recreation
facilities, site perimeter treatment, landscaping, plat and other site
development features including locations of buildings. The petitioner shall
also file the original of all signed and notarized documents pertaining to
restrictive covenants, condominium declaration and/or the creation of a
homeowner's association, along with financial assurance for the satisfactory
installation of all public improvements in the form of bonds or such other
assurances as are required in the normal procedures of platting pursuant to the
provisions of
Chapter 155 of this code. The Plan Commission shall then approve the final
detailed plans by resolution duly adopted, upon an affirmative finding that the
final detailed plan is consistent with the approved preliminary planned
development as adopted and passed by the Council of the city upon rezoning.
Having so once approved the final detailed plan, the Plan Commission shall have
no further authority to review or act thereon, except as to enforcement, except
as to an amendatory ordinance, and except as hereafter provided for.
   (B)   The approved preliminary plan may provide for development of the
property involved in phases. If the phasing is included as a part of the
approval of the preliminary plan, the petitioner may submit partial final
detailed plans which correspond to the phases involved. The partial final
detailed plans, when approved, shall be treated in the same manner as approved
final detailed plans for an entire planned development.
   (C)   The approved final detailed plan or phase thereof shall be stamped
"approved final detailed planned development" and be signed by the President
and Secretary with one copy permanently retailed in the office of the Plan
Commission following recordation as specified in §
156.092 below.
   (D)   Unless extended by the Plan Commission pursuant to §
156.095(A) below, approval of the first phase of the final detailed plan shall
be obtained within two years and approval of the balance of the final detailed
plan shall be obtained within five years after adoption of the Planned
Development District by the Council, of the city.
   (E)   In the event that approval of a final detailed plan is not timely
obtained, the Plan Commission may initiate an amendment to the zoning map
relating to the land.
   (F)   In the exercise of continuing jurisdiction, the Administrator may from
time to time approve only minor modifications of the approved final detailed
planned development in a manner consistent with the approved preliminary
planned development. The modifications shall not include any increase in
density, any lessening of aesthetic treatments, any alteration of frontage or
building location, any change in type of use, or any change in access points.
   (G)   Approval of a final detailed plan shall expire after a period of five
years from the approved phasing of the preliminary plan unless the development
is 50% completed in terms of public improvements including streets, parks,
walkways, utility installations and sanitary sewers. Determination of the
amount of completion shall be made by the Plan Commission upon a recommendation
of the Administrator. Following expiration of the final detailed plan, the city
shall declare the bond to be in default and may use the bond to cause all
public improvements to be installed according to the final detailed plans.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.091 COVENANTS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All covenants, when required by the Plan Commission, shall be set
forth in detail and shall provide for a provision for the release of the
restriction by execution of a document so stating and suitable for recording,
signed by the Plan Commission President and Secretary upon authorization by the
Plan Commission and all of the owners of property in the area involved in the
petition for whose benefit the covenant was created. The covenants shall
provide that their benefits run to the Plan Commission and shall be
specifically enforceable by the Plan Commission in addition to the property
owners.
   (B)   The Plan Commission may require the recording of covenants for any
reasonable public or semi-public purpose, including, but not limited to, the
allocation of land by the petitioner for public thoroughfares, parks, schools,
recreational facilities and other public and semi-public purposes. The
covenants shall provide that if a governmental unit or agency thereof does not
proceed with acquisition of the allocated land within a specified period of
time, the covenants shall automatically terminate. If termination occurs, the
petitioners shall then submit for approval by the Plan Commission a modified
final detailed plan for the land, otherwise consistent with the approved
preliminary planned development.
   (C)   The Commission may require the recording of covenants for any other
reasonable purpose, including, but not limited to, imposing standards for
development of property in a planned development. The development standards may
include, but are not limited to, requirements as to the following:
      (1)   Lot area;
      (2)   Floor area;
      (3)   Ratios of floor space to land space;
      (4)   Area in which structures maybe built "buildable area;"
      (5)   Open space;
      (6)   Setback lines and minimum yards;
      (7)   Building separations;
      (8)   Height of structures;
      (9)   Signs;
      (10)   Off-street parking and loading space;
      (11)   Design standards (including landscaping requirements); and
      (12)   Phasing of development.
   (D)   Adequate provision shall be made for a private organization with
direct responsibility to, and control by, the property owners involved to
provide for the operation and maintenance of all common facilities including
private streets jointly shared by the property owners if the facilities are a
part of the planned development, and, in that instance legal assurances shall
be provided and recorded which show that the private organization is self-
perpetuating.
   (E)   Common facilities which are not dedicated to the public shall be
maintained to standards assuring continuous and adequate maintenance. Common
facilities not dedicated to the public shall be operated and maintained at no
expense to any governmental unit.
   (F)   All private streets shall be maintained by the aforementioned private
organization in such a manner that adequate access is provided at all times to
vehicular traffic so that fire, police, health, sanitation and public utility
vehicles can serve the properties contiguous or adjacent thereto, and so that
the vehicles will have adequate turning area. All streets and roadways not
dedicated to the public shall be operated and maintained at no expense to any
governmental unit.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.092 RECORDING.
   (A)   All approved final detailed planned development plans and plats and
modifications thereof shall be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder
within two years after approval, but before any development takes place. Proof
of the recording shall be provided to the Plan Commission within 30 days
thereof. Failure to so record shall automatically void the approval of the
final detailed planned development.
   (B)   Where upon completion of all development, the exact measurements, as
to the location of buildings or structures erected during the development, are
deemed desirable for public record by recording thereof. The developer may
submit a copy of the approved final detailed planned development to the
Administrator as an amended approved final detailed planned development with
the exact measurements thereon shown, and upon being satisfied that the
measurements are substantially the same as indicated on the original approved
final detailed planned development, shall re-approve, date and sign the amended
approved final detailed planned development, which the developer shall then
record.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.093 PERMIT.
   An improvement location permit shall be issued for a planned development
upon full compliance with the approved final detailed planned development.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.094 CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   No construction or installation work shall be done on any public
improvements until the petitioner has, at least 48 hours in advance, notified
the appropriate governmental inspectors of his or her intention to begin the
work, in order that inspections may be made as the work progresses.
   (B)   All development shall be in conformity with the approved and recorded
final detailed plan and any deviations from the approved and recorded final
detailed plan shall be subject to appropriate enforcement action as provided
for in this chapter.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.095 EXTENSIONS, ABANDONMENT AND EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Extensions of the time for accomplishing any matters set forth herein
may be granted by the Plan Commission at a public hearing for good cause shown.
   (B)   Upon the abandonment of a development authorized under this section
(abandonment shall be deemed to have occurred when no improvements have been
made pursuant to the approved final detailed planned development for 24
consecutive months), or upon the expiration of five years from the approval of
a final detailed planned development for a development which has not been
completed, an amendment may be initiated as provided by law to the zoning map
so that the land will be zoned into a category or categories which most nearly
approximate its then existing use or other zoning category or categories which
the legislative body deems appropriate.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.096 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   All proceedings brought under this section shall be subject to the rules of
procedure of the Plan Commission, where not inconsistent with the procedure
otherwise stated herein.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.097 LIMITATION OF REZONING.
   The Plan Commission shall not initiate any amendments to the zoning map
concerning the property involved in a planned development before completion of
the development as long as the development is in conformity with the approved
final detailed planned development and is proceeding in accordance with the
time requirements imposed herein.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS, VARIANCES, SPECIAL USES AND APPEALS
§ 156.110 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS; MEMBERSHIP AND JURISDICTION.
   There is hereby reestablished the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals to be
known as the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals of the city. The Advisory Board
of Zoning Appeals shall be a continuation of the present Board of Zoning
Appeals of the city heretofore established under the advisory plan law, being
I.C. 36-7-4-900, as added by Acts 1981, P.L. 309 § 23.
   (A)   Membership. The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of and
continue as a five member board appointed as follows, in accordance with I.C.
36-7-4-902 and 36-7-4-903.
      (1)   Three citizen members appointed by the executive of the city, of
whom one must be a member of the Plan Commission and two must not be members of
the Plan Commission.
      (2)   One citizen member appointed by the fiscal body of the city, who
must not be a member of the Plan Commission.
      (3)   One member appointed by the Plan Commission from the Plan
Commission’s membership, who must be a citizen member of the Plan Commission
other than the member appointed under division (A)(1) above.
      (4)   The Plan Commission shall designate, as its appointment to the
Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals, one of the two citizen members who were
appointed to the Plan Commission to represent the unincorporated area. The
member must reside in the unincorporated area. The member shall be appointed
for a term of four years, and is entitled to participate and vote in all
deliberations of the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (B)   Terms of office. Following adoption of this chapter, each of the above
members shall be reappointed for the balance of the term being served on the
present Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals of the city. Thereafter each member,
except those appointed from the Advisory Plan Commission shall be for a term of
four years. The members appointed from the Advisory Plan Commission shall be
for a term of one year. Each term shall expire on the first Monday of the year
of termination.
   (C)   Territorial jurisdiction. The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals shall
have jurisdiction over all the land subject to this chapter.
   (D)   Subject matter jurisdiction. The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals
shall have exclusive jurisdiction for:
      (1)   Variances under statute and this chapter;
      (2)   Special uses; and
      (3)   Appeals as provided by statute, including requirements for
procurement of improvement location or occupancy permits or any ordinance
adopted under I.C. 36-7-4 or any prior zoning statute, and any other appeals
authorized by statute.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999; Ord. 892-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 156.111 RULES AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Rules and by-laws. The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals shall have
sole authority to adopt any and all rules under I.C. 36-7-4-916 and any and all
by-laws concerning organization, selection of officers, forms for applications,
filing requirements, other than as to place of filing as herein provided for,
procedures, notices for and conduct of meetings. Upon adoption of the rules and
by-laws, they shall be applicable to the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (B)   Facilities and funding. The city shall provide suitable facilities for
the holding of Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals hearings and the storage of its
recorded documents and accounts, and its annual budget to provide sufficient
funds for the functioning of the Board and its staff.
   (C)   Filing. All applications for variances, special uses and requests for
appeal should be filed by the applicant with the staff of the Advisory Board of
Zoning Appeals, along with a $50 filing fee.
   (D)   Hearings. All hearings required for variances, special uses and
appeals shall be by the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals. As per § 82 (A),
procedures for public notice setting forth time and place for all hearings by
the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals shall be established by the Advisory Board
of Zoning Appeals, consistent with I.C. 5-3-1 or any other applicable provision
of Indiana Code.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999; Ord. 617, passed 6-14-1999)
§ 156.112 SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   There shall be no classes of cases or application therefor, nor any
particular situation in which this chapter authorizes either special
exceptions, contingent uses, conditional uses or use variances.
   (B)   The Advisory Board may approve a special use in a district subordinate
and in direct connection with primary use if, after a hearing under §
156.111(D) above, it makes findings of fact in writing, that:
      (1)   Section
156.035 above authorizes that special use in that district;
      (2)   The requirements and development standards for the requested
special use as prescribed by this chapter will be met; and
      (3)   Granting the special use will not subvert the general purposes
served by this chapter and will not, because of traffic generation, placement
of outdoor lighting, noise production or hours of operation, materially and
permanently injure other property or uses in the same zoning district and
vicinity.
   (C)   The Advisory Board may impose such reasonable conditions upon its
approval as it deems necessary to find that division (B)(3) above will be
served.
   (D)   The Advisory Board may permit or require the owner of the parcel of
property to make a written commitment concerning the use or development of the
parcel.
   (E)   The approval of a special use under division (B) above is unnecessary
for a use authorized by §
156.035 above if that use existed on the date this chapter, or pertinent
amendments to it, were passed. However, this section shall not authorize the
expansion of such a use if it involves the enlargement of a building, structure
or land area.
   (F)   A special use approved by the Advisory Board may not be expanded,
extended or enlarged unless reapproved by the Advisory Board under the
procedures set forth in this chapter for approving a special use.
   (G)   A special use, approved under division (B) above or authorized by
division (E) above ceases to be authorized and is void if that use is not
established within a 12-month period of the date the special use was approved,
or if that special use is discontinued at that site for a 12-month period
during which time it is not succeeded by the same specifically approved special
use.
   (H)   A special use may be terminated by the Advisory Board of Zoning
Appeals, upon filing of an application therefor by an interested person or the
Administrator, and upon a finding at a public hearing, with notice to the
property owner, that the terms of this chapter, or conditions of approval or
commitments have not been compiled with.
   (I)   For a special use to be eligible for a public hearing by the Advisory
Board under this section, an applicant must first receive a determination from
the Administrator that a special use is required for the intended use or for
the expansion, extension or enlargement of a use under division (F) above. The
Administrator shall file a report of determination (in a form presented by the
Advisory Board) with the Plan Commission which body shall determine how the
granting of the special use would affect the purposes served by this chapter in
furtherance of the Comprehensive Plan. Within 30 days; of the date on which it
received the application, the Commission shall report its determination to the
Advisory Board, for action by it as authorized by division (B) above. If the
Advisory Board grants the special use, it shall direct the applicant to apply
for an improvement location permit under §
156.125 below. If the application complies with this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances, the Administrator shall issue the improvement
location permit for the approved special use.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.113 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Advisory Board may grant a variance from the development standards
(such as height, bulk, area) of this chapter if, after a public hearing, it
makes findings of fact in writing, that:
      (1)   The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the community;
      (2)   The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in
the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner; and
      (3)   The strict application of the terms of this chapter: is being
applied to some condition peculiar to the property involved that is not common
to other properties in the same zoning district; and will result in an unusual
and unnecessary hardship. This situation shall not be solely self-imposed, nor
be based on a perceived reduction of or restriction on economic gain.
   (B)   The Advisory Board may permit or require the owner of a parcel of
property to make written commitment concerning the use or development of that
parcel or may impose conditions upon that grant of variance.
   (C)   A variance granted by The Advisory Board shall run with the land until
such time as the use of the variance ends; or the property conforms with the
ordinance as written.
   (D)   Where an owner has failed to comply with any condition and/or
commitment permitted or required by the grant of variance, the Advisory Board
may authorize that action as it may deem appropriate to obtain compliance by
the owner with the condition or commitment of the grant, or with the terms of
this chapter in the same manner as if the variance had not been granted.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999; Ord. 892-2016, passed 11-14-2016)
§ 156.114 APPEALS.
   (A)   A decision of the Administrator enforcing this chapter may be appealed
to the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals by any person who is adversely affected
by the decision.
   (B)   On an appeal under division (A) above, the Advisory Board of Zoning
Appeals may make any decision that the Administrator might have made.
   (C)   All appeals from a decision of the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals
shall be made pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-1001 through 36-7-4-1020. The person
aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall present the
petition provided for in I.C. 36-7-4-1003 to the court within 30 days after the
entry of the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS
§ 156.125 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   No special use may be approved under §
156.112 and no other change in the use of land that involves a change in any
structure on or in any land, or in the condition of the land, may be made
unless the Administrator on application, issues an improvement location permit
authorizing the change.
   (B)   The filing fees for improvement location permits shall be as follows.
      (1)   New construction, for one-, two- or multi-family dwelling units, as
well as placement of manufactured homes types I, II and III: $0.10 per square
foot, with up to six inspections included. There will be a $40 charge for each
additional inspection. The maximum charge will be $600.
      (2)   Alterations, additions and accessory buildings: $0.10 per square
foot, with up to six inspections included. There will be a $40 charge for each
additional inspection. The maximum charge will be $600.
      (3)   New commercial and industrial construction: ten cents per square
foot, with up to six inspections included. There will be a $40 charge for each
additional inspection. The maximum charge will be $3,500.
      (4)   Educational or religious facility: $0.10 per square foot, with up
to six inspections included. There will be a $40 charge for each additional
inspection. The maximum charge is $2,000.
      (5)   There will be a $40 charge per visit for any other inspection.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.126 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No application for an improvement location permit under §
156.125 above may be considered unless the applicant has also applied for a
certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   No land or structure with respect to which a permit has been issued
under §
156.125 above may be used for the purpose contemplated by the permit unless the
Administrator, after the change is completed, issues a certificate of occupancy
stating that the change complies with this chapter and with the permit.
   (C)   Within ten days after the completion of the change authorized by the
improvement location permit, the Administrator or his or her designee shall
inspect the premises and, if the change conforms to this chapter and the
improvement location permit, and a certificate of compliance, if required by §
156.129 below, has been obtained, he or she shall issue a certificate of
occupancy.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.127 SITE PLAN AND CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS.
   (A)   In addition to all other required applications, information and
permits from other governmental agencies, a person who applies for an
improvement location permit under §
156.125 must furnish the Administrator with plans drawn to scale showing:
      (1)   The location and legal description of the land concerned;
      (2)   The location and size of all buildings and structures already on
the land and those to be erected, including parking, signage, landscaping and
screening;
      (3)   The size of all entrances to and exits from the (and, including all
adjacent streets and highways;
      (4)   Detailed drawings showing all construction and materials; and
      (5)   Elevations of all buildings to be constructed.
   (B)   Plans so furnished shall be kept by the Administrative Officer as
permanent records. As a condition of issuing a permit, the Administrator may
require changes to the landscape plan upon recommendation of the Design Review
Committee, the relocation of any structures or buildings, or of any entrance or
exit, or the inclusion of entrances or exits not shown on the plan, or the
deletion of any entrance or exit, if the requirement is necessary in the
interest of the public welfare or to an appropriate balancing of the interests
of persons in the district and vicinity concerned.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.128 INDUSTRIAL USES; CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   If an application for an improvement location permit relates to an
industrial use, it must be accompanied by a certificate of compliance,
certified by a registered professional engineer of the state, stating that the
use will meet the performance standards of the district concerned. After ten
working days have elapsed during which the Administrator has not required
additional information or objected in writing, he or she shall issue the
permit.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.129 MANUFACTURED HOMES AND HOME SUBDIVISIONS (R5).
   Manufactured homes and manufactured home subdivisions must satisfy all of
the other requirements of this chapter and meet all requirements of
Chapter 155 of this code, in addition to the following requirements. If these
requirements differ from the state standards set forth in I.C. 13-1-7 or 410
I.A.C. 6-6-1, the stricter requirement governs.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, fabricated in an off-site manufacturing
facility, which is transportable in one or more sections and is designed for
uses as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. Such a structure may or may not be built on an integral
chassis. The term MANUFACTURED HOME shall not include a "recreational vehicle."
      MANUFACTURED HOME, TYPE I. A single-family dwelling unit designed and
built in a factory, installed as a permanent residence, which bears a seal
certifying that it was built in compliance with the federal Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law (1974 (U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.),
and which also complies with the following specifications:
         (a)   Shall have been constructed after January 1, 1981 and must
exceed 950 square feet of occupied space per I.C. 36-7-4(d);
         (b)   Is attached to a permanent underfloor foundation of masonry
construction, which is not pierced, except for required ventilation and access;
and has a permanent perimeter enclosure constructed in accordance with the One
and Two Family Dwelling Code;
         (c)   Has wheels, axles and towing chassis removed;
         (d)   Has a pitched roof with a minimum rise of 2/12;
         (e)   Consists of two or more sections; which, when joined, have a
minimum dimension of 20 feet by 47.5 feet in length or width enclosing occupied
space; and
         (f)   Have siding and roofing material of a type customarily used on
dwellings constructed on-site.
      MANUFACTURED HOME, TYPE II. A structure, fabricated in an off-site
manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at a building site, bearing
a seal certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards Act (42 U.S.C.  §§ 5401 et seq.) or I.C.
22-15-4-1 (as opposed to a Type I manufactured home which is built in the
conformance with the Indiana One and Two Family Dwelling Code). To be
considered a Type II manufactured home, the structure must:
         (a)   Contain at least 950 square feet of occupied space per dwelling
unit;
         (b)   Be a double or multiple section unit;
         (c)   Be placed on a permanent under-floor foundation installed in
conformance with the State One and Two Family Dwelling Code and according to
the manufacturer's installation specifications;
         (d)   Be placed onto a permanent perimeter enclosure in conformance
with the Indiana One and Two Family Dwelling Code;
         (e)   Have the wheels, axles and hitch mechanisms removed;
         (f)   Have siding and roofing material of a type customarily used on
dwellings constructed on-site;
         (g)   Be connected to all the utilities necessary for the occupancy of
the unit in conformance with the State One and Two Family Dwelling Code; and
         (h)   Have been constructed after January 1, 1981.
      MANUFACTURED HOME, TYPE III. A structure, fabricated in an off-site
manufacturing facility, which is transportable in one or more sections and is
designed for use as a single-family dwelling. A mobile home would meet this
definition. To be considered a TYPE III MANUFACTURED HOME, the structure must:
         (a)   Be properly connected to all utilities necessary for the
occupancy of the unit; and
         (b)   Be set on piers and properly skirted, with wheels and axles
removed, in a manufactured home subdivision.
   (B)   Minimum lot area.
      (1)   Manufactured home subdivision, five acres.
      (2)   Manufactured home lot, 5,000 square feet.
   (C)   Ground floor area. A manufactured home may not be established, erected
or changed so that its ground floor area is less than 500 square feet or cover
more than 40% of the total lot area, as stated in §
156.056 above.
   (D)   Building height. A main building or structure may not be erected or
changed so as to have a height greater than 25 feet, or as stated in §
156.055 above.
   (E)   Yards and distances between structures.
      (1)   The minimum distance between manufactured home stands on opposite
sides of the street must be at feast 60 feet and front yards must be at least
15 feet, as stated in §
156.059.
      (2)   The minimum distance between a manufactured home stand and a street
pavement, a common parking area, a common walk or other common area must be ten
feet, or as restricted in §
156.059.
      (3)   The minimum distance between a manufactured home stand and the pane
boundary when adjoining another use must be 30 feet.
   (F)   Laundry facilities.
      (1)   Laundry facilities must be provided either individually in each
manufactured home and its space, in a centralized common facility, in
decentralized common facilities, or in a combination of these to suit local
preferences and the availability of washers and dryers supplied in the
manufactured homes.
      (2)   Where centralized provisions of washers, dryers or common drying
yards are required they must be located convenient to the manufactured home
spaces.
   (G)   Recreation facilities.
      (1)   Recreation areas and facilities, such as playgrounds, swimming
pools and community buildings must be provided to meet the anticipated needs of
the clientele the park is designed to serve. Provision of separate adult and
children's recreation areas is encouraged.
      (2)   At least one-half acre per 25 units must be devoted to designed and
developed recreational facilities, generally provided in a centralized location
or in the larger parks, decentralized. The minimum dimension of a recreation
area is 100 square feet. RECREATION AREA includes space for community
buildings, adult recreation, child play areas and swimming pools.
   (H)   Screen planting and fences.
      (1)   A tight screen planting six feet in width and height, effective
during all seasons of the year, must be placed adjacent to the boundary of a
manufactured home subdivision.
      (2)   A wire mesh fence four feet high must be placed at the boundary
line of a manufactured home subdivision.
      (3)   Fences or free standing walls must be installed where necessary for
screening purposes, such as around laundry yards, refuse collection points and
play grounds.
      (4)   All fences and walls must be located at least 18 feet from interior
street center lines and at least 18 inches from the pavement edge of streets,
driveways, parking spaces and walks.
      (5)   Fences and walls must be appropriately designed for the function
intended and shall be substantially constructed to withstand conditions of
soil, weather and use.
   (I)   Community facilities. Essential community facilities and services for
the type of manufactured home subdivision under construction, such as schools,
recreation areas, police and fire protection must be made reasonably accessible
to the park, or provisions must be made assuring these facilities and services.
   (J)   Sanitary facilities.
      (1)   The manufactured home subdivision must be provided with a complete
sanitary sewer system that connects with an existing approved sanitary sewer
outlet with a separate treatment plant, to be provided by the developer in
accordance with the minimum requirements of the State Board of Health and the
Stream Pollution Control Board.
      (2)   The plans for the installation of a sanitary sewer system must be
provided by the developer of a manufactured home subdivision and approved by
the State Board of Health. Upon the completion of the sanitary sewer
installation, the plans for the system as built must be filed with the
Commission.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 13-1 was repealed by P.L.1-1996, Sec. 99.
§ 156.130 MANUFACTURED HOMES; TYPE II AND III AS TEMPORARY USE IN R1, R2 AND R3
DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Manufactured homes Type III shall be permitted as temporary uses only
in R1, R2 and R3 districts as subject to the requirements in §§
156.055 through
156.072 above, as well as those in this section.
   (B)   In the event that a single-family home has been destroyed by fire,
explosion, act of God or the public enemy, and an improvement location permit
has been issued for its replacement or reconstruction, the property owner may
make application for an improvement location permit for a Type III manufactured
home to be placed on the same property for a period not to exceed one year. No
extensions of time shall be permitted by the Administrator.
   (C)   Application procedures and requirements shall be the same as for any
other improvement location permit.
   (D)   Placement of the Type III manufactured home shall be subject to all
use requirements and restrictions applicable to a single-family home.
   (E)   In addition to all other requirements, the property owner shall post a
$1,000 cash bond in favor of the city to be held by the City Clerk. The cash
bond shall be returned without interest upon removal of the Type III
manufactured home and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the
constructed reconstructed single-family home. The cash bond may be drawn on by
the Council of the city, at the Council's discretion upon the advice of the
Administrator, that the property owner has failed to remove the Type III
manufactured home either at the end of one year or within one week of the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the constructed reconstructed
single-family home, whichever occurs first. The cash bond may be used to defray
expenses incurred by the city for the removal of the Type III manufactured home
and legal costs directly associated with the enforcement of this chapter.
   (F)   This section is not intended nor should it be construed to limit the
damages, legal equitable, that the city may seek in the enforcement of this
chapter, nor should this section be construed as authorizing any violation of
this chapter and
Chapter 155 of this code, and the designated uses of respective parcels of real
estate.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.131 OTHER TEMPORARY FACILITIES.
   (A)   No trailer, mobile unit, mobile prefabricated structure, or any other
temporary facility shall be used for school, church, business, office or any
other nonresidential use except as for specially provided for by the Planning
Commission as a temporary use.
   (B)   Such a structure may not be used for a period longer than one year. No
temporary use shall be permitted where permanent use for the purpose is not
permitted or authorized.
   (C)   When a temporary facility is used in connection with a construction
project such use may exist in any district where the use of the completed
structure would be permitted for as long as the construction is proceeding with
reasonable diligence.
   (D)   Application procedures and requirements shall be the same as for any
other improvement location permit.
   (E)   In addition to all other requirements, the property owner shall post a
$1,000 cash bond in favor of the city to be held by the City Clerk.
      (1)   The cash bond shall be returned without interest upon removal of
the temporary structure. The cash bond may be drawn on by the Council of the
city, at the Council's discretion upon the advice of the Administrator, that
the property owner has failed to remove the temporary unit either at the end of
one year or within one week of completion of the permanent structure.
      (2)   The cash bond may be used to defray expenses incurred by the city
for the removal of the temporary structure and legal costs directly associated
with the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.132 RECORDS.
   (A)   A record of each improvement location permit and each certificate of
occupancy shall be kept by the Administrator.
   (B)   Upon request, a copy shall be furnished to any person having a
proprietary possessory interest in the premises concerned.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.133 ISSUANCE; DENIAL.
   The Administrator shall accept only a complete application and issue the
improvement location permit or deny the application together with a statement
of reasons for the denial within a period of eight working days following its
submittal, except for the longer period of time required for industrial uses as
provided in §
156.128 above.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.134 APPEALS.
   A decision of the Administrator under §
156.131 above may be appealed to the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals subject
to the provisions of §
156.114 above.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.135 EXPIRATION.
   An improvement location permit shall be valid for a period of one year at
which time it shall expire, unless work authorized by the improvement location
permit is proceeding and inspections have been made by an official City
Inspector, in which case it shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Administrator to enforce these regulations
and to bring any violations or lack of compliance to the attention of the City
Attorney who may file a complaint against the person and prosecute the alleged
violation.
   (B)   Any person may, by suit in a circuit or superior court of the county,
enjoin the violation of this chapter.
   (C)   The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals by mandatory injunction in the
circuit court of the county against the owner or possessor of the real estate,
may require the removal, of a structure erected in violation of this chapter,
or the removal of any use or condition in violation of this chapter.
   (D)   A use that violates this chapter shall be treated as if it were a
common nuisance, and the owner or possessor of the structure, land or premises
upon which the use is maintained shall be liable for the nuisance.
   (E)   Any person whether owner and/or possessor, who shall violate, or who
permits or allows a violation, of any of the provisions of this chapter, or who
fails to comply therewith or with any requirements thereunder, or who shall
build, reconstruct or structurally alter any building in violation of any
detailed statement or plan submitted upon which an approval or grant is given
under this chapter, shall, upon complaint filed in any court of the county and
upon judgment finding the violation, be fined not less than $500 and not more
than $1,000, and each day that the violation or non-compliance shall be
permitted to exist, shall constitute a separate violation.
   (F)   No improvement location permit or building permit required under the
Uniform Building Code or this chapter shall be issued on any property subject
to this chapter in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
   (G)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary or
appearing to be to the contrary, and in addition and supplementary to other
provisions of this chapter, if the Board of Zoning Appeals or the city is
required to utilize the services of the city attorney or any other attorney in
investigating a possible violation of this chapter or enforcing the provisions
of this chapter before any board or court (including appeals), and the
investigation results in a determination that a violation has occurred or if
the Board of Zoning Appeals or city is successful in its enforcement of the
ordinance by way of suit, appeal or other appropriate proceeding, the
respondent, defendant or party investigated for a violation shall pay the
city's reasonable attorney fees and all costs related to the investigation of
the violation and/or the enforcement of this chapter, unless the attorney fees
or costs are specifically waived by the City Council.
   (H)   As to any appeal from a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals, costs
may not be allowed against the Board of Zoning Appeals unless it appears to the
court that the Board acted with gross negligence or in bad faith in making the
decision brought up for review.
   (I)   The Administrator or any person or persons assisting the Administrator
in the application, and enforcement of this chapter is hereby authorized to go
onto private property for the purpose of conducting inspections required by the
chapter or any order of the Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals or the
City Council, or required to determine if this chapter is being violated, or
required to enforce this chapter. The inspection or inspections shall occur at
reasonable times and shall be conducted in a manner so as not to disturb the
peace.
(Ord. 614, passed 2-22-1999)
APPENDIX A: FORMS AND CERTIFICATES
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ON PROPOSED INITIAL OR REPLACEMENT ZONING ORDINANCE
Note: The Plan Commission must publish a notice of the public hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation within the municipality.
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT the Plan Commission of Ligonier, Indiana, on the
_____ day of ___________________________, _____, at _______ AM PM (circle one)
at the Ligonier City Hall, 103 West Third Street, Ligonier, Indiana, will hold
a public hearing on a proposed zoning ordinance for the City of Ligonier.
The geographic areas to which the proposed ordinance applies are:
_________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
The following is a summary of the subject matter contained in the proposed
ordinance: __________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
Written objections or comments to the provisions of the ordinance may be filed
with the Plan Commission before such hearing, will be heard at the specified
time and place and will be considered. Oral comments concerning the proposal
will also be heard. The hearing may be continued from time to time as may be
necessary.
A copy of the proposed ordinance is available for public inspection in the
Office of the City Clerk in the City Hall.
Plan Commission of Ligonier, Indiana
By: _________________
   Secretary
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ON ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT AMENDMENT
Note: Public Notice is to be published at least ten days prior to the date set
for the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
Notice is hereby given that the Plan Commission of Ligonier, Indiana will hold
a hearing on a proposed amendment to the text of Ordinance No. _______, the
Zoning Ordinance of Ligonier, Indiana. The hearing will be held on the ______
day of _____________,_____, at _______AM PM (circle one) at the Ligonier City
Hall, 103 West Third Street, Ligonier, Indiana. Interested parties may voice an
opinion upon hearing date and/or file written comments concerning the
amendment.
The proposed amendment was initiated by the Plan Commission. The amendment
would do the following:
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
This amendment would apply to the following geographic area:
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
The proposed amendment may be examined in the office of the Plan Commission
located in the Ligonier City Hall in Ligonier, Indiana.
Plan Commission of Ligonier, Indiana
By: _________________________
   Secretary
TRANSMITTAL OF TEXT AMENDMENT TO LEGISLATIVE BODY
RESOLUTION
No: _________
Passed: __________
A RESOLUTION RECOMMENDING THAT THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LIGONIER,
INDIANA, APPROVE A PROPOSAL INITIATED BY THE COMMISSION TO AMEND THE TEXT OF
THE ZONING ORDINANCE.
WHEREAS, The Plan Commission of the City of Ligonier did on _________________
hold a legally advertised public hearing on an amendment to the text of Chapter
___________________ of the Code of Laws of the City of Ligonier, Indiana, which
is the zoning ordinance of the City, until all objections and remonstrances
were heard; and
WHEREAS, This amendment was initiated by the Plan Commission; and
WHEREAS, the request did propose that the ordinance be amended to.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, That the Plan Commission of Ligonier, Indiana,
certifies that the commission makes a favorable recommendation to the City
Council of Ligonier, Indiana, that the attached ordinance amending the text of
the zoning ordinance be adopted.
__________________________________________
President, Plan Commission
__________________________________________
Secretary, Plan Commission
PETITION TO AMEND THE ZONING MAP
Note: This form is used when a person requests a change in the zoning ordinance
map. The forms usually are supplied to the petitioner by the Plan Commission
office which keeps various forms on Hie for public distribution. (A zoning map
change may also be initiated by the Plan Commission or by a legislative body
which requires the Plan Commission to prepare the petition.) The form is
completed by the petitioners and filed with the Secretary of the Plan
Commission, who in turn submits the petition to the Commission for review at a
public hearing and recommendation to the appropriate legislative body.
Ligonier Plan Commission         Date Submitted: ______________
                  Docket/Case No.: _____________
1.    Owner: _______________   Address: _____________________________   Phone:
_____________
2.    Record of Ownership:    Deed Book _______   Page _________   Purchase
Date ___________________
3.    Legal Description:
_________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
4.    Common Address of Property Involved:
__________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
5.    Proposed Zoning Change:
   From the _____________ District to the ______________ District, for the
property shown outlined in red on the map attached hereto, which is made a part
of this petition.
6.    State how the proposed change will not adversely affect the surrounding
properties. ______________
____________________________________________________________________________________
7.    Has the owner contacted adjoining property owners? _______________
CHECKLIST FOR ZONING MAP CHANGE APPLICATION
Note: The checklist below is used to assist in making decisions concerning the
granting of rezoning applications.
                                  Yes          No
1.   Will the rezoning fulfill a public need for that type of land
use?      ________      ________
2.   If "yes" to #1 above, should the rezoning be done in the area
   requested, or would the public interest be better served by
   rezoning another area of the community?               ________      ________
3.   Does the rezoning conform to the future land use map in the
   comprehensive plan?                        ________      ________
4.   Will the new land use complement the present and future
   traffic flows or would the rezoning cause an adverse
impact?      ________      ________
5.   Can adequate off-street parking be provided if the rezoning
   request is granted?                        ________      ________
6.   Have the adjacent landowners been fully informed of the
   rezoning request?                        ________      ________
7.   Have the potential inconveniences and nuisances (such as noise,
   neon lights, odors and the like) of the rezoning request on
   adjacent landowners been adequately
considered?            ________      ________
8.   Are there adequate public utilities and services available to the
   land if rezoned?                        ________      ________
9.   If not, will the local government have to pay the cost of
   installation?                           ________      ________
10.   Can it be assured that this is not spot zoning, a violation of
   precedents, or arbitrary and
capricious?               ________      ________
11.   Is it really needed, or is it merely for the convenience of the
   applicant?                           ________      ________
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ON AMENDMENT TO ZONING MAP
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT THE Plan Commission of Ligonier, Indiana, on the
_________ day of _____________, _____, at _________ AM PM (circle one) at the
Ligonier City Hall, 103 West Third Street, Ligonier, Indiana, will hold a
public hearing on a proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance of Ligonier,
Indiana.
The proposed amendment involves consideration of a change of the zoning
classification from the ___________ District to the ______________ District for
the following described property:
Written suggestions or objections to the provisions of the amendment may be
filed with the Secretary of the Commission before such meeting and will be
heard by the Plan Commission at the time and place specified. The hearing may
be continued from time to time as may be necessary.
Interested persons desiring to present their views upon the proposed amendment,
either in writing or verbally, will be given the opportunity to be heard at the
above mentioned time and place. Copies of the petition may be examined at the
Ligonier City Hall, Ligonier, Indiana.
Plan Commission of Ligonier, Indiana
By: ________________________________
   Secretary
ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE ZONING MAP
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE ZONING MAP OF THE CITY OF LIGONIER, INDIANA, FROM
_______________ ZONE TO ______________ ZONE ON PREMISES COMMONLY KNOWN AS
________________________________________.
SECTION 1. Be it ordained by the City Council of Ligonier, Indiana, that the
Zoning Ordinance adopted on the _______ day of ________________ of the year
______, be amended so as to include in the _____
_____ the following described real estate located in the City of Ligonier,
Indiana, to-wit:
SECTION 2. All buildings or uses permitted and placed upon the describe real
estate shall fully conform with all the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of
Ligonier, Indiana, and shall have obtained the proper permits.
SECTION 3. This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage by the City Council of Ligonier, Indiana thereto.
Action by Council: _______________________
Date: ______________
____________________________________
President
APPLICATION FOR APPEAL - LIGONIER BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
1.    Applicant:
_________________________________________________________________________
Address: ______________________________   Phone:
__________________________________
2.    Owner of the property involved: _______________________________________
Owner's address:
_____________________________________________________________________
3.    Premises affected:
Lot no. ______________________________   Street no.
_____________________________
Legal description (from deed or abstract)
4.    Date lot of record: ___________________    present zoning classification
_________________
5.    Type of appeal: (check the appropriate response)
_____   (a)   Request for an appeal from the decision of the zoning officer.
      (Attach a copy of the decision of ruling.)
_____   (b)   Request for a special use
_____   (c)   Request for a variance of development standards
6.    State explanation of requested appeal: (state what you want to do and
cite the article and section of the zoning ordinance which applies and/or
creates the need for this appeal.)
7.    State reasons supporting the appeal:
8.    Present use of the property:
9.    Describe the proposed use of the property:
10.    Are there any restrictions, laws, covenants governing the property which
would prohibit its use for the purpose specified in this application? If answer
is "yes", attach a copy.
11.    Has there been any previous appeal filed in connection with this
property? If answer is "yes", give the date and the decision of the appeal.
APPLICATION FOR IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT
Ligonier, Indiana
Application No.: _______________________________   Date Filed: ________________
Applicant: _______________________________________________
Address of Applicant:
__________________________________________________________________
Owner (if other than applicant): _______________________________
Address of Owner:
___________________________________________________________________
Location of Property: Lot No.: _________________   In ______________________
Subdivision
Street Number (if available): _________________________________
Other Description: ____________________________________________________
Date Lot of Record: ____________________________   Zoning Classification:
________________
To Permit Construction of: ______________________________________________
(Fee of $ __________ to accompany this application)
__________________________________________
Owner
__________________________________________
Agent
NOTICE
Post this permit in a conspicuous location on the premises until
a certificate of occupancy is issued.
If any changes or deviations are made from the original application,
a new permit is required.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
Improvement Location Permit Number:   _____________________________________
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY Number:   ______________________________________
Issued: _____________________________, ______________
Issued To: ________________________________________________________
This certifies that the action or work for which an Improvement Location Permit
was issued for the premises identified as Lot Number ____________ in
________________________ Subdivision, address
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________ or other description as follows
_________________________
___________________________________________________ has been inspected and
found to be in compliance with the applicable laws of the State of Indiana, and
ordinances of __________________.
_________________________________________________________
Title: ____________________________________________________
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[RESERVED]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to 1998 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Reference Code Section
I.C. Reference              Code Section
1-1-1-5                     10.04
1-1-1-7                     10.12
1-1-1-8                     10.06
1-1-4-5                     10.05
1-1-5-1                     10.11
1-1-6-1                     10.08
3-2-7-1                     31.16
3-2-7-5                     31.17
3-5                         31.16;
                            31.17
3-10-6                      31.35
4-21.5-3-7                  150.022
4-21.5-5-5                  59.117
4-22-2                      96.45
                            31.21;
                            31.38;
                            35.50;
5-3-1                       96.49;
                            155.027;
                            155.028;
                            156.111
5-11-1-27(I)                34.90
5-11-10                     31.42
5-13-5                      34.02
5-14-1.5-1 et seq.          Ch. 30
5-14-3                      34.42
5-14-3-3(d)                 38.01
5-22-4-1 et seq.            35.01
6-1.1-12.1-1–6-1.1-12.1-5.34.15
6-9-39                      94.02
8-1.5-3-9.1                 56.03
8-14-1-1 et seq.            34.02
8-23-17                     156.004
9-13-2                      70.001
9-13-2-1                    Ch. 96
9-13-2-1 et seq.            70.001
9-13-2-121                  70.001
9-18-12 (Expired)           96.47
9-21-4-1 et seq.            70.061
9-21-5-1 et seq.            70.080
9-21-13-1 et seq.           70.104
9-21-16-1 et seq.           Ch. 72
9-21-20                     70.001
9-22-1-1 et seq.            96.45
                            Ch. 96;
9-22-1-1–9-22-1-32        96.45;
                            96.46
9-22-1-4                    96.51
9-22-1-13(b)                96.48
9-22-1-19                   96.49
9-22-1-27                   96.52
9-25-4-5                    76.03
9-29-4-2  (Repealed)        34.40
9-30-2–9-30-14            70.999
10-14-3-22(b)(2)            70.029
10-14-3-29                  70.029
10-14-3-29.5                70.029
12-12-1-4  (Repealed)       150.017
13                          59.999;
13-1-7  (Repealed)          156.129
13-18                       156.070
13-21-1-1 et seq.           57.01
13-22-1-1 et seq.           57.01
13-30-3                     59.999
14-28-1-1 et seq.           150.047
15-17-8-8                   94.02
22-9.5-1                    93.02
22-9.5-2-9                  93.02
22-12                       150.022
22-12-1-3                   152.08
22-12-1-5                   150.017
22-12-1-7                   150.017
22-12-1-14                  150.017
22-12-1-16                  150.017
22-12-1-17                  150.017
22-12-1-18                  150.017
22-12-1-22(b)(12)           150.024
22-12-1-24                  150.017
22-12-1-26                  150.017
22-12-7                     150.019
22-13                       150.022
22-13-2-3(b)                150.023
22-13-2-5                   150.025
22-13-2-6                   150.018
22-13-2-7                   150.022
22-13-2-7(b)                150.023
22-13-2-9                   150.018
22-13-2-11                  150.019
22-14                       150.022
22-15                       150.022
22-15-3                     150.020
22-15-4                     150.018
22-15-4-1                   156.004;
                            156.129
31-6-4-15.7  (Repealed)     131.02
31-37-19-27                 131.02
32-1-6  (Repealed)          156.004;
                            156.023
32-25-2-9                   150.017
32-34-1 et seq. (Repealed)  52.03
Title 35                    59.999
35-44.1-3-1                 93.02
35-45-1-1 et seq.           92.02
35-46-3-11.5                91.19
35-47-11-1.1 et seq.        Ch. 132
35-49-2-2                   156.004
36-1-3-4                    155.005
36-1-3-8(a)(10)             10.99;
                            58.99
36-1-5-4                    150.023;
                            150.024
36-1-6-4                    150.022
36-1-6-9                    150.022
36-1-8-5.1(b)(2)            34.02
36-1-11                     96.49
36-4-5                      31.01;
                            31.15
36-4-5-1–36-4-5-9         Ch. 31
36-4-5-2                    31.16
36-4-5-6                    31.20
36-4-6                      31.01
36-4-6-1 et seq.            Ch. 30
36-4-6-5(j)                 30.01
36-4-6-5(l)                 30.01
36-4-6-6                    Ch. 30
36-4-6-7                    Ch. 30
36-4-6-8                    30.05
36-4-6-9                    30.30;
                            31.36
36-4-6-10                   Ch. 30
36-4-6-10–36-4-6-17       30.05
36-4-6-16                   30.31
36-4-7-2                    30.33
36-4-7-3                    32.01
36-4-8-14                   34.01
36-4-9-5                    31.55
36-4-9-7                    31.18
36-4-9-8                    Ch. 31;
                            32.01
36-4-9-11                   Ch. 32
36-4-10                     31.01
36-4-10-2                   31.35
36-4-10-2.5                 31.40
36-4-10-3                   31.35
36-4-10-4                   31.35
36-4-10-4.5                 31.37;
                            31.56
36-4-10-5.5                 31.41
36-4-11-2                   31.35;
                            32.01
36-7-1-2                    156.004
36-7-1-3                    156.004
36-7-1-18                   156.004
36-7-3-12 et seq.           150.003
36-7-4                      156.085;
                            156.110
36-7-4(d)                   156.004;
                            156.129
36-7-4-200                  32.05
36-7-4-207                  156.004
36-7-4-501                  156.004
36-7-4-700                  155.005
36-7-4-900                  156.110
36-7-4-902                  156.110
36-7-4-903                  156.110
36-7-4-916                  156.111
36-7-4-1001–36-7-4-1020   156.114
36-7-4-1003                 156.114
36-7-9                      152.01
36-7-9-2                    152.07
36-7-9-4                    152.06
36-7-9-14                   152.09
36-7-9-28                   152.99
36-7-10.1-1                 96.31
36-7-10.1-1 et seq.         96.31
36-7-10.1-3                 99.11
36-7-12-1                   92.01
36-7-14                     34.02
36-7-25                     34.02
36-8-2-2                    Ch. 32;
                            92.01
36-8-2-3                    Ch. 32;
                            92.01
36-8-2-4                    92.01
36-8-2-8                    92.01
36-8-2-9                    92.01
36-8-3-6                    33.03
36-8-3-10                   33.03
36-8-3-20                   33.03
36-8-6-1 et seq.            34.02
36-8-14-1 et seq.           34.02
36-8-17                     150.021
36-9-2-14                   Ch. 50
36-9-2-15                   Ch. 50
36-9-2-16                   Ch. 50
36-9-2-17                   Ch. 50
36-9-6-11                   59.001
36-9-15.5-2                 34.02
36-9-16-3                   34.02
36-9-16-6                   34.02
36-9-23-1 et seq.           Ch. 50;
                            51.001
36-10-2-2                   91.04
36-10-3                     91.02
36-10-3-20                  34.02
36-10-3-22                  34.02
36-10-5-2(b)(2)(C)          32.02
                            
 
REFERENCES TO 1998 CODE
1998 Code 2010 Code
1998 Code 2010 Code
2-1       31.01
2-6       31.15
2-7       31.16
2-8       31.17
2-9       31.18
2-10      31.19
2-11      31.20
2-12      31.21
2-20      31.35
2-21      31.36
2-22      31.37
2-23      31.38
2-24      31.39
2-25      31.40
2-26      31.41
2-30      31.55
2-31      31.56
2-32      31.57
2-33      31.58
2-38      32.01
2-39      32.01
2-40      32.01
2-55      32.03
2-56      32.03
2-57      32.03
2-58      32.03
2-62      32.04
2-63      32.04
2-64      32.04
2-65      32.04
2-70      32.05
2-71      32.05
2-72      32.05
2-75      32.06
2-76      32.06
2-77      32.06
2-80      33.01
2-81      33.02
2-82      33.03
2-83      33.04
2-84      33.05
2-85      33.06
2-86      33.07
2-124     32.07
2-155     34.01
2-165     34.02
2-166     34.02
2-167     34.02
2-168     34.02
2-169     34.02
2-170     34.02
2-171     34.02
2-172     34.02
2-173     34.02
2-174     34.02
2-175     34.02
2-176     34.02
2-177     34.02
2-178     34.02
2-179     34.02
2-180     34.02
2-182     34.02
2-183     34.02
2-184     34.02
2-185     34.02
3-1       30.01
3-2       30.02
3-3       30.03
3-4       30.04
3-5       30.05
3-6       30.06
3-7       30.07
3-8       30.08
3-9       30.09
3-10      30.10
3-11      30.25
3-12      30.26
3-13      30.27
3-14      30.28
3-15      30.29
3-16      30.30
3-17      30.31
3-18      30.32
3-19      30.33
3-31      30.35
4-1       34.25
4-2       34.26
4-3       34.27
4-10      34.40
4-11      34.41
4-12      34.42
4-13      34.43
4-14      34.44
4-20      110.01
4-21      110.02
4-22      110.03
4-23      110.04
4-24      110.05
4-25      110.99
4-30      111.01
4-31      111.02
4-32      111.03
4-33      111.04
4-34      111.05
4-35      111.99
4-40      90.01
4-41      90.02
4-42      90.03
4-43      90.04
4-44      90.05
4-45      90.06
4-46      90.07
4-47      90.08
4-48      90.09
4-49      90.10
4-50      90.11
4-51      90.12
4-52      90.99
4-53      90.13
4-60      112.01
4-61      112.02
4-62      112.03
4-63      112.04
4-64      112.05
4-65      112.06
4-66      112.07
4-67      112.08
4-68      112.09
4-69      112.99
4-70      112.10
4-75      113.01
4-76      113.02
4-90      34.15
5-1       91.01
5-2       91.02
5-3       91.03
5-4       91.04
5-8       91.15
5-9       91.16
5-10      91.99
5-15      91.17
5-20      91.18
5-21      91.18
5-22      91.18
5-23      91.18
5-24      91.18
5-25      91.18
5-26      91.18
6-1       92.01
6-2       92.01
6-3       92.01
6-4       92.01
6-5       92.01
6-6       92.01
6-7       92.02
6-8       92.03
6-12      93.01
6-13      93.02
6-14      93.03
6-15      93.04
6-16      93.05
6-17      93.06
6-18      93.07
6-19      93.08
6-20      93.09
6-21      93.10
6-22      93.11
6-30      131.01
6-31      131.02
6-32      131.99
6-36      132.01
6-38      132.03
6-39      132.99
6-64      96.01
6-65      96.99
6-67      96.99
6-70      96.03
6-71      96.99
6-78      96.30
6-79      96.99
6-85      130.01
6-86      130.02
6-87      130.03
6-88      130.04
6-89      130.99
6-90      130.05
6-94      152.01
6-95      152.02
6-96      152.03
6-97      152.04
6-98      152.05
6-99      152.06
6-100     152.07
6-101     152.08
6-102     152.09
6-103     152.10;
          152.99
6-108     94.01
6-109     94.02
6-110     94.03;
          94.99
6-115     94.15
6-116     94.16
6-117     94.17
6-118     94.99
6-125     58.01
6-126     58.02
6-127     58.03
6-128     58.04
6-129     58.05
6-130     58.06
6-131     58.07
6-132     58.99
6-135     57.01
6-146     57.02;
          57.99
6-147     57.03
6-148     57.04
6-149     57.05
6-180     96.31
7-1       150.001
7-50      150.060
7-51      150.061
7-52      150.062
7-58      151.01
7-59      151.02
7-60      151.03
7-61      151.04
7-62      151.05
7-63      151.06
7-64      151.07
7-65      151.08
7-66      151.09
7-67      151.10
7-68      151.11
7-69      151.12
7-70      151.13
7-71      151.14
7-72      151.15
7-73      151.30
7-74      151.31
7-75      151.32
7-76      151.33
7-77      151.34
7-78      151.35
7-79      151.36
7-80      151.37
7-81      151.38
7-82      151.39
7-83      151.40
7-84      151.41
7-85      151.42
7-86      151.99
7-95      150.075
7-96      150.076
7-97      150.999
7-98      150.077
7-105     150.002
7-106     150.003
8-1       70.001
8-2       70.001
8-3       70.001
8-4       70.001
8-5       70.001
8-6       70.001
8-7       70.001
8-8       70.001
8-9       70.001
8-10      70.001
8-11      70.001
8-12      70.001
8-13      70.001
8-14      70.001
8-15      70.001
8-16      70.001
8-17      70.001
8-18      70.001
8-19      70.001
8-20      70.001
8-21      70.001
8-22      70.001
8-23      70.001
8-24      70.001
8-25      70.001
8-26      70.001
8-27      70.001
8-28      70.001
8-29      70.001
8-30      70.001
8-31      70.001
8-32      70.001
8-33      70.001
8-34      70.001
8-35      70.001
8-36      70.001
8-37      70.001
8-38      70.001
8-39      70.001
8-40      70.001
8-41      70.001
8-45      70.020
8-46      70.021
8-47      70.022
8-48      70.023
8-49      70.024
8-50      70.025
8-51      70.026
8-52      70.027
8-53      70.028
8-54      70.029
8-58      70.040
8-59      70.041
8-60      70.042
8-61      70.043
8-62      70.044
8-63      70.045
8-64      70.046
8-65      70.047
8-66      70.048
8-68      70.060
8-69      70.061
8-70      70.062
8-71      70.063
8-72      70.064
8-73      70.065
8-74      70.066
8-78      70.080
8-79      70.081
8-85      70.082
8-86      70.082
8-90      70.083
8-91      70.083
8-95      70.084
8-97      70.084
8-98      70.084
8-99      70.999
8-104     70.085
8-105     70.085
8-106     70.085
8-108     70.086
8-110     70.087
8-115     70.100
8-116     70.101
8-117     70.102
8-118     70.103
8-119     70.104
8-120     70.105
8-121     70.106
8-122     70.107
8-123     70.108
8-124     70.109
8-125     70.110
8-128     70.125
8-129     70.126
8-132     71.01
8-133     71.02
8-134     71.03
8-135     71.04
8-136     71.05
8-137     71.06
8-138     71.99
8-142     72.01
8-144     72.02
8-145     72.03
8-146     72.04
8-147     72.05
8-148     72.06
8-149     72.07
8-150     72.08
8-155     72.09
8-156     72.10
8-172     70.999
8-180     70.002
8-181     70.003
8-182     70.004
8-183     70.005
8-184     70.006
8-185     70.007
9-1       50.01
9-2       50.02
9-3       50.03
9-4       50.04
9-7       51.001
9-18      51.015
9-19      51.016
9-20      51.017
9-21      51.018
9-22      51.019
9-23      51.020
9-24      51.021
9-25      51.022
9-26      51.023
9-30      51.035
9-31      51.036
9-32      51.037
9-33      51.038
9-34      51.039
9-35      51.040
9-36      51.041
9-37      51.042
9-38      51.043
9-39      51.044
9-40      51.045
9-41      51.046
9-42      51.047
9-48      51.060
9-49      51.061
9-50      51.062
9-51      51.063
9-52      51.064
9-53      51.065
9-54      51.066
9-55      51.067
9-56      51.068
9-57      51.069
9-58      51.070
9-59      51.071
9-60      51.072
9-61      51.073
9-62      51.074
9-63      51.075
9-64      51.076
9-65      51.077
9-66      51.078
9-67      51.079
9-68      51.080
9-75      51.081
9-76      51.999
9-85      51.095
9-86      51.096
9-87      51.097
9-88      51.098
9-89      51.099
9-90      51.100
9-91      51.101
9-92      51.102
9-93      51.103
9-94      51.104
9-95      51.105
9-96      51.106
9-97      51.107
9-98      51.108
9-99      51.109
9-100     51.110
9-101     51.111
9-102     51.112
9-103     51.113
9-104     51.114
9-105     Ch. 51, App. A
9-110     52.01
9-111     52.02
9-114     52.03
9-115     52.04
9-116     52.05
9-117     52.06
9-118     52.07
9-119     52.99
9-125     53.01
9-126     53.02
9-127     53.03
9-128     53.04
9-129     53.05
9-130     53.06
9-131     53.07
9-132     53.08
9-133     53.09
9-134     53.10
9-135     53.11
9-136     53.12
9-137     53.13
9-138     53.14
9-145     54.01
9-146     54.02
9-147     54.03
9-148     54.04
9-149     54.05
9-150     54.06
9-151     54.07
9-155     55.01
9-156     55.02
9-157     55.03
9-158     55.99
9-165     56.01
9-166     56.02
9-167     56.03
          
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
–      3-19-1992   91.18
–      10-27-2003  34.02
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section
                      58.01–
583       - -         58.07;
                      58.99
616       - -         31.42
148       7-9-1963    110.99
161       1-27-1969   96.30;
                      96.99
169       2-22-1971   34.02
                      57.02–
421       2-8-1982    57.06;
                      57.99
441       11-28-1983  34.41
447       2-8-1984    70.104
447       2-28-1984   70.001–
                      70.007
                      130.01–
451       11-26-1984  130.05;
                      130.99
464       2-10-1986   70.082
                      91.15;
471       5-26-1987   91.16;
                      91.99
                      132.01;
–       11-14-1988  132.03;
                      132.99
491       11-14-1988  96.03;
                      96.99
490       7-10-1989   150.060–
                      150.062
                      131.01;
497       9-11-1989   131.02;
                      131.99
–       11-27-1989  96.01;
                      96.99
                      152.01–
455       5-29-1990   152.10;
                      152.99
447       7-23-1990   70.999
                      51.095–
500       3-11-1991   51.102;
                      51.105–
                      51.114
                      111.01–
506       6-10-1991   111.05;
                      111.99
512       12-23-1991  33.01–
                      33.06
513       12-23-1991  96.99
519       6-4-1992    56.03
523       9-14-1992   51.103;
                      51.104
525       10-12-1992  70.084;
                      70.999
530       12-18-1992  30.01
                      51.001;
                      51.015–
                      51.023;
539       3-14-1994   51.035–
                      51.047;
                      51.060–
                      51.081;
                      51.999
559       12-18-1995  93.01–
                      93.11
582       - -1996     53.01–
                      53.14
584       - -1996     54.01–
                      54.07
586       - -1996     53.04
562       4-22-1996   34.02
576       12-23-1996  52.01;
                      52.02
                      55.01–
580       - -1997     55.03;
                      55.99
581       - -1997     52.07
604       6-22-1998   35.01
605       6-22-1998   35.15–
                      35.21
606       6-22-1998   35.35
607       6-22-1998   35.50–
                      35.52
                      34.42;
                      90.01–
                      90.13;
                      90.99;
603       7-27-1998   96.31;
                      112.01–
                      112.10;
                      112.99;
                      113.01;
                      113.02
                      156.001–
                      156.009;
                      156.020–
                      156.023;
                      156.035–
                      156.037;
                      156.039–
                      156.041;
614       2-22-1999   156.055–
                      156.071;
                      156.085–
                      156.097;
                      156.110–
                      156.114;
                      156.125–
                      156.135;
                      156.999
                      155.001–
                      155.014;
                      155.025–
                      155.029;
615       2-22-1999   155.040–
                      155.051;
                      155.065–
                      155.068;
                      155.080–
                      155.084
                      156.041;
617       6-14-1999   156.060;
                      156.111
626       11-22-1999  34.45
631       2-14-2000   156.059
641       2-14-2000   156.041
632       3-13-2000   56.01
633       4-24-2000   34.42
637       9-25-2000   51.023;
                      51.036
                      153.01;
                      153.02;
644       8- -2001    153.04–
                      153.17;
                      153.99
656       3-25-2002   96.45–
                      96.52
661       8-8-2002    156.041
662       8-12-2002   94.15;
                      94.17
678       - -2003     94.03;
                      94.99
672       2-24-2003   52.01
676       6-9-2003    156.060
677       6-23-2003   96.47
682       9-22-2003   32.03
683       9-22-2003   31.42
688       2-23-2004   156.041;
                      156.072
694       11-8-2004   156.041
                      150.015–
700       1-10-2005   150.025;
                      150.999
711       2-13-2006   72.99
716       8-14-2006   34.02
718       9-25-2006   94.02
                      94.30–
719       9-25-2006   94.38;
                      94.99
722       9-25-2006   156.041
721       11-27-2006  156.041
                      95.01–
725       5-14-2007   95.05;
                      95.99
726       9- -2007    34.41
731       10-22-2007  130.02
                      59.001–
                      59.008;
                      59.020–
                      59.036;
                      59.050–
                      59.054;
733       12-10-2007  59.065–
                      59.072;
                      59.085–
                      59.096;
                      59.110–
                      59.133;
                      59.999
734       3-24-2008   36.01;
                      36.02
735       4-28-2008   94.02
738       10-27-2008  52.03
741       11-24-2008  91.19
745       11-24-2008  36.02
746-2008  12- -2008   34.01
747-2009  1- -2009    34.02
748-2009  2- -2009    34.02
749-2009  2-9-2009    34.02
751       4-27-2009   31.22
753       5-11-2009   34.02
757-09    9-14-2009   36.02
758-09    9-14-2009   130.99
761-2010  6-28-2010   55.99
762-2010  8-23-2010   98.01;
                      98.99
767-2010  11-22-2010  52.01
                      97.01–
769-2010  11-8-2010   97.03;
                      97.99
772-2010  11-8-2010   30.29
775-2010  11-22-2010  Adopting Ordinance
779-2011  1-10-2011   57.07
782-2011  2-14-2011   36.02
785-2011  4-11-2011   32.06
787-2011  5-9-2011    150.020
                      99.01–
788-2011  6-13-2011   99.11;
                      99.99
791-2011  6-27-2011   31.42
793-2011  7-25-2011   31.43
797-2011  9-12-2011   33.20
798-2011  9-12-2011   Adopting Ordinance
800-2011  9-26-2011   132.01
802-2011  12-12-2011  94.18;
                      94.99
803-2011  12-12-2011  70.029;
                      70.999
806-2012  4-9-2012    31.44
807-2012  4-23-2013   37.01
809-2012  4-26-2012   34.02
                      99.06;
816-2012  8-13-2012   99.09;
                      99.11
                      59.004;
817-2012  8-13-2012   59.085;
                      59.090;
                      59.111
818-2012  8-24-2012   51.001;
                      51.115
819-2012  9-24-2012   57.05;
                      57.99
826-2012  12-10-2012  30.01
828-2013  1-28-2013   Adopting Ordinance
829-2013  2-11-2013   34.60;
                      34.61
830-2013  3-25-2013   32.05
834-2013  5-13-2013   51.116
835-2013  5-13-2013   52.01;
                      52.02
836-2013  6-24-2013   51.113
837-2013  6-24-2013   51.116
838-2013  6-24-2013   52.01
839-2013  6-24-2013   31.42
                      51.097 –
850-2014  10-27-2014  51.099 ;
                      51.113
852-2014  8-25-2014   37.01
859-2014  1-12-2015   150.004; 
                      150.999
860-2015  2-9-2015    60.01
861-2015  2-9-2015    Adopting Ordinance
862-2015  2-23-2015   154.01
867-2015  7-27-2015   100.01; 
                      100.99
                      156.004; 
870-2015  9-14-2015   156.041; 
                      156.072
876-2015  11-23-2015  30.34
879-2016  4-25-2016   Adopting Ordinance
880-2016  5-23-2016   30.31
890-2016  9-26-2016   156.041 ; 
                      156.072
892-2016  11-14-2016  156.110 ; 
                      156.113
                      30.03 ; 
894-2016  11-14-2016  31.21 ; 
                      31.28 ; 
                      35.21
895-2016  11-14-2016  34.70–
                      34.84
896-2016  11-14-2016  34.90
898-2017  1-23-2017   72.11
899-2017  2-13-2017   37.01
                      75.01–
903-2017  6-26-2017   75.10 ; 
                      75.99
905-2017  8-14-2017   52.01
915-2017  11-3-2017   Adopting Ordinance
917-2018  4-9-2018    34.02
920-2018  - -         91.19
921-2018  7-23-2018   34.02
                      156.020;
924-2018  9-24-2018   156.041;
                      156.056–
                      156.059
                      32.02 ; 
931-2019  6-17-2019   91.15–
                      91.19
937-2019  9-9-2019    32.07
938-2019  12-9-2019   37.01
939-2020  5-11-2020   34.02
940-2020  5-11-2020   52.01
941-2020  5-11-2020   51.116
942-2020  5-11-2020   51.113
950-2020  4-26-2021   34.02
959-2021  4-26-2021   32.05
960-2021  4-26-2021   34.02
962-2021  6-28-2021   34.02
973-2022  6-27-2022   52.01;
                      52.02
974-2022  6-13-2022   31.42
975-2022  6-13-2022   57.07
977-2022  9-12-2022   34.02
985-2023  2-13-2023   59.085;
                      59.090
987-2023  3-27-2023   34.02
988-2023  4-24-2023   34.60;
                      34.61
989-2023  5-22-2023   34.02
990-2023  6-26-2023   52.25–52.35
998-2023  10-23-2023  34.76;
                      34.78
999-2023  11-13-2023  34.03
1000-2023 12-11-2023  37.01
1001-2023 12-11-2023  156.073
                      111.01–
1006-2024 2-12-2024   111.03;
                      111.99
1022-2025 6-23-2025   30.01;
                      30.02
                      76.01–
1023-2025 7-28-2025   76.04;
                      76.99
1024-2025 8-25-2025   96.01
1027-2025 9-8-2025    38.01
1028-2025 9-22-2025   36.02
1037-2025 12-8-2025   57.07
                     
 
 
