MARSHALL COUNTY, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-17, passed 7-21-2025; and
State legislation current through 2025 Indiana Legislative Service, Pamphlet
No. 3
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
MARSHALL COUNTY ORDINANCE NO 2024-19
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE MARSHALL COUNTY, INDIANA,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
WHEREAS the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Indiana empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify, and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
WHEREAS the Marshall County Board of Commissioners has authorized a general
compilation, revision, and codification of the ordinances of the political
subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance
in book form; and
WHEREAS it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance takes
effect at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MARSHALL COUNTY INDIANA BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the political subdivision as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of Marshall County, Indiana."
Section 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following Titles:
Title I: General Provisions
Title III: Administration
Title V: Public Works
Title VII: Traffic Code
Title IX: General Regulations
Title XI: Business Regulations
Title XIII: General Offenses
Title XV: Land Usage
Table of Special Ordinances
Parallel References
Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code
of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part
in such code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the code.
Section 4. Such code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Board of Commissioners. The Clerk of Marshall County is
hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the
Office of the Clerk.
Section 5. Such code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for
the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of
the people of this municipality and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Marshall County Board of Commissioners this 16th day
of September, 2024.
                                    BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
                                    MARSHALL COUNTY, INDIANA
                                    Stan Klotz /s/         
                                    Stan Klotz, President
                                    Michael D. Burroughs /s/      
                                    Michael D. Burroughs
                                    Kevin G. Overmyer /s/      
                                    Kevin G. Overmyer
ATTEST:
Angela C. Birchmeier /s/      
Angela C. Birchmeier, Auditor
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   COUNTY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.17   Unlawful or prohibited acts include causing, permitting, concealing
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the county, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles,
chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the “Marshall County
Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances” or
“code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application
or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in
law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AGENCY. When used to designate a subordinate element of government, shall
mean and be construed as including all offices, departments, institutions,
boards, commissions and corporations of the county government and, when so
specified, all offices, departments, institutions, boards, commissions and
corporations which receive or disburse county funds.
      BOARD. The Board of Commissioners of the county.
      COUNCIL. The County Council.
      COUNTY. Marshall County.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      STATE. The State of Indiana.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing or other modes of
representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person or the person’s
mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(I.C. 1-1-4-5) (Prior Code, § 1-1-2)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable.
If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
   (D)   The repeal of a section or amendment stating that the provisions of a
chapter, subchapter or section are severable as provided in division (B) above
does not affect the operation of division (B) with respect to that chapter,
subchapter or section.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; on the effective date of that ordinance or following the
effective date, the rights, powers, duties or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers and rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall
not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under
the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture or
liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
      (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-
1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
         (I.C. 36-5-2-2)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
            This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection
or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the county published in a previous year and subsequently amended,
the previous code section number shall be indicated in the history by “(Prior
Code, §      ).”
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.17 UNLAWFUL OR PROHIBITED ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING, PERMITTING, CONCEALING.
   Whenever in this code of ordinances any act or omission is made unlawful or
prohibited, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting,
suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-10)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent violations,
except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and parking.
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
CHAPTER 11: COUNTY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   County boundaries
   
11.02   County precincts
   
11.03   County districts
§ 11.01 COUNTY BOUNDARIES.
   The boundary of the county is as follows: Beginning at the northeast corner
of Section 21, Township 35 North, Range 4 East, thence south on the centerline
of Township 35 North, Range 4 East, thence south on the centerline of Township
34 North, Range 4 East, thence south on said centerline of Township 33 North,
Range 4 East, thence south on the centerline of Township 32 North, Range 4 East
to the southeast corner of Section 33, Township 32 North, Range 4 East, thence
west on the south line of Township 32 North to the east line of Section 24
Michigan Road Lands, thence south to the southeast corner of said Section 24
Michigan Road Lands, thence, west to the southwest corner of said Section 24
Michigan Road Lands, thence north to the south line of Township 32 North,
thence west to the 2nd Principal Meridian Line, thence north on said Meridian
Line to the northwest corner of Section19, Township 35 North, Range 1 East,
thence east on the centerline of Township 35 North to the west line of Section
3 Michigan Road Lands, thence south to the southwest corner of said Section 3
Michigan Road Lands, thence east to the southeast corner of Section 3, Michigan
Road Lands, thence north to the north line of fractional Section 22, Township
35 North, Range 2 East, thence east on the centerline of Township 35 North to
the place of beginning.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-1)
§ 11.02 COUNTY PRECINCTS.
   The county, by and through the Board of County Commissioners, establishes
and revises the boundaries of certain precincts within the county. A precinct
description and map of the boundary of each precinct submitted to the State
Election Division is attached to the ordinance codified in this section.
(Ord. 2021-17, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 11.03 COUNTY DISTRICTS.
   (A)    The county, by and through the Board of County Commissioners,
establishes and revises the boundaries of the County Commissioner Districts
within the county. The districts and map of boundaries for each district shall
be submitted to the appropriate bodies. The 2022 Commissioner District map is
shown below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/026ff826ece732f19c166c2e35204d5ecdcf1bf4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-828.jpg]
 
   (B)    The county, by and through the Board of County Commissioners,
establishes and revises the districts for the County Council within the county
. A description and map of the boundaries for each district shall be submitted
to the appropriate state officials. The 2022 Council District map is shown
below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/026ff826ece732f19c166c2e35204d5ecdcf1bf4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-830.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2021-18, passed 12-6-2021)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS AND COUNTY COUNCIL
      
31.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
      
33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
34.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
35.   ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
CHAPTER 30: BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS AND COUNTY COUNCIL
Section
Board of Commissioners
   
30.01   Purpose
   
30.02   Commissioner districts
   
30.03   Councilmanic districts
   
30.04   Board of Commissioners; County Executive
   
30.05   Meetings
   
30.06   Legislative procedures
   
30.07   Board of Commissioners as purchasing agent
County Council
   
30.20   County Council; fiscal body
   
30.21   Meetings
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
§ 30.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish County Commissioner and
Councilmanic election districts for the county.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-1)
§ 30.02 COMMISSIONER DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The County Executive shall divide the county into three districts that
are composed of contiguous territory and are reasonably compact. The Executive
may not divide precincts and may divide townships only when a division is
clearly necessary to accomplish redistricting. If necessary to do so, the
County Auditor shall call a special meeting of the Executive to establish or
revise districts.
   (B)   The county is divided into three County Commissioner election
districts designated numerically as follows:
      (1)   District One. German and North Townships and Precinct One of Polk
Township;
      (2)   District Two. West Township, Precinct Two of Polk Township and
Precincts One, Two, Three, Four and Seven of Center Township; and
      (3)   District Three. Bourbon, Tippecanoe, Walnut, Green and Union
Townships, and Precincts Five and Six of Center Township.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2) (Ord. 1992-2, passed 12-30-1991)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-2-2-4
§ 30.03 COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The County Executive shall by ordinance divide the county into four
contiguous, single-member districts. The Executive may not divide precincts
when redistricting. If it is necessary to do so, the County Auditor shall call
a special meeting of the Executive to establish or revise districts. One member
of the fiscal body shall be elected by the voters of each of the four
districts. Three at-large members of the fiscal body shall be elected by the
voters of the whole county.
   (B)   Single-member districts must:
      (1)   Be compact, subject only to natural boundary lines such as
railroads, major highways, rivers, creeks, parks and major industrial
complexes;
      (2)   Contain as nearly as possible equal population; and
      (3)   Include whole townships, except when a division is clearly
necessary to accomplish redistricting under this section.
   (C)   A division shall be made in 1981 and every ten years after that and
may also be made in any other odd-numbered year.
   (D)   The county is divided into four County Councilmanic election districts
designated numerically as follows:
      (1)   District One. German Township and Precinct One of Bourbon Township;
and
      (2)   District Two. Tippecanoe, Walnut, Green and Union Township,
Precinct Two of West Township and Precinct Two of Bourbon Township;
      (3)   District Three. Polk Township and North Township, Precincts One of
West Township and Precincts Five and Six of Center Township; and
      (4)   District Four. Precincts One, Two, Three, Four and Seven of Center
Township, and Precinct Three of West Township.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-3) (Ord. 1992-2, passed 12-30-1991)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-2-3-4
§ 30.04 BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS; COUNTY EXECUTIVE.
   The three-member County Board of Commissioners elected under I.C. 36-2-2-
2 is the County Executive. The County Executive shall act in the name of “The
Marshall County Board of Commissioners.”
(I.C. 36-2-2-3)
   (A)   A member of the Executive who wants to resign must send written notice
to the President of the County Council. The Council shall then declare the
office vacant.
(I.C. 36-2-2-5)
   (B)   The County Executive will meet during the first week of January in
each year to elect its President and Vice President by a majority of the whole
Executive, and to conduct such other business as may come before it.
   (C)   The President and Vice President shall serve for one year and until
the election and qualification of his, her or their successors. The President
shall preside over all meetings of the Executive and, by his or her signature
thereto, shall authenticate all ordinances passed by the Executive in his or
her presence.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)
§ 30.05 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners shall hold regular meetings in the
Commissioners’ Room of the Marshall County Building on the first and third
Monday of each month beginning at such time as the Board of Commissioners shall
designate, and concluding when all necessary business is conducted for that
particular meeting.
   (B)   Special meetings may be called by the Executive if the public interest
requires. At least six days’ notice of the special meeting will be given unless
the meeting is called to deal with an emergency under I.C. 5-14-1.5-5. The
notice must include a specific statement of the purpose of the meeting, and the
Executive may not conduct any unrelated business at the meeting.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-2) (Ord. passed 10-8-1981)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-2-2-8
§ 30.06 LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURES.
   The County Executive adopting an ordinance, order, resolution or motion for
the government of the county or the transaction of county business pursuant to
I.C. 36-2-4-2 will adhere to the following legislative procedures.
   (A)   Quorum. Two members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
(I.C. 36-2-4-3)
   (B)   Passage of ordinance. A majority vote is required to pass an
ordinance.
(I.C. 36-2-4-5)
   (C)   Continuation of question. If only two members of a County Executive
are present at a meeting of the Executive, and they disagree on a question that
is before the Executive, the question shall be continued until the next
meeting.
(I.C. 36-2-4-6)
   (D)   Passage of ordinance. Unanimous consent of the members present is
required to pass an ordinance on the same day or at the same meeting at which
it is introduced.
(I.C. 36-2-4-7)
   (E)   Adoption of ordinances, orders or resolutions.
      (1)   An ordinance, order or resolution is considered adopted when it is
signed by the presiding officer. If required, an adopted ordinance, order or
resolution must be promulgated or published according to statute before it
takes effect.
(I.C. 5-3-1)
      (2)   An ordinance prescribing a penalty or forfeiture for a violation
must, before it takes effect, be published once each week for two consecutive
weeks.
(I.C. 36-2-4-8)
   (F)   Record of ordinance adopted. Within a reasonable time after an
ordinance is adopted, the County Auditor shall record it in a book kept for
that purpose.
(I.C. 36-2-4-9)
   (G)   Order of business.
      (1)   At each regular meeting of the Executive, the order of business
shall be as follows:
         (a)   Call to order;
         (b)   Approval of minutes of previous regular meeting and intervening
special meetings;
         (c)   Reports;
         (d)   Approval of contracts and other documents for the signature of
the Executive;
         (e)   Resolutions;
         (f)   Ordinances;
         (g)   Citizen comment; and
         (h)   Adjournment.
      (2)   Citizens may be heard on any matter requiring a vote before the
vote is taken.
   (H)   Rules of order. The conduct of Executive meetings shall be governed by
Robert’s Rules of Order, revised, except as otherwise provided by this code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-3)
§ 30.07 BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS AS PURCHASING AGENT.
   (A)    The Board of Commissioners hereby determines that it is the
purchasing agency for the county.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners designates the following persons to serve
as purchasing agents for the county:
      (1)   Each elected county official;
      (2)   Each Circuit and Superior Court Judge;
      (3)   Each department head; and
      (4)   Such county employees as are designated from time to time, in
writing.
   (C)   (1)   The Board of Commissioners hereby stipulates that all purchasing
agents must obtain prior approval from the purchasing agency before making any
purchases that are equal to or exceed $1,000.
      (2)   All purchasing agents shall complete the required forms as required
by statute and the purchasing agency.
      (3)   Claims submitted that exceed $1,000 which have not been pre-
approved or claims submitted that do not have the correct appropriate paperwork
and completed forms will not be approved and paid by the county.
(Ord. 1998-2, passed 7-6-1998)
COUNTY COUNCIL
§ 30.20 COUNTY COUNCIL; FISCAL BODY.
   (A)   The seven-member County Council elected under I.C. 36-2-3-3 is the
fiscal body.
   (B)   The fiscal body shall act in the name of the County Council.
(I.C. 36-2-3-2)
      (1)   The fiscal body will meet during the first week of January after
its election to elect a President and President Pro-Tempore from its members.
      (2)   The County Auditor is the Clerk of the fiscal body and shall:
         (a)   Preserve the fiscal body’s records in his or her office;
         (b)   Keep an accurate record of the fiscal body’s proceedings;
         (c)   Record the ayes and nays on each vote appropriating money or
fixing the rate of a tax levy; and
         (d)   Record the ayes and nays on other votes when requested to do so
by two or more members.
(I.C. 36-2-3-6)
   (C)   The County Sheriff or a deputy shall attend the meetings of the fiscal
body, if requested by the fiscal body, and shall execute its orders.
   (D)   The fiscal body may employ legal and administrative personnel
necessary to assist and advise it in the performance of its functions and
duties.
(I.C. 36-2-3-6)
(Prior Code, § 1-6-1)
§ 30.21 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The fiscal body shall hold a regular annual meeting, as prescribed by
I.C. 6-1.1-17, to adopt the county’s annual budget and tax rate.
   (B)   Special meetings may be called by the County Auditor, the President of
fiscal body or by a majority of the members of the fiscal body. At least 48
hours before the meeting, the Auditor, President or members calling the meeting
shall give written notice of the meeting to each member of the fiscal body and
publish, at least one day before the meeting, the notice in accordance with
I.C. 5-3-1. This does not apply to a meeting called to deal with an emergency
under I.C. 5-14-1.5-5.
   (C)   If a court orders the County Auditor to make an expenditure of county
money for a purpose for which an appropriation has not been made, the Auditor
shall immediately call an emergency meeting of the fiscal body to discuss the
matter. The meeting shall be held within three working days of the receipt of
the order by the Auditor, and notice of the meeting day, time and place is
sufficient if given by phone to the members of the fiscal body and given
according to I.C. 5-14-1.5.
(I.C. 36-2-3-7) (Prior Code, § 1-6-2)
CHAPTER 31: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
31.01   Reserves; County Sheriff’s Reserve Unit; Sheriff’s Department
   
31.02   Civil Defense Department
   
31.03   Health Department
   
31.04   Solid Waste Management District
   
31.05   Drainage Board
   
31.06   Housing Authority
   
31.07   Department of Economic Development
   
31.08   HAVA Advisory Council
   
31.09   Park and Recreation Department
   
31.10   Tourism Commission
   
31.11   Public Defender Board
§ 31.01 RESERVES; COUNTY SHERIFF’S RESERVE UNIT; SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Reserves; County Sheriff’s Reserve Unit.
      (1)   There is hereby established a County Police Reserve Unit. The
purpose and functions of said Police Reserve Unit is to complement and support
the County Police Department. Duly appointed members of the County Police
Reserve Unit shall be known as a “Special Deputy Sheriff.”
      (2)   The County Sheriff is authorized, and may appoint, with the
approval of the County Sheriff’s Merit Board, Special Deputy Sheriffs in such
numbers as the Sheriff deems necessary to assist him or her in promoting the
public safety and preserving the peace in and throughout the county. The
Sheriff shall determine the length of time each appointment shall remain in
effect, but in no event shall the duration of the appointment be extended past
the appointing Sheriff’s own term of office.
      (3)   Such Special Deputy Sheriff shall have all of the same police
powers as regular Deputy Sheriffs of the County Police Department, except as
may be limited by the rules, regulations and directives of the County Police
Department. Such limitations may be imposed collectively or individually.
Further, the Sheriff is additionally free to adopt whatever rules, regulations
and directives, from time to time, as he or she deems appropriate to govern the
activities of such Special Deputy Sheriffs and may limit the authority of each
such Special Deputy Sheriff as he or she deems appropriate including the
limitations of the geographical area in which such police powers may be
exercised.
      (4)   (a)   The Sheriff shall fix the prerequisites of training,
education and experience for such Special Deputy Sheriffs, subject to certain
minimum requirements prescribed herein.
         (b)   Applicants must:
            1.   Be 21 years of age or over;
            2.   Never have been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude;
            3.   Be of good moral character;
            4.   Have sufficient training to ensure that proper performance of
their authorized duties; and
            5.   Set out in writing their personal acknowledgment that as a
Special Deputy they serve at the expressed pleasure of the County Sheriff, and
that the individual’s commission as a Special Deputy Sheriff may be revoked by
the County Sheriff, for any reason or for no given reason at all at any given
time.
      (5)   Under no circumstances are such Special Deputy Sheriffs eligible to
participate in the pension program provided for the regular members of the
County Police Department.
      (6)   An individual may not be appointed as a Special Deputy Sheriff of
the county police until such time that such person has completed the training
and any probationary period which shall be deemed appropriate prior to the
appointment by the rules, regulations and directives of the County Police
Department.
   (B)   Sheriff’s Department and case reports.
      (1)   It is the intention of the County Board of Commissioners and the
County Sheriff’s Department to otherwise comply with I.C. 5-14-3-5, as amended
by Senate Enrolled Act No. 461, which states that the following information
shall be made available for inspection and copying:
         (a)   The time, substance and location of all complaints or requests
for assistance received by the agency;
         (b)   The time and nature of the agency’s response to all complaints
or requests for assistance; and
         (c)   If the incident involves an alleged crime or infraction:
            1.   The name, time, date and location of occurrence;
            2.   The name and age of any victim, unless the victim is a victim
of a crime under I.C. 35-42-4;
            3.   The factual description surrounding the incident; and
            4.   A general description of any injuries, property or weapons
involved.
      (2)   The investigatory records of the County Sheriff’s Department, as
defined by I.C. 5-14-3-2, currently maintained by County Sheriff’s Department
and to be maintained thereby now and in the future, that are not specifically
declared available for public inspection and copying by I.C. 5-14-3-5(c), as
amended by Senate Enrolled Act No. 461, are hereby declared confidential and
not available to the public unless otherwise allowed by state law.
   (C)   Retired law enforcement officers to retain service weapons.
      (1)   I.C. 7.1-2-2-11.5 permits retired law enforcement officers to
retain service weapons, badges and identification cards with certain
stipulations and conditions and it is in the best interest of the county to
permit a retired Deputy Sheriff with at least 20 years of service as a law
enforcement officer to retain his or her service weapon.
      (2)   In recognition of the officer’s service to the Sheriff’s Department
and to the public, a retiring Deputy Sheriff is entitled to receive a badge
that indicates that the officer is retired. Further, the officer who is
retiring shall have an identification card stating the officer’s name and rank,
signifying that the officer is retired and noting the officer’s authority to
retain his or her service weapon, all as is provided by state code.
      (3)   This recognition of retired deputies by allowing them to retain
their service weapon upon the conditions set forth herein and by state statute
is prospective only.
(Ord. 92-16, passed 7-21-1992; Ord. 1995-12, passed 12-29-1995; Ord. 2016-04,
passed 1-4-2016)
§ 31.02 CIVIL DEFENSE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established a merit system of personnel administration
for all employees of the County Civil Defense Agency, to be serviced by the
State Personnel Division. The County Civil Defense Director is hereby
authorized and directed to enter into such arrangements and agreements with the
State Department of Civil Defense and the State Personnel Division as may be
necessary to provide for a continuing merit program of personnel administration
for all county civil defense employees.
   (B)   Such merit program shall be serviced by the State Personnel Division,
pursuant to the authority granted by I.C. 4-15–2-36 (the State Personnel Act,
being I.C. 4-15-2-1 et seq.), and shall meet federal merit system standards of
the U.S. Department of Defense, including the exemption of any positions from
the merit program as is recognized in these same federal standards.
   (C)   For the purpose of administering the merit program for employees of
the Civil Defense Agency, the County Civil Defense Director is hereby
considered and designated as the appointing officer.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-2)
§ 31.03 HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a full-time local
Health Department within the county.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   There is hereby established a full-time County Health Department.
      (2)   Such department shall be named the “County Health Department.”
      (3)   The County Health Department shall operate as an agency of the
county responsible to the County Commissioners.
      (4)   The County Health Department shall be managed by a seven-member
County Board of Health as an integral part of county government
administratively responsible to the County Commissioners.
   (C)   Initial Board of Health. The initial members of the County Board of
Health are hereby appointed with staggered terms ending as set forth opposite
each member’s name as follows:
      (1)   James A. Berndt, M.D., December 31, 1991;
      (2)   Ted Chittum, December 31, 1991;
      (3)   Mark Gidley, December 31, 1991;
      (4)   Frances M. Lemler, December 31, 1991;
      (5)   Stephen A. Phillips, M.D., December 31, 1991;
      (6)   Harry E. Sponseller, D.D.S., December 31, 1991; and
      (7)   Georgette Samuelson, December 31, 1991;
   (D)   Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to I.C. 16-20-2, and all
acts supplemental and amendatory thereto, which are adopted and incorporated
herein by reference.
(Ord. 1991-10, passed 10-7-1991)
§ 31.04 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   Establishment of a single County Solid Waste Management District.
Pursuant to I.C. 13-21-3, there is hereby established a County Solid Waste
Management District (“MCSWMD”). The MCSWMD shall consist of the entire area
located within the legal boundaries of the county.
   (B)   Organization. The membership of the Board of Directors of the County
Solid Waste Management District shall be:
      (1)   The three members of the County Board of Commissioners;
      (2)   One member appointed by the County Council from among its members;
      (3)   The Mayor of the City of Plymouth;
      (4)   One member of the Plymouth City Council to be appointed by the
Plymouth City Council; and
      (5)   One member of a town council to represent all municipalities in the
county other than the City of Plymouth, to be appointed by the County
Commissioners.
   (C)   Terms of Board members. The term of office of each member of the
District’s Board of Directors shall be coextensive with the member’s term of
office on the government body of which he or she is a member. All Board members
shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority.
   (D)   Board powers. The County Solid Waste Management District has all the
powers authorized by I.C. 13-9.5-2 and related laws and shall follow the
directives of state law for organizing and carrying out its duties.
(Ord. 1991-5, passed 6-28-1991)
§ 31.05 DRAINAGE BOARD.
   (A)   (1)   The five-member Drainage Board shall consist of the County
Executive and an additional two resident freeholders of the county who are
knowledgeable in drainage matters. The freeholders appointed to the Board shall
serve for three years, with their initial appointment being made for a lesser
number of years so as to provide for staggering of terms.
      (2)   The County Surveyor shall serve on the Board as an ex officio, non-
voting member as has been the case in the past.
   (B)   A county resident freeholder will be appointed to serve as a member of
the County Drainage Board for approximately one and one-half years with his or
her initial term ending December 31, 2001. Thereafter, such appointee, or at
the sole discretion and option of the Executive, he or she or another qualified
resident freeholder, shall be appointed for a full three-year term to the
County Drainage Board, said term ending December 31, 2004. The initial
appointee is John L. Glingle.
   (C)   Another county resident freeholder will be appointed to serve as a
member of the County Drainage Board for approximately two and one-half years as
a Drainage Board member with his or her initial term ending December 31, 2002.
Thereafter, such appointee, or at the sole discretion and option of the
Executive, he or she or another qualified resident freeholder, shall be
appointed for a full three-year term to the County Drainage Board, said term
ending December 31, 2005. The initial appointee is Raymond L. Borggren.
   (D)   The five-member Drainage Board shall have all of the powers enumerated
by state law.
(Ord. 2005-05, passed 5-15-2000)
§ 31.06 HOUSING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   There is a need for the establishment of a housing authority in and
for the county as provided in I.C. 36-7-18.
   (B)   There is hereby established a County Housing Authority. Such Authority
shall consist of seven members, all of which must be residents of the county,
and who shall be designated by the County Council, one of whom must be a person
directly assisted by the Housing Authority, no more than four of whom may be of
the same political party. The members will be Commissioners of the County
Housing Authority. The seven Housing Authority Commissioners shall be appointed
by the County Council in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-18-5 and
shall serve for the terms provided for in said statute.
   (C)    Such Housing Authority shall constitute a county authority and shall
perform all the duties and have all the powers granted to it by statute.
   (D)   The seven members of such Authority shall be appointed and have terms
of office in accordance with I.C. 36-7-18-7. After their appointments, the
members of such Authority shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson,
except that the first Chairperson shall be selected by the County Council. The
members shall adopt bylaws and rules and regulations as provided by statute.
Said Housing Authority Commissioners shall receive no salary and may be removed
for the causes enumerated in the appropriate statute.
   (E)   No Housing Authority Commissioner or employee may acquire any interest
in any project or contract of the Authority. In the event that such
Commissioners shall acquire any such interest in any such project, contract or
anything proposed by such Authority, he or she shall make a complete written
disclosure which shall be entered upon the minutes of such Authority.
   (F)   Such Authority shall present an annual report to the County
Commissioners and the County Council as is required by said laws.
(Council Ord. 2001-07, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 31.07 DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   This County Council hereby finds it necessary to finance economic
development or pollution control facilities under the Act (I.C. 36-7-11.9 and
36-7-12).
   (B)   This County Council hereby establishes a Department of Economic
Development, to be controlled by a commission known as “County Economic
Development Commission.”
   (C)   After the adoption of this section, the County Auditor (the “county”),
is hereby authorized and directed to promptly notify the County Commissioners,
this County Council and the fiscal body of the most populous municipality
located in the county.
   (D)   Any officer of the county is hereby authorized and directed, for and
on behalf of the county, to execute and deliver any instrument or take any
other action as such officer determines to be necessary or desirable to
accomplish the purposes of this section, such determination to be conclusively
evidenced by such officer’s having executed such instrument or having taken
such action, and any such officer’s having executed and delivered any such
instrument or having taken any such action is hereby ratified and approved.
(Council Ord. 2000-2, passed 1-10-2000)
§ 31.08 HAVA ADVISORY COUNCIL.
   (A)   The county hereby establishes the HAVA Advisory Council.
   (B)   The County HAVA Advisory Council shall consist of the following
persons or its designees:
      (1)   The President of the County Executive;
      (2)   The President of the county fiscal body;
      (3)   The County Clerk;
      (4)   All members of the County Election Board; and
      (5)   Two representatives of the disabilities community or elderly voters
selected by the County Executive which appointments shall be residents with a
variety of backgrounds, partisan affiliations and perspectives.
   (C)   The HAVA Advisory Council shall have a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson
and a Secretary who will be elected by the HAVA Advisory Council for a term of
one year.
   (D)   The HAVA Advisory Council shall meet as required by law and at
additional times and places as determined by the Council.
   (E)   Any and all meetings of the HAVA Advisory Council shall be open
meetings and shall be posted in accordance with I.C. 5-14-1.5.
   (F)   The HAVA Advisory Council is to provide assistance to the county in
doing all things required by the federal Help America Vote Act of 2002, being
52 U.S.C. §§ 20901 to 21145, its amendments and the state election laws,
including those statutes adopted to implement the requirements of HAVA in the
state.
(Council Ord. 2003-12, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 31.09 PARK AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Under the provisions of I.C. 36-10-3 et seq., there is hereby created
a County Park and Recreation Department.
   (B)   A Park and Recreation Board shall be composed of:
      (1)   Two members appointed by the County Executive. The members must be
affiliated with different political parties.
      (2)   Two members appointed by the county fiscal body. The members must
be affiliated with different political parties.
      (3)   One member to be appointed by the Judge of the Marshall Circuit
Court.
   (C)   (1)   Upon establishment of the Board, the terms of its members shall
be as follows:
         (a)   The appointments by the County Executive shall be for two- and
four-year terms, respectively;
         (b)   The appointments by the county fiscal body shall be for two- and
four-year terms, respectively; and
         (c)   The appointment by Circuit Court Judge shall be for a one-year
term.
      (2)   As a term expires, each new appointment shall be for a four-year
term. All terms shall expire on the first Monday in January, but a member shall
continue in office until his or her successor is appointed. The appointing
authorities shall make initial appointments within 90 days after the creation
of the Department.
      (3)   If an appointment for any new term is not made by the first Monday
in April, the incumbent shall serve another term. If a vacancy on the Board
occurs, the appointing authority shall appoint a person to serve for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
   (D)   At its first regular meeting in each year, the Board shall elect a
President and a Vice President. The Vice President shall have authority to act
as the President of the Board during the absence or disability of the
President. The Board may select a Secretary either from within or without its
own membership.
   (E)   The Board shall have the power to perform all acts necessary to
acquire and develop sites and facilities and to conduct such programs as are
generally understood to be park and recreation functions. In addition, the
Board shall have all the powers and duties listed in I.C. 36-10-3 et seq.
   (F)   The Board shall prepare and submit an annual budget in the same manner
as other departments of county government as prescribed by the State Board of
Accounts. The Board may accept grants, gifts, donations and subsidies for park
and recreation purposes.
(Ord. 2020-11, passed 3-16-2020)
§ 31.10 TOURISM COMMISSION.
   (A)   A Tourism Commission is established, pursuant to I.C. 6-9-18-5, as
amended.
   (B)   The Tourism Commission will be controlled by a board of seven members
known as the Tourism Commission.
   (C)   The members of the Tourism Commission shall be appointed pursuant to
the requirements established under I.C. 6-9-18-5, as amended.
   (D)   Initially, the County Commissioners shall appoint five members to the
Tourism Commission, and the Mayor of the City of Plymouth shall appoint two
members.
   (E)   (1)   The members will be appointed to two-year terms, with three
members initially serving a one-year term. The initial term for one of the
appointees of the Mayor of the City of Plymouth will expire 12-31-2024, and the
term for the second appointee by the Mayor of the City of Plymouth will expire
on 12-31-2025.
      (2)   The initial term for two appointees of the County Commissioners
will expire 12-31-2024 and the initial term for the remaining appointees of the
County Commissioners will expire 12-31-2025.
   (F)   The County Commissioners will receive applications/nominations in
December of every year in order to consider Commissioner appointments for a
Commission member whose term expires on December 31. Towns in the county may
submit applications for prospective Commission members for consideration by the
Board of Commissioners for appointment to the Tourism Commission.
   (G)   The Tourism Commission will provide an annual written report to the
County Commissioners detailing revenues, expenses, results, and plans. A
representative of the Commission shall make a quarterly report to the
Commissioners.
(Ord. 2024-3, passed 2-19-2024)
§ 31.11 PUBLIC DEFENDER BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment of Board. Pursuant to I.C. 33-40-7 et seq., the Marshall
County Public Defender Board is hereby established for the purpose of providing
legal representation to indigent defendants/respondents in criminal, juvenile,
probation violation, extradition, child support, civil commitments and other
proceedings where the right to counsel has been established by law.
   (B)   Definitions. When used herein the following words and terms shall be
defined as follows:
      BOARD. The County Public Defender Board created by this section.
      INDIGENT DEFENDANT/RESPONDENT. A person who requests legal representation
and is determined by the court to be entitled to legal representation at public
expense.
      LEGAL REPRESENTATION.
         (a)   The services of an attorney provided to a defendant/respondent
in a matter originating in a state court in the county involving:
            1.   A person charged with a crime as defined in I.C. 35-31.5-2-75;
            2.   An act of delinquency as defined in I.C. 31-37-1-2;
            3.   A violation of a condition of probation established as a part
of a sentence in a juvenile or criminal matter;
            4.   Detention of a person subject to extradition to another
jurisdiction;
            5.   Proceedings to collect unpaid child support pursuant to I.C.
Article 31-16;
            6.   Civil commitment and contempt proceedings;
            7.   Children in need of services and termination of parental
rights proceedings; or
            8.   Other proceedings where the right to counsel at public expense
has been established by law.
         (b)   Includes services in connection with all pretrial, trial and
appellate proceedings in which an indigent defendant/respondent has a right to
counsel.
   (C)   Board membership and appointment.
      (1)   The Board shall consist of three members: one member appointed by
the county executive; one member appointed by the judges in the county who
exercise felony or juvenile jurisdiction; and one member appointed by the
Indiana Public Defender Commission.
      (2)   The initial term of the member appointed by the County
Commissioners shall expire on July 1, 2028. The initial term of the member
appointed by the judges shall expire on July 1, 2027, and the initial term of
the member appointed by the Indiana Public Defender Commission shall expire on
July 1, 2026.
      (3)   After the initial term of each member, appointments shall be for
three year terms. Members of the Board shall serve until their successor is
appointed. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the authority
appointing the member vacating the position and shall be for the remainder of
the unexpired term.
      (4)   The following persons shall be ineligible to serve as members of
the Board: a city, town, or county attorney; a law enforcement officer; a
judge; a court employee; an attorney who provides representation to indigent
persons in the county or region managed by the Board; an employee of the
department of child services; or an employee of any the individuals enumerated
in this section.
      (5)   Board members shall serve without pay but may receive reimbursement
for expenses incurred in connection with the member's duties if approved by the
Board.
      (6)   Two members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose
of conducting the business of the Board. Decisions of the Board shall be
approved by a majority of the members present.
      (7)   The Board shall meet at least quarterly or upon call of its
chairperson or any two members of the Board.
      (8)   The Board shall elect its chairperson by a majority vote of the
Board.
   (D)   Powers and duties of the Board. The Board shall have the following
powers and duties:
      (1)   Prepare a comprehensive plan for providing legal representation to
indigent defendants/respondents in the county in accordance with I.C. 33-40-7-
5. The comprehensive plan shall, at a minimum, provide for:
         (a)   Legal representation to an indigent defendant/respondent at the
earliest possible point
in time;
         (b)   Legal representation to an indigent defendant/respondent by the
same attorney or attorneys through the pendency of the matter to the greatest
extent possible; and
         (c)   Professional development, continuing legal education, and
malpractice coverage for public defenders.
      (2)   Establish policies and procedure for the provision of competent
legal representation for indigent defendants/respondents in criminal, juvenile,
probation violation, extradition, child support and criminal contempt, and
other matters pursuant to the comprehensive plan.
      (3)   Establish guidelines and procedures for the determination of
indigency and for the appropriate reimbursement for legal representation
provided at public expense in accordance with I.C. 33-40-3.
      (4)   Recommend an annual operating budget for the agency and monitor the
expenditures of funds.
      (5)   Prepare and submit to the County Council and the general public an
annual report on the operation of the agency.
   (E)   Authority of judges. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to
abridge the authority of any judge of a state court of this county from
appointing counsel for any person entitled thereto under the Constitution of
the United States or the Constitution of the State of Indiana.
(Ord. 2025-15, passed 5-5-2025)
CHAPTER 32: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Broadband ready community
   
32.02   Internal control standards
   
32.03   Restricting home address access through county website
County Employees
   
32.15   Employment policies and personnel policy handbook
   
32.16   Employee job descriptions
   
32.17   Meal allowance for election workers
   
32.18   Travel reimbursement policy
   
32.19   County public property database use
   
32.20   Conflicts of interest
   
32.21   Nondiscrimination implementation plan and policy
   
32.22   Credit cards and purchasing cards
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 BROADBAND READY COMMUNITY.
   For the purpose of promoting private investment in broadband infrastructure,
the county adopts the following.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PERMIT. Any local permit, license, certificate, approval, registration or
similar form of approval required by policy, administrative rule, regulation,
ordinance or resolution with respect to a project.
      PROJECT. The construction or deployment of wireline or wireless
communications facilities to provide communications services (as defined in
I.C. 8-1-32.5-3) in a unit.
   (B)   Application. Notwithstanding any other provision of county ordinances,
regulations, policies or practices, the governing body of the unit shall:
      (1)   Appoint a single point of contact for all matters related to a
project;
      (2)   Establish procedures to allow all forms, applications and
documentation related to a project to be filed or submitted and signed by
electronic means;
      (3)   Review and approve or reject all applications for a permit related
to a project within ten business days after an application is filed or
submitted; and
      (4)   Assure that after an application is approved pursuant to division
(B)(3) above, any inspections, including any additional necessary approvals,
related to a project will occur in a timely and expeditious manner.
   (C)   Processes and procedures. The county shall adopt adequate processes
and procedures to implement the provisions of division (B) above. Processes and
procedures established hereunder may not do the following:
      (1)   Require an applicant to designate a final contractor to complete a
project;
      (2)   Impose a fee to review an application or issue a permit for a
project;
      (3)   Impose a seasonal moratorium on the issuance of permits for a
project; or
      (4)   Discriminate among communications service providers or utilities
with respect to any action described in this section or otherwise related to a
project, including granting access to public rights-of-way, infrastructure and
poles, river and bridge crossings and any other physical assets owned or
controlled by the county.
(Ord. 2019-27, passed 1-6-2019)
§ 32.02 INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS.
   The internal control standards as established by I.C. 5-11-1-27(e) is hereby
adopted and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
shall supersede and repeal existing oral or written personnel policies and
procedures.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 2-1-2016)
§ 32.03 RESTRICTING HOME ADDRESS ACCESS THROUGH COUNTY WEBSITE.
   (A)   The county hereinafter adopts and incorporates by reference I.C. 36-1-
8.5-1 through 36-1-8.5-12 and any amendments thereto.
   (B)   I.C. 36-1-8.5 defines a COVERED PERSON as:
      (1)    A judge;
      (2)   A law enforcement officer;
      (3)   An address confidentiality program participant;
      (4)   A public official;
      (5)   The surviving spouse of a PERSON described in this division (B), if
the person was killed in the line of duty;
      (6)   An employee of the department of child services;
      (7)   A current or former probation officer;
      (8)   A current or former community corrections officer;
      (9)   A regular, paid firefighter or a volunteer firefighter (as defined
in I.C. 36-8-12-2); or
      (10)    Any person who resides in the same household as a person
described in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(9) above.
   (C)   The county public property database website is an internet website
that is available to the general public over the internet, does not require
registration, subscription, or the creation of a username and password to
search the website, and connects a covered person’s home address to the covered
person’s name, so that a search of the website for the covered person’s name
discloses the covered person’s home address.
   (D)   Upon proper request, the duty to prevent disclosure of an address as
it falls under I.C. 36-1-8.5 rests upon the County Information Technology
Department.
   (E)   (1)   A covered person may submit a completed form to the County
Information Technology Department, which form will include the information
necessary for restricting that covered persons’ home address. A copy of the
form is attached hereto as Exhibit A and made a part hereof. The form may be
obtained in the County Auditor’s office for submittal to the Information
Technology Department. The forms will be returned to the Auditor’s office and
maintained in a confidential file.
      (2)   If requested, the covered person may be required to certify or
provide proof of additional information. Victims of domestic violence must
submit proof of program participation as is required by statute.
   (F)   If an application for restriction is denied by the County Information
Technology Department, the applicant may appeal such denial to the Board of
County Commissioners.
   (G)   As a result of the request, the following changes will be made to the
appropriate county information system or third-party systems managed by the
county:
      (1)   GIS: the search results for GIS will reflect the changes made to
the database for those records marked as confidential. It is the intention of
the county to comply with the intent of the code to not make the property
accessible by means of removing the link between name and parcel information.
      (2)   Portal: once the option to suppress has been enabled to a specific
parcel, it will not be returned in search results or display on the map.
   (H)   (1)   Victims of domestic violence will not be required to pay a fee
for restricted access.
      (2)   A fee of $25 per parcel will be accessed for all other covered
person requests. An additional $25 per parcel fee will be accessed for any
changes to the title of the parcel or relocation of the covered person. All
fees collected will be deposited to the county’s General Fund.
   (I)   (1)   It is requested and recommended that a covered person having
submitted the form shall resubmit the form on an annual recurring basis so as
to assist the County Information Technology Department in assuring that the
covered person’s home address is restricted on the database website. However,
there is no additional fee for the recurring form filing. If a form has not
been submitted for five years, the address with the restricted access will be
automatically lifted.
      (2)   If a covered person moves from an address that is restricted, the
covered person must submit a written request to allow public access on the
public property database website to the County Auditor for forwarding to the
County Information Technology Department so that the restriction on that
address can be lifted.
   (J)   The county is not liable for failure to timely restrict disclosure of
an address under this chapter unless the county’s act or omission constitutes
gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct (see I.C. 36-1-8.5-12).
   (K)   The public access of removed information can only be done at the
request of the original covered person. Per the code, a covered person may
request reinstatement of their excluded information. Should any changes to the
title of a covered parcel be made, the existing residence will be removed from
the list of confidential properties. A new request will need to be made in
order to have the parcel covered.
   (L)   All requests made to the unit by a covered person are confidential
(see I.C. 36-1-8.5-11).
   (M)   This section is in effect for the covered person’s primary residence
only per I.C. 36-1-8.5-7. If a covered person owns or is involved in additional
properties that might be utilized as a primary home address or as a mailing
address, such parcels will be displayed unless the covered person wishes to
have those addresses restricted as well and which will require a $25 fee
applied upon submission.
   (N)   The county reserves the right to amend or revise the contents of this
section. Further, a copy of this section shall be circulated to the local
judges, law enforcement officers through the local law enforcement agencies in
the county, and other local units of government who may have individuals that
are included as a covered person. The County Prosecutor’s office will be sent a
copy of this section for distribution to any victim of domestic violence that
may be a covered person.
   Exhibit A:
   Confidential Request to Restrict Home Address Access of a Covered Person
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-8-3 et seq. and Marshal County Ordinance 2023-19
   File stamp upon receipt of payment
A “covered person” must complete and submit this form in person to the Marshall
County Auditor’s Office in order to initiate the covered person’s ability to
restrict access to their home address by means of a public property data base
web site, as provided for by I.C. 36-1-8.5. The Marshall County Auditor’s
Office will only accept this form if it is signed by the Covered Person and
accompanied by a valid government issued photo ID. The Marshall County
Auditor’s Office may refuse to accept this form if the person submitting it is
unable to provide proof of their eligibility as a “covered person”, or if the
identity of the person submitting the form is unable to be verified or if the
form is incomplete. Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-8.5-12, a unit may not be civilly
liable for failure to timely restrict disclosure of an address.
   By signing and submitting this request, the covered person understands and
acknowledges that:
   •   If, at any time after the submission of this form, the covered persons
name is changed or is involved in an action that alters the name or names on a
deed, the covered person MUST resubmit this form to retain such restricted
access coverage.
   •   Certain services, primarily online governmental services, related to the
covered persons name and property may be limited or inaccessible, which
includes, but is not limited to, the covered persons ability to view and pay
real estate taxes on-line, the covered persons ability to use a credit/debit
card to make payments online and possible difficulty in refinancing or purchase
a home.
   •   The restricted access provided herein does not prohibit the disclosure
of any documents required to be released pursuant to access to public records
law, subpoena, or court order.
   •   This request will not remove a covered person’s information from
information already provided by any Marshall County office or website outside
of the control of Marshall County. Notwithstanding anything else contained
herein, this form is CONFIDENTIAL and not subject to disclosure pursuant to
I.C. 36-1-8.5-11.
   •   The covered person should resubmit the form on an annual basis, without
recurring fee. If a form has not been submitted for five (5) years, the address
with restricted access will be automatically lifted. Should the covered person
wish to remove the restriction in the future, a written request must be
submitted.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-8.5-5, “public property data base web site” means an
internet web site that: (1) is available to the general public over the
internet; (2) does not require registration, subscription, or the creation of a
user name and password to search the web site; and (3) connects a covered
person’s home address to the covered person’s name, so that a search of the
website for the covered person’s name discloses the covered person’s home
address.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-8.5-2, the following are “covered persons,” please
check the box that applies to you:
       (1)   A judge as defined in I.C. 36-1-8.5-3.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer as defined in I.C. 36-1-8.5-4.
      (3)   An address confidentiality program participant as defined in I.C.
36-1-8.5-4.3.
      (4)   A public official as defined in I.C. 36-1-8.5-4.5.
      (5)   The surviving spouse of a person described in subdivision (2) if
the person was killed in the line of duty.
      (6)   An employee of the department of child services as defined in I.C.
36-1-8.5-2.5.
      (7)   A current or former probation officer.
      (8)   A current or former community corrections officer.
      (9)   A regular, paid firefighter or a volunteer firefighter as defined
in I.C. 36-8-12-2.
      (10)   Any person who resides in the same household as a person described
in subdivisions (1) through (9).
Please list home address and parcel number (the parcel number my be obtained
from the Auditor’s Office):
Street address, city, state, zip code                         Parcel number
Any additional addresses and parcel numbers of property that you own and wish
to restrict, subject to established fee:
Street address, city, state, zip code                         Parcel number
Street address, city, state, zip code                         Parcel number
I swear under the penalty of perjury that I am an eligible “covered person” as
defined in I.C. 36-1-8.5-5 et seq. and I request Marshall County, Indiana to
restrict access to my home address through any record made available to the
general public within a “public property data base web site” as defined in I.C.
36-1-8.5-5.
Covered Person’s Printed Name       Covered Person’s Signature             Date
**This request must be submitted in person: Marshall County Auditor’s Office,
112 W. Jefferson Street, Room 205, Plymouth, IN 46563
Original form to Settlement Deputy, Copy of Form & Quietus to I.T. Department
and Quietus filed in Auditor’s Office.
(Ord. 2023-19, passed 10-16-2023)
COUNTY EMPLOYEES
§ 32.15 EMPLOYMENT POLICIES AND PERSONNEL POLICY HANDBOOK.
   The county’s employee handbook and personnel policies are adopted by
reference.
(Ord. passed 12-5-1994; Ord. 2011-09a, passed - -; Ord. 2011-10(a), passed - -;
Ord. 95-10, passed 12-4-1995; Ord. 1995-13, passed 12-18-1995; Council Ord. 95-
02, passed 1-8-1996; Ord. 1996-1, passed 3-18-1996; Council Ord. 1998-6, passed
9-29-1998; Ord. 1998-6, passed 10-5-1998; Ord. 2000-09, passed 7-7-2000;
Council Ord. 2000-13, passed 12-11-2000; Ord. 2000-13, passed 12-18-2000; Ord.
2000-14, passed 12-29-2000; Council Ord. 2000-14, passed 1-8-2001; Council Ord.
2001-4, passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2001-4, passed 7-16-2001; Ord. 2004-10, passed
12-6-2004; Ord. 2006-05, passed 4-3-2006; Ord. 2007-14(a), passed 12-3-2007;
Council Ord. 2007-14(b), passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 2008-13(a), passed 12-1-2008;
Council Ord. 2008-13(b), passed 12-8-2008; Ord. 2009-09(a), passed 9-8-2009;
Council Ord. 2010-5(b), passed 6-14-2010; Ord. 2010-18(a), passed 12-6-2010;
Council Ord. 2010-18(b), passed 12-13-2010; Ord. 2011-1(a), passed 1-3-2011;
Council Ord. 2011-09(b), passed 6-13-2011; Council Ord. 2011-10(b), passed 6-
13-2011; Ord. 2012-2A, passed 6-4-2012; Council Ord. 2012-02B, passed 6-11-
2012; Council Ord. 2012-05B, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 2012-5A, passed 7-16-2012;
Ord. 2015-07, passed 6-1-2015; Ord. 2015-08(a), passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 2015-09
(a), passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 2015-10(a), passed 6-15-2015; Council Ord. 2015-08
(b), passed 7-13-2015; Council Ord. 2015-09(b), passed 7-13-2015; Council Ord.
2015-10(b), passed 7-13-2015; Ord. 2016-9, passed 3-21-2016; Ord. 2016-17,
passed 9-6-2016; Ord. 2016-26, passed 11-21-2016; Ord. 2018-05, passed 2-5-
2018; Ord. 2020-06, passed 1-6-2020; Ord. 2020-23, passed 12-7-2020; Ord. 2020-
24, passed 12-7-2020; Ord. 2020-26, passed 12-21-2020; Ord. 2022-05, passed 2-
7-2022; Ord. 2022-17, passed 12-5-2022; Ord. 2023-21, passed 11-6-2023; Ord.
2023-33, passed 12-29-2023 ; Ord. 2024-6, passed 1-16-2024; Ord. 2024-25,
passed 12-2-2024; Ord. 2025-17, passed 7-21-2025 )
§ 32.16 EMPLOYEE JOB DESCRIPTIONS.
   (A)   The list of job descriptions attached to the ordinance codified in
this section describe and classify positions and services, and those job
descriptions are adopted as the official job descriptions for all county
positions. In the future, as new jobs are added, or the adopted job
descriptions change, new job descriptions shall be prepared or updated and
presented to the County Council for approval.
   (B)   The FLSA exempt, excluded and non-exempt classifications attached to
the ordinance codified in this section are hereby adopted for the purposes of
calculating overtime for employees holding nonexempt positions. Employees
holding exempt classification status are not eligible to and shall not receive
FLSA overtime or FLSA compensatory time, with the exception of the Sheriff or
Captain, Chief Jailer, Communication Supervisor; Nurse/Public Health Nurse; and
WIC Coordinator, who shall be paid an hourly rate and eligible for FLSA
overtime or FLSA compensatory time.
(Council Ord. 2019-10, passed 5-13-2019; Council Ord. 2019-10(1), passed 8-12-
2019; Council Ord. 2023-4B(1), passed 5-11-2023)
§ 32.17 MEAL ALLOWANCE FOR ELECTION WORKERS.
   (A)   Under the provisions of I.C. 3-6-6-31, the allowance for meals for
precinct election workers in the county is hereby fixed at the sum of $15, per
precinct election officer per day.
   (B)   Alcoholic beverages may not be furnished to precinct election workers.
(Ord. 1994-8, passed 11-7-1994)
§ 32.18 TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT POLICY.
   (A)   The following items are designated for reimbursement when an original
itemized receipt accompanies a properly completed accounts payable voucher
within 30 calendar days from the date expense occurred:
      (1)   Meal, maximum allowed, includes gratuity:
         (a)   Breakfast: $30;
         (b)   Lunch: $40;
         (c)   Dinner: $50;
         (d)   Gratuity itemized on receipt up to 20%, cash gratuity will not
be reimbursed and is included in the maximum amount allowed; and
         (e)   In accordance with the County Personnel Policies Handbook, the
county shall not pay for a person’s meal more than once. This includes, but is
not limited to, meals included in registration fees or by hotels in the room
charge. If a person in travel status received a meal without charge, then the
subsistence allowance must be reduced. However, no deductions from subsistence
shall be taken for continental breakfasts or meals served on airplanes.
      (2)   Parking reimbursement: with parking receipt; and
      (3)   Mileage reimbursement: rate as established by the State Department
of Administration.
   (B)   Pursuant to state code, each payment must be fully itemized and each
invoice or bill certified by the County Auditor.
(Ord. 2022-07, passed 5-9-2022)
§ 32.19 COUNTY PUBLIC PROPERTY DATABASE USE.
   (A)   The county hereinafter adopts and incorporates by reference I.C. 36-1-
8.5-1 through 36-1-8.5-12 and any amendments thereto.
   (B)   I.C. 36-1-8.5-2 defines a covered person as:
      (1)   A judge;
      (2)   A law enforcement officer;
      (3)   A victim of domestic violence; and
      (4)   A public official.
   (C)   The county’s public property database website is an internet website
that is: available to the general public over the internet; does not require
registration, subscription or the creation of a username and password to search
the website; and connects a covered person’s home address to the covered
person’s name so that a search of the website for the covered person’s name
discloses the covered person’s home address.
   (D)   Upon proper request, the duty to prevent disclosure of an address as
it falls under I.C. 36-1-8.5 rests upon the County Information Technology
Department.
   (E)   (1)   A covered person may submit a completed form to the County
Information Technology Department, which form will include the information
necessary for restricting that covered person’s home address. A copy of the
form is attached to the ordinance codified in this section. The form may be
obtained in the County Auditor office for submittal to the Information
Technology Department. The forms will be returned to the Auditor’s office and
maintained in a confidential file.
      (2)   If requested, the covered person may be required to certify or
provide proof of additional information. Victims of domestic violence must
submit proof of program participation as is required by statute.
   (F)   If an application for restriction is denied by the County Information
Technology Department, the applicant may appeal such denial to the Board of
County Commissioners.
   (G)   As a result of the request, the following changes will be made to the
appropriate county information system or third-party systems managed by the
county.
      (1)   GIS. The search results for GIS will reflect the changes made to
the database for those records marked as “confidential.” It is the intention of
the county to comply with the intent of the code to not make the property
accessible by means of removing the link between name and parcel information.
      (2)   Portal. Once the option to suppress has been enabled to a specific
parcel, it will not be returned in search results or display on the map.
   (H)   Victims of domestic violence will not be required to pay a fee for
restricted access. A fee of $25 per parcel will be accessed for all other
covered person requests. An additional $25 per parcel fee will be accessed for
any changes to the title of the parcel or relocation of the covered person. All
fees collected will be deposited to the County General Fund.
   (I)   (1)   It is requested and recommended that a covered person having
submitted the form shall resubmit the form on an annual recurring basis so as
to assist the County Information Technology Department in assuring that the
covered person’s home address is restricted on the database website. However,
there is no additional fee for the recurring form filing. If a form has not
been submitted for five years, the address with the restricted access will be
automatically lifted.
      (2)   If a covered person moves from an address that is restricted, the
covered person must submit a written request to allow public access on the
public property database website to the County Auditor for forwarding to the
County Information Technology Department so that the restriction on that
address can be lifted.
   (J)   The county is not liable for failure to timely restrict disclosure of
an address under this chapter unless the county’s act or omission constitutes
gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct. See I.C. 36-1-8.5-12.
   (K)   The public access of removed information can only be done at the
request of the original covered person. Per the code, a covered person may
request reinstatement of his or her excluded information. Should any changes to
the title of a covered parcel be made, the existing residence will be removed
from the list of confidential properties. A new request will need to be made in
order to have the parcel covered.
   (L)   All requests made to the unit by a covered person are confidential.
See I.C. 36-1-8.5-11.
   (M)   This policy is in effect for the covered person’s primary residence
only per I.C. 36-1-8.5-7. If a covered person owns or is involved in additional
properties that might be utilized as a primary home address or as a mailing
address, such parcels will be displayed unless the covered person wishes to
have those addresses restricted as well and which will require a $25 fee
applied upon submission.
   (N)   The county reserves the right to amend or revise the contents of this
policy and ordinance. Further, a copy of this section shall be circulated to
the local judges, law enforcement officers through the local law enforcement
agencies in the county, and other local units of government who may have
individuals that are included as a covered person. The County Prosecutor’s
office will be sent a copy of this section for distribution to any victim of
domestic violence that may be a covered person.
(Ord. 2016-15, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 32.20 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   The County Board of Commissioners establishes and adopts this Gift Rule/
Conflict of Interest Policy.
   (A)   Policy. The following provisions apply to all public officials and
employees of the county.
      (1)   No officers or employees of the county shall neither solicit nor
accept gratuities, favors or anything of monetary value from consultants,
potential consultants or parties to subagreements, unless in accordance with
this Conflict of Interest Policy. The aforementioned prohibition does not
include gratuities, favors or anything of monetary value under $100 per day,
any financial interest under $100 per day shall be considered not substantial
in accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations.
      (2)   This policy conforms to the standards set forth in the Code of
Federal Regulations and by the State Department of Transportation. For the
purpose of this section, a CONSULTANT is defined as an individual or firm
providing engineering and design-related services as a party to a contract with
a recipient or subrecipient of federal assistance.
   (B)   Application. The terms of this policy apply to all elected officials
and employees of the county.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   The dollar value of $100 per day, below which any financial
interest or value of any gratuity is not substantial and may be accepted per
this policy.
      (2)   This policy shall not prohibit or restrict contributions to a
political committee formed to support any elected official or employee’s
candidacy for elected office.
(Ord. 2017-26, passed 11-6-2017)
§ 32.21 NONDISCRIMINATION IMPLEMENTATION PLAN AND POLICY.
   The county’s Title VI Nondiscrimination Implementation Plan and Policy
attached to the ordinance codified herein is hereby adopted and shall be in
full force and effect upon adoption.
(Ord. 2020-05, passed 1-6-2020)
§ 32.22 CREDIT CARDS AND PURCHASING CARDS.
   (A)   This section is adopted in compliance with the State Board of Accounts
Accounting and Uniform Compliance Guidelines Manual for Counties, Chapter 1,
authorizing certain elected officials and department heads to use credit cards
for certain purchases.
   (B)   (1)   The issuance and handling of said credit cards shall be
administered by the County Auditor. The Auditor will maintain a log, which
would include the names of the individual’s requesting usage of the cards,
their position, estimated amounts to be charged, fund and account numbers to be
charged, date the card is issued and returned.
      (2)   When the purpose for which the credit card has been issued and
accomplished, the credit card should be immediately returned to the custody of
the Auditor’s office.
   (C)   It will be the responsibility of the elected official or department
head to safeguard the usage and security of said cards. If the elected official
or department head elects a designee to use the credit card, it must be logged
to clearly indicate the physical custody of said credit card to that employee,
and the related physical transfer back to the holder. Designated cardholders
shall sign the attached statement pledging receipt and responsibility.
   (D)   Payment of credit card charges shall be subject to the audit
requirements of Accounts Payable claim vouchers in conformity with I.C. 5-11-10
and 36-4-8, along with the compliance procedures of the State Board of
Accounts. It is the responsibility of the cardholder or the designee to obtain
proper itemized receipts other than the credit card receipt for the item
charged.
   (E)   Credit card and purchasing card charges that do not meet state audit
requirements, including charges that include the imposition of state sales tax
for which the county is otherwise exempt, are the responsibility of the
employee authorizing the charge. The State Department of Revenue General Sales
Tax Exemption Certificate, Form ST-105, is available upon request to the
Auditor’s office.
   (F)   The credit cards will only be used in the performance of county
business for purchase of goods or services for the official business of the
county, including supplies, certain hotel charges and certain equipment
purchases. County credit cards can only be used to purchase items and services
already approved for purchase within the budget as approved by the County
Council and accounted for in a specific line item of the budget. Credit cards
should be used for purchases requiring an immediate need. Cards may not be used
for entertainment, or any personal charges by the holder. Personal use of
county credit cards is expressly prohibited. Such use would be subject to
personnel action as described in the County Personnel Policies Handbook § 6.13,
Employee Conduct.
   (G)   Upon completion of the credit card transaction, elected officials or
department heads must complete an accounts payable voucher with all proper
itemized receipts and submit to the Auditor’s office at least seven business
days from the date of the transaction. If interest charges or late fees are
incurred as a result, it will be the financial responsibility of the cardholder
to pay those fees. Payment will not be made based on a statement or credit card
slip only. Procedures for payments should be no different than for any other
claim. Supporting documents such as paid bills and receipts must be submitted.
Additionally, any interest or penalty incurred due to late filing or furnishing
of documentation by an officer or employee will be the responsibility of that
officer or employee.
   (H)   The Auditor’s office will review each credit card statement and all
documentation submitted by county employees to ensure transactions comply with
the policy. Any transactions not submitted with an itemized credit card receipt
and a signed voucher will be immediately investigated. Transactions that do not
appear to comply with this policy will be reported to the Commissioners.
   (I)   Each month, the balance due on the credit cards for all verified
transactions will be paid when they are due to avoid the assessment of interest
and late charges. The Commissioners will not approve a payment to the entity
issuing the credit card until all transactions have been verified.
   (J)   County-issued credit cards are the property of the county, and if a
card is lost or stolen, the employee must report the missing card immediately
to the Auditor’s office.
   (K)   The County Commissioners further authorize an annual fee may be paid
for said credit cards, if required.
(Ord. 2022-10, passed 10-17-2022)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
General Provisions
   
33.001   Insufficient funds and dishonored checks
   
33.002   Grant approval and administration policy
   
33.003   Claim pre-payment procedure
   
33.004   Purchasing rules and policies
   
33.005   Authorizing purchase of blanket bonds for county officials and
employees
   
33.006   Co-payments for health care incurred at County Jail
   
33.007   Procurement of emergency funds
   
33.008   Authorizing Auditor to establish a second petty cash drawer
   
33.009   Membership in organizations
   
33.010   Fixed asset capitalization and inventory policy
   
33.011   Contracts
Taxation
   
33.025   County adjusted gross income tax
   
33.026   Innkeeper’s tax
   
33.027   Publication on delinquent personal property taxes
   
33.028   Tax abatement procedure
Funds
   
33.040   Corrections Fund
   
33.041   Inmate Processing Fund
   
33.042   Enhanced GIS Data Access Fund
   
33.043   Wireless 9-1-1 Fund
   
33.044   Cumulative Capital Projects Enabling Fund
   
33.045   Rainy Day Fund
   
33.046   Plat Book Fund
   
33.047   Public Health Emergency Response Fund
   
33.048   Miscellaneous Funds
Fees
   
33.060   Health Department collection of fees; specific fees
   
33.061   Jury fees
   
33.062   Accident report fees
   
33.063   Criminal history record inspection and release requests
   
33.064   Sex offender fees
   
33.065   Copy fees
   
33.066   Bulk copy fees
   
33.067   Document recordation fee
   
33.068   Real property endorsement fees
   
33.069   Enhanced access fee
   
33.070   Fees for vendors utilizing county payroll services
   
33.071   Electronic data processing fees
   
33.072   Sheriff’s Sale Program and service fee
   
33.073   Authorizing Auditor to collect administrative fees
   
33.074   Electronic facsimile transmission fee
   
33.075   Enhanced 9-1-1 emergency telephone system fee
 
   
33.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Grant Approval and Administrative Policy Checklists
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.001 INSUFFICIENT FUNDS AND DISHONORED CHECKS.
   (A)   Upon non-payment of any personal or business check tendered to the
County Treasurer, the Treasurer shall notify the maker at the last known
address or at the address printed on said check, and the maker shall be liable
for the penalty as provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   A penalty of $35 shall be assessed against the maker of any personal
check or business check not honored by the appropriate financial institution.
   (C)   Said penalty referenced in division (B) above shall be in addition to,
and not in lieu of, any other right or remedy that the County Treasurer may
have under the laws of the state for collection of bad checks, taxes and
assessments.
(Ord. 1985-6, passed 11-4-1985; Ord. 2024-9, passed 2-19-2024)
§ 33.002 GRANT APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATION POLICY.
   (A)   Generally. The attached county grant approval and administration
policy is hereby adopted and shall be in full force and effect from and after
its adoption by both the Commissioners and the Council and shall supersede and
repeal existing oral or written policies and procedures.
   (B)   (1)   Adopted policy. This policy was adopted by the County
Commissioners and shall be in full force and effect immediately.
      (2)   Checklist. The following general information needs to be addressed
when applying for federal and state grants on behalf of the county:
         (a)   Statement of grant terms and conditions:
            1.   Employee requirements:
               a.   Space;
               b.   Tools;
               c.   Salary;
               d.   Benefits; and
               e.   Training.
            2.   Time period:
               a.   Start date; and
               b.   End date.
            3.   Obligations:
               a.   Does the award amount require matching funds?
               b.   What conditions does the grant require and how do those
conditions impact the county?
         (b)   Does the grant meet a need within the county?
         (c)   Who will administer the grant and; will an administration fee be
charged?
      (3)   Pre-approval policies.
         (a)   All departments are required to complete a request to apply for
grants in advance of submitting a grant application;
         (b)   All departments shall notify the Council, Commissioners and
Auditor that a grant is being considered with as much advance notice as
possible;
         (c)   Potential personnel expenses need to be estimated;
         (d)   A proposed job description needs to be submitted;
         (e)   The proposed position needs to be classified within county’s
existing system; and
         (f)   Council approval of grant compensation must be obtained in
advance of submitting grant applications.
      (4)   Grant approval.
         (a)   If the grant is awarded, the grant document and contract should
be forwarded to the Auditor to review using the attached checklist in Appendix
A.
         (b)   Before a contract is executed, the County Attorney, Auditor,
Commissioners and Council or designee shall review the grant requirements to
evaluate the county’s liability exposure.
         (c)   The Department will be notified of a decision and/or
recommendations regarding the grant request.
         (d)   The Auditor shall maintain a comprehensive list of approved or
denied grants and contracts.
      (5)   Employment. Grant employees may be full- or part-time. Employment
is conditioned on grant funding, and in the event that grant funds are not
available to fund the position or contract, the position and the employee shall
be terminated, unless otherwise stipulated by the grant and authorized by the
County Council. Grant employees may be eligible for county benefits providing
funding is provided by the applicable grant.
(Ord. 2013-15, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 33.003 CLAIM PRE-PAYMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The following categories are designated for pre-approved or pre-
payment procedures:
      (1)   Property or services purchased or leased from the U.S. government,
its agencies or its political subdivision;
      (2)   Insurance premiums;
      (3)   Utility payments or utility connection charges;
      (4)   State or federal taxes;
      (5)   Credit card or charge card expenses incurred by county government
offices for lawful purposes, which may include the prepayment of conference or
seminar registration, overnight hotel accommodations and transportation
expenses to said conference or seminar for elected officials, department heads
or other pre-approved employees and credit card expenses by department heads
for the purchase of merchandise, supplies, small machinery, equipment and
appliances under $750. The employee must submit supporting documentation for
the credit card charge or expense and the claim for prepayment to the County
Auditor by the tenth of the month if to be paid by the fifteenth and by the
twentieth of the month if to be paid by the twenty-fifth;
      (6)   Postage;
      (7)   Unemployment fees;
      (8)   County ditch and reconstructions taxes to the County Treasurer;
      (9)   Payment of claims associated with sums received as a result of
federal grants which said payments are required to be paid within a shorter
time span than the typical billing cycle by the county;
      (10)   (a)   Reimbursement to county employees for overnight hotel
accommodations and/or registration fees that exceed $50; and
         (b)   The employee must submit supporting documentation and the claim
for pre-payment by the tenth of the month if to be paid by the fifteenth, and
by the twentieth of the month if to be paid by the twenty-fifth.
      (11)   Payment for conference registration;
      (12)   Payments to the Bureau of Motor Vehicles;
      (13)   Petroleum (gasoline and diesel) delivered to County Highway
Department under contract; and
      (14)   State Department of Transportation invoices as well as engineer
invoices for county match payments on road or bridge projects.
   (B)   Pursuant to state code, each payment must be fully itemized and each
invoice or bill certified by the County Auditor. The pre-approved or pre-paid
claim must be advertised and approved at the next scheduled meeting of the
County Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010; Ord. 2014-12, passed 11-17-2014; Ord. 2015-01,
passed 1-20-2015; Ord. 2016-27, passed 12-5-2016)
§ 33.004 PURCHASING RULES AND POLICIES.
   The following are the purchasing rules for the county.
   (A)   Purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States. Supplies
manufactured in the United States shall be specified for all county purchases
and shall be purchased unless the county determines that:
      (1)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in
reasonably available quantities;
      (2)    The price of the supplies manufactured in the United States
exceeds by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable
supplies manufactured elsewhere;
      (3)   The quality of supplies manufactured in the United States is
substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available supplies
manufactured elsewhere; or
      (4)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is not
in the public interest.
   (B)   Protection of officers; status of documents as public records.
      (1)   Protection of offers prior to opening. The purchasing agent shall
retain all offers received in a secure location prior to the date and time at
which offers will be opened in order to prevent disclosure of the contents
prior to the opening of the offers.
      (2)   Unobstructed evaluation of offers. After offers have been opened,
the purchasing agent shall be responsible for maintaining the offers in such a
manner as to permit evaluation of the offers by the persons responsible for
evaluating the offers. The purchasing agents shall maintain such offers in
their own offices, as well as a duplicate set of records in the designated
purchasing filing cabinets set up by the Board of Commissioners with said
filing cabinets to be in a place designated by them. All filings in the
designated cabinets will be by instructions provided therewith.
      (3)   Public record status of bids. Bids submitted in response to an
invitation for bids must be available for public inspection and copying after
the time of the bid opening. Accepted bids with all necessary accompanying
documentation will be kept for inspection in the designated cabinets.
      (4)   Register of proposals. The purchasing agent shall prepare a
register of proposals for each request for proposals issued which shall contain
information concerning the proposals available for public inspection and
copying. Proposals may not be disclosed. A copy of the register will also be
kept in the designated cabinet.
      (5)   Discussions with offerors responding to a request for proposals.
The purchasing agent may conduct discussions with, and best and final offers
may be obtained from, responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to
be reasonably susceptible of being selected for a contract award.
      (6)   Delay in opening of offers. Upon request of the purchasing agent
and when the Board of Commissioners makes a written determination that it is in
the county’s best interests, offers may be opened after the time stated in the
solicitation. The date, time and place of the rescheduled opening must be
announced at the time and place of the originally scheduled opening.
   (C)   Evidence of financial responsibility.
      (1)   Purchases less than $25,000. The purchasing agent may not require
evidence of financial responsibility when the estimated cost of a purchase is
less than $25,000.
      (2)   Purchases between $25,000 and $100,000. The solicitation may
include a requirement that an offeror provide evidence of financial
responsibility. If the evidence of financial responsibility is required, the
solicitation must indicate the kind of evidence that will be acceptable. If a
bond or certified check is required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated
cost of the purchase.
      (3)   Purchases over $100,000. The solicitation shall include a
requirement that an offeror provide evidence of financial responsibility and
must indicate the kind of evidence that will be acceptable. If a bond or
certified check is required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated cost of
purchase.
      (4)   Retention of bonds or checks. Checks and other evidence of
financial responsibility shall be retained in a secure place.
   (D)   Use of RFP for purchases of designated types of supplies.
      (1)   The county determines that:
         (a)   It is either not practical or not advantageous to purchase
certain types of supplies by sealed competitive bidding; and
         (b)   Receiving proposals is the preferred method for purchasing the
following types of supplies.
      (2)   See Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this section
for a list of supplies designated for RFP purchases.
   (E)   Modification and termination of contracts.
      (1)   Price adjustments. The purchasing agent may include provisions to
permit price adjustments in a purchase contract. The following provisions for
price adjustments may be included:
         (a)   Price adjustments must be computed by agreement on a fixed price
adjustment before the beginning of the pertinent performance or as soon after
the beginning of a performance as possible;
         (b)   Price adjustments must be computed by unit prices specified in
the contract or subsequently agreed upon;
         (c)   Price adjustments must be computed by costs attributable to the
events or situations under such clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all
as specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;
         (d)   Price adjustments must be computed in such other manner as the
contracting parties may mutually agree upon; or
         (e)   In the absence of agreement by the parties, price adjustments
must be computed by unilateral determination by the governmental body of the
costs attributable to the events or situations under such clauses with
adjustment of profit or fee, all as computed by the governmental body in
accordance with applicable rules adopted by the governmental body.
      (2)   Adjustments in time or performance. The purchasing agent may
include provisions in a purchase contract concerning adjustments for time or
performance under the contract.
      (3)   Unilateral rights of county. The purchasing agent may include in a
purchase contract provisions dealing with the unilateral right of the county to
order changes in the work within the scope of the contract or to order
temporary work stoppage or delays in time or performance.
      (4)   Quantity variations. The purchasing agent may include in a purchase
contract provisions dealing with variations between the estimated quantities of
work in a contract and the actual quantity delivered.
   (F)   Purchase of services.
      (1)   The county determines that each elected county official and
department head may purchase services in whatever manner the purchaser deems to
be reasonable.
      (2)   The county purchasing agency may not require any county purchasing
agent or any county official to purchase services in any particular manner;
except that the purchase of services that exceed $1,000 shall be approved by
the county purchasing agency.
   (G)   Small business set-aside purchases. The county is desirous of trying
to purchase products and supplies from local vendors and to give preference to
small businesses and hereby determines to establish criteria for determining
qualifications as a small business and to identify specific supplies for small
business set-aside purchases.
      (1)   Qualifications. A business qualifies as a small business if it
qualifies as a small business under the standards established by the State
Department of Commerce.
      (2)   Businesses that are not small businesses.
         (a)   A wholesale business, if its average annual sales for its most
recently completed fiscal year exceeds $4,000,000;
         (b)   A construction business, if its average annual receipts for the
preceding three fiscal years exceeds $4,000,000;
         (c)   A retail business or business selling services, if its annual
sales and receipts exceeds $500,000; and
         (d)   A manufacturing business if it employs more than 100 persons.
      (3)   Specific supplies eligible for small business set-aside. See
Exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified in this section for a list of
supplies eligible for small business set-aside.
   (H)   State business preference.
      (1)   Qualification. An offeror is a state business if its principal
place of business operations and the business is owned or operated by a citizen
and resident of the state or is incorporated within the state.
      (2)   Application of state business preferences. State business
preferences shall be applied as follows.
         (a)   It is the intent of the county to do business locally. The
county recognizes that service is more likely to be quicker and more readily
available by a local business and thus prefers doing business locally if the
same products, supplies and services can be purchased for the same price.
         (b)   The county prefers doing business in the state.
   (I)   Publication of notices; invitation of bids.
      (1)   Notice of invitations.
         (a)   All notices of invitations for bids shall be published in
accordance with I.C. 5-3-1-2 in the Plymouth Pilot-News, Bremen Enquirer and/or
Culver Citizen.
         (b)   The purchasing agent shall schedule the publication of notice to
provide a reasonable amount of time for preparation and submission of bids. A
notice will be published two times, at least one week apart. The second
publication must occur at least ten days prior to the date the bids will be
open.
      (2)   Request for proposals. All notices of request for proposal shall be
published in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in the Plymouth Pilot-News, Bremen
Enquirer and/or Culver Citizen. The purchasing agent shall schedule the
publication of notice to provide a reasonable amount of time for preparation
and submission of proposals. The notice will be published two times, at least
one week apart. The second publication must occur at least seven days prior to
the date the proposals will be open.
      (3)   Request for specifications. All notices of request for
specification shall be published in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in the Plymouth
Pilot-News, Bremen Enquirer and/or Culver Citizen. The purchasing agent shall
schedule the publication of notice to provide a reasonable amount of time for
preparation and submission of proposals. The notice will be published two
times, at least one week apart. The second publication must occur at least
seven days prior to the date the proposal will be opened.
      (4)   Electronic notices. Whenever a notice or other material, including
specifications, and invitations for bids, requests for proposals or requests
for specifications is sent by mail, the purchasing agent may also send the
notice or other material by electronic means; provided, that the transmission
of the information is at least as efficient as mailing the information.
   (J)   Receiving offers.
      (1)    Opening of offers.
         (a)   Bids received in response to an invitation for bids must be
opened publicly in the presence of at least one or more witnesses at the time
and place designated in the invitation for bids.
         (b)   Proposals received in response to request for proposals must be
opened to avoid disclosure of the contents to competing offerors during the
process of negotiation.
         (c)   Proposals received in response to a request for specification
may be opened as specified in the request for specifications.
      (2)   Electronic receipt of offers.
         (a)   The purchasing agent may receive electronic offers in response
to an invitation to bid, request for proposals or a request for specification.
         (b)   An electronic offer may only receive an electronic offer if:
            1.   The solicitation includes a procedure for the electronic
transmission of the offer; or
            2.   The purchasing agency receives the offer on a fax machine or
other system with a security feature that protects the contents of an
electronic offer with the same degree of protection as provided to an offer not
transmitted electronically.
   (K)   Correction and withdrawal of bids.
      (1)   An offeror may correct inadvertent errors in a bid up to the time
at which bids will be opened by supplementing the erroneous bid and submitting
a revised bid. A bidder may not supplement an inadvertently erroneous bid after
the time at which the bids were opened.
      (2)   A bidder may withdraw a bid containing inadvertent errors up to the
time at which bids will be opened and for a period of not more than 24 hours
after the time at which the bids were opened.
   (L)   Cancellation of solicitation. When the purchasing agent makes a
written determination that it is in the county’s best interest, the purchasing
agent may cancel a solicitation or reject all offers; provided, that the
solicitation included information concerning the procedure for cancellation.
   (M)   Small purchases. The purchasing agent may purchase supplies with an
estimated cost of less than $1,000 per purchase on the open market without
inviting or receiving quotes.
   (N)   Approval of purchases.
      (1)   All purchasing agents must obtain prior approval from the
purchasing agency before making any purchases that are equal to or exceed
$1,000.
      (2)   All purchasing agents shall complete the required forms as required
by statute.
      (3)   Copies of forms may be provided or designated by the purchasing
agency from time to time.
      (4)   Claims submitted that exceed $1,000 that have not been pre-
approved, or claims submitted that do not have the correct appropriate
paperwork and completed forms will not be approved and paid by the county.
(Ord. 1998-03, passed - -)
§ 33.005 AUTHORIZING PURCHASE OF BLANKET BONDS FOR COUNTY OFFICIALS AND
EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The County Auditor is hereby authorized to purchase a blanket bond or
a crime insurance policy endorsed to include faithful performance to cover the
faithful performance of all employees, county officials, Commission members and
all persons acting on behalf of the county.
   (B)   The amount of the bond shall be for sums to provide adequate
protection to the county and that meet or exceed minimum coverage required by
law.
(Ord. 2000-3, passed 2-22-2000)
§ 33.006 CO-PAYMENTS FOR HEALTH CARE INCURRED AT COUNTY JAIL.
   (A)   A person confined to the County Jail, except as provided in divisions
(B) and (C) below, shall be required to make a co-payment in an amount of $15
for each provision of any of the following services:
      (1)   Dentist’s visit;
      (2)   Physician’s visit;
      (3)   Glasses;
      (4)   Ophthalmology/optometrist visit;
      (5)   Prescription handling fee; and
      (6)   Any other health care-related service.
   (B)   Division (A) above does not apply to a person confined in the County
Jail who:
      (1)   Maintains a policy of insurance from a private company covering:
         (a)   Medical care;
         (b)   Dental care;
         (c)   Eye care; or
         (d)   Any other health care related service;
      (2)   Division (A) above also does not apply to a person confined in the
County Jail:
         (a)   Provided said inmate provides complete and accurate information
to allow the health care provider to file a claim for services rendered;
         (b)   The inmate is willing to pay for the person’s own medical care;
and
         (c)    The inmate is housed at the County Jail pursuant to contract
entered into with the U.S. Marshals’ Service.
   (C)   A person confined at the County Jail is not required to make the co-
payment if:
      (1)   The inmate does not have funds in the inmate’s commissary account
or trust account at the time the service is provided and the inmate does not
have funds in the inmate’s commissary or trust account within 30 days after the
medical service is provided;
      (2)   The service is provided in an emergency;
      (3)   The service is provided as a result of an injury received at the
County Jail; or
      (4)   Service is provided at the request of the Sheriff.
   (D)   Only the original filling of a specific prescription shall be charged
a co-payment for this medical service. All refills ordered when the original
prescription was written shall constitute one service.
   (E)   The original call for medical services is initiated by the Sheriff.
Follow-up care for the same illness or injury will not require a co-payment if
follow-up service is rendered within 30 days of the original medical service.
   (F)   Inmates at the County Jail will never be refused medical treatment
because of an inability to pay. Should an inmate have a zero balance in the
inmate trust or commissary account, the transaction shall be carried on the
books for a 60-day period. Should the inmate receive money within the 60-day
period, the co-payment will be deducted from the inmate’s account. If the
inmate receives no funds, at the end of 60 days an adjustment, entry shall be
made to negate the medical billing transaction. Within the 60-day period if the
inmate receives monies, the outstanding co-payments shall be deducted prior to
a commissary order being processed. Co-payments for medical services shall be
deducted prior to any monies being released to the inmate for bonding or any
other purposes.
   (G)   Monies collected shall be deposited into the County General Fund and
will be used only for inmates’ medical care.
(Ord. 1994-4, passed 7-5-1994; Ord. 1994-14, passed 9-6-1994; Ord. 1996-8,
passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 2002-7, passed 8-5-2002)
§ 33.007 PROCUREMENT OF EMERGENCY FUNDS.
   (A)   In the event of an emergency, as defined in Chapter 32 of this code of
ordinances, the County Emergency Management Director is hereby authorized upon
approval of the President of the County Board of Commissioners and approval of
the President of the County Council, to secure the necessary emergency services
needed to protect county residents.
   (B)   The County EMA Director, in conjunction with the County Auditor, will
review and determine the financial situation of the county at the time of the
emergency and the cost for the necessary emergency services and shall first
report to the President of the Board of Commissioners and the President of the
County Council (or the Vice President if the President is unavailable or
affected by the emergency) in the event that there is not enough time to
address the emergency and the services that need to be acquired before the next
meeting of the Commissioners or the Council.
   (C)   At the first meeting of the Board of Commissioners and the first
meeting of the County Council, after emergency procurement has occurred as
outlined herein, the County EMA Director shall appear before said bodies and
explain the emergency and the need for procurement of the emergency services
and shall thereafter obtain approval from the Board of Commissioners and the
County Council for the action that had been previously taken to protect county
residents.
   (D)   The County EMA Director, in conjunction with the County Auditor and
any other necessary agency or department of the county, including the County
Health Department, will promptly take the necessary steps for reimbursement
from agencies of the federal or state government for reimbursement of sums
expended on emergency services as are allowable from said federal or state
governmental agencies and nothing permitted by this section permitting
procurement of emergency funds to purchase said emergency services shall
prevent the county or the County EMA Director or any of the other county
agencies to be reimbursed for the pre-payment of said emergency services as a
result of the authorization for procurement of said funds for payment for said
items.
(Ord. 2013-05, passed 6-17-2013; Council Ord. 2013-05, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 33.008 AUTHORIZING AUDITOR TO ESTABLISH A SECOND PETTY CASH DRAWER.
   (A)   The County Council authorizes and identifies the following petty cash
drawers by department and amount.
 
Department          Amount of Fund
Building Commission $100
Health Department   $50
Plan Commission     $100
Recorder            $50
Surveyor            $50
Treasurer           $500
 
   (B)   For internal control purposes, the custodian of a petty cash fund
shall be required annually to complete the certified balance report by noon on
December 30 and file with the County Auditor. Supporting documentation such as
receipts, tickets, invoices, bills, contracts and other public records must be
available for audit to provide supporting information for the validity and
accountability of the monies disbursed. Payments without documentation will be
the personal obligation of the responsible custodian official or employee.
   (C)   The County Auditor will complete an internal audit verifying by
December 31.
(Council Ord. 2022-08, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 33.009 MEMBERSHIP IN ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize participation in
certain organizations that provide information and services that are necessary
for efficient operation of the county.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-1)
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   The Board of Commissioners is authorized to budget, and the County
Council is authorized to appropriate funds from the General Fund or from other
funds to provide membership for the county and for the elected and appointed
officials and members of the county’s boards, council, departments or agencies
in local, regional, state and national associations of a civic, education or
governmental nature, which have as their purpose the betterment and improvement
of county government operations.
      (2)   The Board of Commissioners is further authorized to budget and the
County Council is further authorized to appropriate funds to pay the expenses
of duly-authorized representatives to attend the meetings and functions of
organizations to which the county belongs.
      (3)   Nothing in this section mandates the budgeting or appropriating
fund for the purposes set out in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above. The purpose
of this section is to make such budgeting and appropriating permissive by the
Board of Commissioners and the County Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-2)
§ 33.010 FIXED ASSET CAPITALIZATION AND INVENTORY POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of establishing a capital asset policy is to:
      (1)   Safeguard the investments of the taxpayers of the county;
      (2)   Comply with the standards of the Government Accounting Standards
Board Statement 34;
      (3)   Fix responsibility for the custody of the assets;
      (4)   Maintain accurate records of all fixed assets that are capitalized,
including infrastructure;
      (5)   Provide data for financial reporting for increased accuracy and
clarity;
      (6)   Demonstrate appropriate stewardship responsibility for public
assets.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CAPITAL ASSETS.
         (a)   Assets having a useful life of more than one year and an
acquisition cost of $5,000 or more. Capital assets include land, land
improvements, buildings, building improvements, machinery and equipment,
vehicles, construction work in progress, works of art, historical treasures and
infrastructure, the latter of which are long-lived capital assets that normally
are stationary in nature and normally can be preserved for a significantly
great number of years than most capital assets.
         (b)   All items with a useful life of more than one year and a cost of
$5,000 or more shall be capitalized, including acquisitions by lease-purchase
agreements and donated items. All land will be capitalized but not depreciated.
Construction work in progress will be included in the capital asset inventory
and will be depreciated once the project is complete and transferred to the
appropriate county department. Items costing less than $5,000 that are
permanently installed as a part of the cost of the original construction or
installation of a larger building or equipment unit, or that prolong a fixed
asset’s economic life or expand its usefulness, will be in included in the cost
of the larger unit.
         (c)   All capital assets meeting the criteria will be included in the
county’s fixed asset inventory and reported in the county’s financial
statements. Assets that are not capitalized are expensed in the year of
acquisition. Departments must maintain an inventory of capital assets under
their supervision.
   (C)   Capitalization threshold and inventory.
      (1)   Capitalization threshold.
         (a)   To be considered a fixed asset for financial reporting purposes,
an item must be at or above the capitalization threshold and have a cost
greater than $5,000. The cost of the asset will include all expenses necessary
to make the asset fully operational. Assets acquired through lease purchase
agreements that meet these specifications are to be capitalized. This cost will
be determined as the present value or discounted value of the future stream of
lease payments, and not the total lease.
         (b)   Capital assets are recorded at actual cost. Normally, the cost
recorded is the purchase price or construction cost of the asset, but it may
also include any other reasonable and necessary costs incurred to place the
asset in its intended location and intended use, including:
            1.   Legal and title fees and closing costs;
            2.   Appraisal and negotiation fees and surveying costs;
            3.   Land preparation costs and demolition costs;
            4.   Architect, engineering and accounting fees;
            5.   Transportation charges.
         (c)   Donated or contributed assets should be recorded at the fair
market value on the date donated. If no cost is available for a fixed asset, a
replacement cost or a historic cost index may be used. Items that do not meet
the definition of capital assets are to be expensed in the year the asset is
acquired.
      (2)   Capital assets valuation. Capital assets are defined by the
following categories.
         BUILDINGS and IMPROVEMENTS. All structures designed and erected to
house equipment, services or functions are included. This includes systems and
fixtures within the buildings and attachments such as stairs, fire escapes,
canopies, lighting fixtures, flagpoles and other items that serve the building.
Plumbing systems, lighting systems, heating, cooling, ventilating and air
handling systems, sound systems, surveillance systems, elevators, built-in
casework, walk-in coolers and freezers, fixed shelving and other fixed
equipment are included as building components.
         EQUIPMENT. Includes all other types of physical property, such as
mechanical equipment, heavy equipment, office furniture, appliances,
furnishings, machinery items, maintenance equipment, communication equipment,
laboratory equipment and data processing equipment. Supplies that typically get
used within one year are not included.
         INFRASTRUCTURE. Long-lived capital assets that normally can be
preserved for a significantly greater number of years than most capital and
that are normally stationary in nature. Examples include new roads, bridges,
stormwater and drainage systems.
         LAND. Specified land, lots, parcels or acreage including rights-of-way
owed by the county.
         VEHICLE. Includes all vehicles for which title and license must be
obtained including cars, trucks, buses, road-going trailers, dump trucks and
highway trucks. Vehicle accessories will be identified as a component asset of
the vehicle to which they are attached.
   (D)   Responsibilities for inventory and reporting of capital assets.
      (1)   Responsibilities of county departments.
         (a)   Department heads are the stewards for each piece of property
utilized by their department. The steward will be the focal point for questions
for availability, condition and usage of the asset.
         (b)   The steward shall be designated as the person to record the
receipt of the asset, to examine the asset to make sure no damage was incurred
during shipment and to make sure the asset was received in working order. The
steward is also responsible for arranging the necessary preventative
maintenance and any needed repairs to keep the asset in working condition. The
steward also ensures that the asset is used for the purpose for which it was
acquired and that there is no personal or unauthorized use. The steward is
responsible for reporting any loss, theft or damage to the assets.
         (c)   Departments are to maintain inventories of all capital assets,
including those that are capitalized and reported on the county’s capital asset
inventory and controllable assets with an acquisition cost of $4,999 or less
and which are tracked and inventoried.
         (d)   Department heads are to report newly acquired assets, retired
assets, transferred assets and assets in use that previously were not included
in the county’s asset inventory to the County Auditor’s office. Department
heads are required to use the Auditor’s office prescribed forms and to meet
with the Auditor’s office, or its designee, if necessary, for the proper
preparation of the capital asset reports.
         (e)   Department heads must abide by all Auditor office deadlines for
the reporting. Typically, asset reporting is to be completed by the first
Friday of the first full week in January each year.
         (f)   Assets below the capitalization threshold but considered
sensitive may include, but are not limited to, weapons, radios, computers,
chain saws, small motor equipment and power tools. These minor but sensitive
items shall be inventoried and controlled at the department level by the head
of the operating department. Stated inventory shall be conducted annually. The
County Auditor’s office is to receive a copy of the inventory and/or updated
inventories for minor but sensitive items.
         (g)   Department heads are responsible for ensuring that acquisitions
of capital assets follow all policies, statutes and regulations, including
proper advertising, use of proper budgetary codes and accounting forms and all
required appropriation approvals.
         (h)   The County Commissioners and the Auditor’s office may conduct
spot checks of the asset inventory and condition on a random, unannounced
basis.
      (2)   Responsibilities of the County Auditor’s office.
         (a)   The County Auditor’s office is responsible for ensuring that
accounting for capital assets is being exercised by establishing a capital
asset inventory that is updated annually for additions, retirements, transfers
and items retroactively added.
         (b)   The Auditor’s office is responsible for securing a fixed asset
advisor for the county, if deemed necessary, and for the financial reporting of
the capital assets, including depreciation expense and assets included in the
inventory but not depreciated.
   (E)   Depreciation methods.
      (1)   The county will depreciate capital assets by using the straight-
line method. Assets will be depreciated based on the estimated useful life of
each asset.
      (2)   The following are the estimated useful lives for each asset class:
Building components and improvements 20 year
Buildings                            50 years
Car                                  5 years
Infrastructure being depreciated     50 years
Large trucks                         15 years
Machinery and equipment              5 to 15 years
Sport utility vehicle (SUV)          10 years
Vehicles                             5 to 15 years
 
(Ord. 2020-27, passed 12-31-2020)
§ 33.011 CONTRACTS.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners hereby adopt the requirements for county
contracts as set forth in I.C. 36-2-2.8 and adopts the manner of review of said
county contracts, and approval of the same as set forth in I.C. 36-2-2.9.
   (B)   (1)   As used in the state statutes and in this section, CONTRACT
means a contract for the purchase of:
         (a)   Real property;
         (b)   Tangible or intangible personal property; and
         (c)   Services (as defined in I.C. 5-22-2-30).
      (2)   The term does not include a CONTRACT concerning the issuance of:
         (a)   A bond to finance the construction of a public facility; or
         (b)   A bond or other type of security for the payment of a lease
obligation.
   (C)   A COUNTY OFFICER means the following:
      (1)   Assessor;
      (2)   Auditor;
      (3)   Coroner;
      (4)   Recorder;
      (5)   Sheriff;
      (6)   Surveyor;
      (7)   Treasurer;
      (8)   Clerk of the Circuit Court; or
      (9)   County fiscal body.
   (D)   A contract entered into by the county must meet the following
requirements:
      (1)   The contract must be executed in the name of the county; and
      (2)   Any property purchases for public use shall be:
         (a)   Titled to; or
         (b)   Documented as owned by the county.
   (E)   Contractual language to be used in all contracts entered into by the
county shall include:
      (1)   Provisions for indemnification;
      (2)   Dispute resolution provisions;
      (3)   Venue requirements;
      (4)   Termination provisions; and
      (5)   Notification provisions.
   (F)   If a county officer has a proposed contract for any of the following,
the county officer must have the County Executive execute the contract after
submission of the contract for review in accordance with this section:
      (1)   That the county officer believes is necessary for the county
officer to carry out a constitutional or statutory duty of office; and
      (2)   For which funds have been appropriated by the county fiscal body to
pay for the contract.
   (G)   The County Executive may void a contract that a county officer
executes without first complying with this section.
   (H)   To initiate a contract review, the county officer must submit the
contract to the County Commissioners and to the County Auditor requesting a
review of the proposed contract which includes a copy of the proposed contract.
The contract must comply with the requirement for using standard terms required
by this section. The County Auditor shall date stamp the request and
immediately forward copies of the request and contract to the County Executive
as well as the County Attorney.
   (I)   Not later than 20 days after the request is filed with the County
Auditor:
      (1)   The County Executive and County Attorney shall review the proposed
contract;
      (2)   The County Executive shall notify the county officer of the results
of the review;
      (3)   If the County Attorney advises the County Executive that the
contract does not comply with state law or any applicable public purchasing or
bidding laws, the County Executive may disapprove the contract and the contract
may not be executed; and
      (4)   The County Attorney shall notify the County Executive of the
results of the review.
   (J)   If a contract is not disapproved under division (I) above and the
County Executive finds the contract complies with I.C. 36-2-2.8 and is
otherwise acceptable, the County Executive may approve and authorize execution
of the contract by the County Executive.
   (K)   If the County Executive finds the contract does not comply with I.C.
36-2-2.8, this section, or is otherwise not acceptable for reasons other than
those determined above, the County Executive must provide the county officer
with a written statement. The County Executive must provide a written statement
as part of the notification of the review results that:
      (1)   Explains why the contract is not acceptable; and
      (2)   Provides recommendations, if any, for making the contract
acceptable to the County Executive.
   (L)   The County Executive has a responsibility of notifying the county
officer of the results of the review conducted by the County Attorney and the
County Executive.
   (M)   A contract approved by the County Executive shall be uploaded by the
County Auditor to the state transparency website.
(Ord. 2024-17, passed 7-15-2024)
TAXATION
§ 33.025 COUNTY ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME TAX.
   The Council hereby increases the county adjusted gross income tax rate
imposed upon county taxpayers of the county from 1% to 1.25%. This tax rate
increase takes effect July 1, 2003.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-1) (Council Ord. 2003-2, passed 2-10-2003)
§ 33.026 INNKEEPER’S TAX.
   (A)   An innkeeper’s tax is hereby levied on every person, as defined by
I.C. 6-2.5-1-3, engaged in the business of renting or furnishing, for periods
of less than 30 days, any room or rooms, lodgings or accommodations in any of
the following located in the county (“innkeeper’s tax”):
      (1)   Hotel;
      (2)   Motel;
      (3)   Boat motel;
      (4)   Inn;
      (5)   College or university memorial union;
      (6)   College or university residence hall or dormitory; or
      (7)   Tourist cabin.
   (B)   The innkeeper’s tax does not apply to gross income received in a
transaction in which:
      (1)   A student rents lodging in a college or university residence hall
while that student participates in a course of study for which the student
receives college credit from a college or university located in the county; or
      (2)   A person rents a room, lodging or accommodations for a period of 30
days or more.
   (C)   The innkeeper’s tax shall be levied at the rate of 5% on the gross
retail income derived from lodging income only and is in addition to the state
gross retail tax imposed under I.C. 6-2.5.
   (D)   The innkeeper’s tax shall be imposed, paid to and collected by the
State Department of Revenue in accordance with I.C. 6-9-18-3.
   (E)   All of the provisions of I.C. 6-2.5 relating to rights, duties,
liabilities, procedures, penalties, definitions, exemptions and administration
are applicable to the imposition and administration of the innkeeper’s tax,
except to the extent those provisions are in conflict or inconsistent with the
specific provisions of I.C. 6-9-18 or the requirements of the County Treasurer.
   (F)   The County Treasurer previously established the County Convention,
Visitor and Tourism Fund (Fund 7304 - Innkeeper’s Tax Collections) in which all
amounts received under this section shall be deposited,
   (G)   Money in the County Convention, Visitor and Tourism Fund shall be used
to promote and encourage conventions, visitors and tourism within the county.
Such expenditures include, but are not limited to, expenditures for
advertising, promotional activities, trade shows, special events and
recreation.
   (H)   Any person, corporation or other entity described in division (A)
above shall continue payment of the innkeeper’s tax for the county to the State
Department of Revenue in accordance with I.C. 6-9-18-3.
(Council Ord. 91-2, passed 7-22-1991; Council Ord. 1991-11, passed 10-7-1991;
Council Ord. 2010-17, passed 12-13-2010; Council Ord. 2021-04, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 33.027 PUBLICATION ON DELINQUENT PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES.
   The County Treasurer shall be hereby directed to give written notification
by regular mail and notification by publication in the local newspapers to
those persons or entities that are delinquent in personal property taxes
pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-23-9.
(Ord. 2003-7, passed 6-2-2003)
§ 33.028 TAX ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Prior resolutions; areas to be designated.
      (1)   Except insofar as abatements now in effect have been granted under
prior ordinance or resolution, or except with respect to areas designated as
economic revitalization areas with respect to abatements previously granted,
the areas hereafter designated as economic revitalization areas shall be
specifically designated.
      (2)   After approval of any resolution designating an economic
revitalization area or approving an application for abatement within an
economic revitalization area, the County Council shall publish notice of the
adoption and substance of the resolution in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 and file
the following information with each taxing unit in the geographic area where
the economic revitalization area is located:
         (a)   A copy of the notice published under I.C. 5-3-1; and
         (b)   A statement containing substantially the same information as a
statement of benefits filed with the County Council before the hearing required
under I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-3 and 6-1.1-12.1-4.5 and divisions (D) and (E) below.
   (B)   Basic requirements. Each application for economic revitalization area
designation must meet the following requirements.
      (1)   Real property must be in an area which is undesirable for normal
development.
      (2)   The intended use of the property must be allowed by the applicable
zoning restrictions. If it is not, the necessary variance, rezoning or approval
petition must be on file at the time of the filing of the designation
application, and the variation, rezoning or approval petition must be approved
before the final hearing on the economic revitalization area resolution shall
be conducted.
      (3)   The application must be made by all owners of the properties or
their designated representatives.
      (4)   For new manufacturing equipment, the application must be submitted
prior to the new manufacturing equipment being operated at the facility in
which it will be installed.
      (5)   For new manufacturing equipment, the application must indicate if
the new manufacturing equipment is rebuilt or reworked, and if it is replacing
other equipment in the facility in which it will be installed. The applicant
must confirm that such equipment has not been used previously in the state.
      (6)   (a)   The application must be made prior to filing for a building
permit or initiating construction on the project in the case of real property.
Exceptions may be allowed by the County Council if substantial evidence is
provided by the owner that the obtaining of a building permit or accomplishment
of construction was necessitated by emergency circumstances. Examples of
possible exceptions would be construction to an existing building to prevent
structural failure, repair damage resulting from fire or natural disaster, or
to protect a building from the damage effects of weather.
         (b)   The County Council may approve a supporting document which
elaborates upon and provides additional detail relative to the standards set
forth in this division (B)(6)(b) and in division (F) below. The supporting
document shall have the same force and effect as this section. Additionally,
the County Council may elect to periodically modify the standards set forth in
the support document. The supporting document may set forth quantitative scales
for rating a proposed project with respect to various parameters in several
categories, which may include measures of:
            1.   Total value of the project;
            2.   Total number of jobs created or retained;
            3.   Total new or retained payroll;
            4.   Employee benefits including health insurance, pension and
profit-sharing plans, and other benefits;
            5.   Overall job quality;
            6.   Project impact on county infrastructure, including roads,
water and sewage;
            7.   Project impact on schools;
            8.   Added costs to county government generally caused by the
project; or
            9.   Other factors.
         (c)   The rating scales and their application to a particular project
shall be developed and approved by the County Council. Ratings derived under
the quantitative scales may be used by the County Council as factors for its
consideration in evaluating a project application, but in no event will any
rating result be determinative of the decision of the County Council.
Determinations are to be made within the description of the County Council
based on the overall merit of a particular project viewed in the context of the
development and other needs of the county.
   (C)   Additional criteria. In addition to the requirements prescribed by
I.C. 6-1.1-12.1, the County Council shall consider the following general
criteria in evaluating a proposed project:
      (1)   With respect to jobs:
         (a)   How many jobs will be created or retained by the project?
         (b)   How do pay and benefits for these jobs compare with current pay
and benefits in comparable businesses in the county and the surrounding area?
         (c)   Are the jobs to be offered of a type that county residents would
desire and/or qualify for?
         (d)   Does the business proposing the project have a record as a good
employer in the state and elsewhere?
         (e)   What is the potential for expansion of the project to provide
more jobs?
         (f)   Will the project’s presence in the county attract related
industry jobs to the county or result in the increase of jobs by existing
county employers?
      (2)   With respect to overall growth of business in the county:
         (a)   What are the scope, size and nature of the project?
         (b)   Will the project expand in later phases and/or attract
additional development?
         (c)   Does the project meet a need for development in the county that
is not being met by existing business?
         (d)   Will the project improve a blighted area or alleviate site-
problems, such as environmental contamination?
      (3)   With respect to the overall impact of the project:
         (a)   What impact will the project have on the infrastructure needs of
the county, such as roads, water, sewage and the like, and how will the cost
and non-monetary burdens resulting from the impact be met?
         (b)   What government services will the project require?
         (c)   What will be the effect on the local schools, and how does the
benefit of increased taxation from the project compare with any increased costs
to the school districts affected?
         (d)   Is the project environmentally friendly or does it pose a
significant risk of any adverse environmental impacts?
         (e)   Is the project a type of activity that is compatible with the
general quality of life for county residents?
   (D)   Review of applications. The County Council may require applicants to
provide financial information including, without limitation, financial
statements, balance sheets and particularly in the case of new enterprises with
limited historic financial information, a business plan. All financial
information provided to the County Council shall be confidential and may not be
disclosed other than to members of the County Council, the County Auditor and
the County Council Attorney. The County Council and the applicant may enter
into an appropriate confidentiality agreement with respect to financial
information submitted in connection with an application.
   (E)   Designation determined by confirming resolution. The economic
revitalization area designation for a project will be conditioned in such
manner that it will be effective only relative to the project, which is
described in the confirming resolution, as supplemented by information in the
application, site plans and elevations.
   (F)   Letter of commitment.
      (1)   The County Council shall require the applicants for economic
revitalization area designation submit a letter of commitment with the county
following adoption of a preliminary resolution. The letter of commitment shall
contain the capital investment levels, job creation and/or retention levels,
and hourly wage rates the applicant has committed to the county in order to
receive consideration for economic revitalization area designation. The letter
of commitment shall be submitted to the county before confirming resolution and
any tax abatement are approved.
      (2)   Additionally, the letter of commitment shall indicate that the
county, by and through the County Council, reserves the right to terminate an
economic revitalization area designation and the associated real and personal
property tax abatement deductions, if it determines that the applicant has not
made reasonable efforts to substantially comply with all of the commitments,
and the applicant’s failure to substantially comply with the commitment was not
due to factors beyond its control.
      (3)   If the county terminates the economic revitalization area
designation and associated tax abatement deductions, it may require the
applicant to repay the county all or a portion of the tax abatement savings
received through the date of such termination. Additional details relative to
the re-payment of tax abatement savings may be required to be in the letter of
commitment.
   (G)   Compliance review. Under the authority of I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-5.1(b), the
County Council will review project receiving economic revitalization area
designations for compliance with the capital investment levels, job creation
and/or retention levels, and hourly wage rates or salary levels contained in
the designation application, the project description contained in the
attachments to the final resolution designating the subject real estate as an
economic revitalization area, the approved statement of benefits form, and the
signed letter of commitment. Taxpayers receiving abatements or their
representatives, may be required to appear before the County Council when their
abatements are reviewed by the County Council to respond to questions from and
provide information to the County Council with respect to their compliance with
the terms and conditions of their abatements. The County Council may reduce the
dollar amount of, rescind the deduction in its entirety, or rescind the
deduction and require re-payment of all or a portion of the tax abatement
savings received by an applicant for failure to make reasonable efforts to
substantially comply.
   (H)   Time limit on designation. Unless otherwise stated in the resolution
applicable to a specific project, the economic revitalization area designation
shall terminate five years after the date of the final resolution; however,
this termination does not limit the length of time a taxpayer is entitled to
receive an abatement of property taxes to five years.
   (I)   Compliance with other laws and zoning. All applicants must comply with
other federal, state and local laws in order to be approved, which laws include
zoning restrictions and compliance with federal S.A.R.A. Title III, also known
as the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, being 40 C.F.R.
parts 350 through 372, and I.C. 13-25-1 concerning hazardous substance handling
and reporting.
   (J)   Effective date. This section shall be in full force and effect from
and after its passage; however, designation applications dated or filed prior
to enactment of this section and receiving abatements thereunder shall be
continued to be governed by any resolutions or any requirements contained
specifically for the prior abatements in the confining resolution applicable to
such project which will take precedence over matters contained herein.
(Council Ord. 2001-08, passed 12-10-2001)
FUNDS
§ 33.040 CORRECTIONS FUND.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 11-12-2-12 the County Board of Commissioners hereby
elects to establish a Community Corrections Program on behalf of the County
Community Corrections Program.
   (B)   All funds shall be collected by the County Clerk’s office, received
and accounted for by the County Auditor’s office on a monthly basis and
deposited with the County Treasurer’s office.
   (C)   The County Community Corrections Program Fund will be administered by
the Community Corrections Advisory Board.
   (D)   Monies in said Fund may be received and used for any community
corrections programs, including, but not limited to, work release, home
detention community service and transition services, work crews and other
programs deemed appropriate by the Advisory Board.
   (E)   The Fund shall receive monies from state subsidies, grants, user fees
and donations.
   (F)   The County Community Corrections Fund shall be authorized to receive
deposits of funds from the State Department of Corrections.
   (G)   Expenditures may be made from the Fund for any purpose necessary in
operation and administration of the Miami County Community Corrections Program.
   (H)   Expenditures may be made from the Fund at the direction of the County
Community Corrections Program Advisory Board.
   (I)   All monies received by the county for the Community Corrections
Program and related services shall immediately be placed in the Fund.
   (J)   The aforementioned Funds shall be perpetual and nonreverting at year
end and shall only terminate by subsequent ordinance.
(Ord. 1986-6, passed 4-7-1986; Ord. 1987-2, passed 4-6-1987; Ord. 1988-1,
passed 4-4-1988; Ord. 1989-3, passed 3-6-1989; Ord. 1990-7, passed 3-19-1990;
Ord. 1991-1, passed 4-1-1991; Ord. 1992-14, passed 4-6-1992; Ord. 1993-4,
passed 4-5-1993; Ord. 1994-2, passed 2-7-1994; Ord. 1995-3, passed 4-17-1995;
Ord. 2015-13(a), passed 9-8-2015)
§ 33.041 INMATE PROCESSING FUND.
   (A)   Convicted inmate processing fee.
      (1)   A need exists to establish a chargeable fee by the County Sheriff’s
Department for the processing of convicted inmates in and out of the County
Jail.
      (2)   The County Sheriff’s Department shall hereby and hereafter charge a
fee of $50 as an inmate processing fee for each time a convicted person has
been booked into the County Jail.
      (3)   The convicted inmate processing fee shall not apply and/or may be
waived by the County Sheriff in the following instances:
         (a)   Where the inmate is indigent (determination by any of the courts
that an inmate is indigent and/or has been appointed a public defender is prima
facie indication that the inmate is indigent);
         (b)   Where the inmate is being held for another agency for a per diem
payment; or
         (c)   Where the inmate is being held for safekeeping for another
agency.
   (B)   Fee collection. The processing fee shall be added to the convicted
inmate’s fines and court costs as an additional cost and shall be collected as
the fine and court costs are collected.
   (C)   Fund established. The Board of Commissioners does determine that a
need exists for the creation of an Inmate Processing Fund whereby all funds
received by the County Sheriff’s Department for the convicted inmate processing
fee shall be deposited in said Fund. The Fund created shall be entitled the
Convicted Inmate Processing Fee Fund and shall be subject to appropriation
through the County Council.
   (D)   Use of funds.
      (1)   The funds received and deposited in the Convicted Inmate Processing
Fee Fund can be used only for the specific purposes set forth herein. The funds
received and deposited in the Convicted Inmate Processing Fee Fund will be
expended at the discretion of the County Sheriff for any departmental purpose
reasonably related to the processing of inmates in and out of the County Jail
and for the benefit of inmates who are processed in and out of the County Jail.
      (2)   The funds received and deposited in the Convicted Inmate Processing
Fee Fund may be utilized for, but not limited to, the following-identified
purposes:
         (a)   Inmate education and counseling; or
         (b)   Equipment, education and training for the County Jail staff and
jailers.
   (E)   Termination of funds or transfer of funds. The Convicted Inmate
Processing Fee Fund shall remain in existence and remain perpetual in its terms
until amended or terminated by a subsequent ordinance enacted by the Board of
Commissioners, and if and when a subsequent ordinance is passed to terminate
the life of the Convicted Inmate Processing Fee Fund, the Fund balance
existing, and if not otherwise provided for by the ordinance, if any at that
time, it shall be transferred to the County General Fund.
(Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-2-2007; Ord. 2019-06, passed 2-18-2019)
§ 33.042 ENHANCED GIS DATA ACCESS FUND.
   (A)   The County Council establishes an Enhanced GIS Data Access Fund to
receipt the fee listed in the preamble to the ordinance as codified herein, and
that uses of the Fund will be used according to I.C. 14-8-3.
   (B)   The Enhanced GIS Data Access Fund is to be used for the following
purposes:
      (1)   The replacement, improvement and expansion of capital expenditures;
and
      (2)   The reimbursement of operating expenses incurred in providing
enhanced access to public information therefor.
(Council Ord. 2008-5, passed 3-10-2008)
§ 33.043 WIRELESS 9-1-1 FUND.
   The County Council establishes a Wireless 9-1-1 Fund to receipt the wireless
9-1-1 fees into, and uses of the Fund will be determined according to state
statute.
(Council Ord. 2007-05, passed 3-12-2007)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-8-16.7-29
§ 33.044 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL PROJECTS ENABLING FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created the County Cumulative Capital Projects
Enabling Fund, (“Fund”) into which, in the discretion of the Board of
Commissioners, there shall be diverted each year from the County General Fund,
an amount of funds found necessary by said Board of Commissioners. In addition
thereto, certain miscellaneous revenues, CAGIT funds, interest earned and
proceeds from the sale of the hospital may also be put into said Fund, as
determined by the County Council.
   (B)   The funds so accumulated into this Fund will be used solely for the
construction and/or renovation of the County Jail and any other structures
owned by the county as deemed necessary by the Board of Commissioners, and that
an appropriation be established, so that all expenditures from said Fund shall
receive the approval of the County Council. Said Fund shall be perpetual until
terminated by subsequent action of the Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   Upon termination of the Fund by subsequent action of the Board of
Commissioners, any funds remaining in said Fund shall, upon such termination,
be transferred to the General Fund.
(Ord. 1987-3, passed 4-20-1987; Ord. 1990-13, passed 9-7-1990; Ord. 1993-1,
passed 4-19-1993; Ord. 2000-7, passed 6-19-2000; Ord. 2017-08, passed 4-17-
2017)
§ 33.045 RAINY DAY FUND.
   The County Council hereby establishes a Rainy Day Fund to receipt the
surplus ($403,262.75) CAGIT refund into, and any other funding sources the
Council deems necessary as along as state statute is followed, and that uses of
the Fund will be established by the Council by ordinance.
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 2-9-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-1-8-5.1
§ 33.046 PLAT BOOK FUND.
   (A)   Purpose. This section is established to provide for the collection of
a fee to maintain plat books in the county.
   (B)   Establishment of Plat Book Fund.
      (1)   The County Auditor, under the provisions of I.C. 36-2-9-18 is
hereby authorized to collect a fee of $1 for each real property endorsement
that the Auditor makes, that this fee is additional to any other fee provided
by law.
      (2)   The County Auditor shall place revenue received under this section
in a dedicated Fund entitled “Plat Book Fund.”
      (3)   The Plat Book Fund shall be dedicated to the use of maintaining
county plat books and records.
   (C)   Collection. Collections of fees shall commence December 1, 1990.
(Ord. 1990-15, passed 10-15-1990)
§ 33.047 PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY RESPONSE FUND.
   The County Council hereby establishes the Public Health Emergency Response
Fund for the purpose of receiving funds to be expended for public health
activities related to the H1N1 influenza virus. Be it further ordained that
these expenditures shall be made without appropriation.
(Council Ord. 2009-06, passed 8-10-2009)
§ 33.048 MISCELLANEOUS FUNDS.
   The following are new funds created by the County Council since January 1,
2008.
Fund No. Fund Name Amount
Fund No. Fund Name                     Amount
         Cumulative Bridge Fund        N/A
0110     CAGIT Certified Shares Fund   N/A
0123     2006 Reassessment             N/A
0151     County Identification         N/A
         Security Protection Fund
0153     Sales Disclosure - County     N/A
         Share
0154     Mortgage Fee Fund             N/A
0156     County Training Fund          N/A
0224     Levy Excess Fund              N/A
0228     Gaming Revenue Distribution   N/A
0231     County Riverboat Revenue      N/A
         Sharing
0232     Property Tax Rebate Fund      N/A
0234     Road Cut Bonds                N/A
0338     Coroner’s Substance Abuse   N/A
         Education
0339     Sales Disclosure - State      N/A
         Share
0505     Interstate Compact Fees       N/A
0506     Administrative Probation Fees N/A
0509     County Offender               N/A
         Transportation Fund
0709     Major Moves Fund              N/A
0803     E.P.I.C.S. Fund               N/A
0808     Tobacco Cessation/prevention  N/A
0810     Older Adult Services Grant    N/A
         Fund
0852     Clerk IV-D Incentive Pre-Oct  N/A
         99
0853     Clerk IV-D Incentive Post-Oct N/A
         99
0860     DFC-CPRTS                     N/A
1114     LIT - Special Purpose         N/A
1122     Community Correction Program  N/A
1122     Community Corrections Grant   N/A
         Fund
1123     Community Transition Fund     N/A
1138     Lake Enforcement Fund         N/A
1150     Inmate Processing Fee Fund    N/A
1154     Special Death Benefit Fund    N/A
1158     Wireless 9-1-1 Fund           N/A
1161     Local Public Health Services  N/A
1161     Sheriff’s Pension Fund      N/A
1173     MVH Restricted                N/A
1207     Unsafe Building               N/A
1224     Reassessment                  Any remaining cash balance of Fund 1188
1229     LOIT Special Distribution     N/A
1230     Central Dispatch              N/A
1237     Opioid Restricted Funds       N/A
1238     Opioid Unrestricted Funds     N/A
1431     Campaign Enforcement Fund     N/A
1432     HAVA-Section 101              N/A
1433     HAVA - Title 3                N/A
2393     Capital Project Enabling Fund N/A
2394     Rainy Day Distribution Fund   N/A
2395     Rainy Day Fund                N/A
2400     Supplemental Technology Fund  N/A
2510     PSC Drug Court                N/A
2523     Community Corrections Project N/A
         Income Fund
2600     Drain Construction/           N/A
         Reconstruction
4012     K-9 Program                   N/A
4101     Park and Recreation           N/A
4201     Convicted Inmate Processing   N/A
         Fee Fund
4226     W.I.C. #2                     N/A
4607     EMA Grant Fund                N/A
4609     Hoosier Safe-T Grant Fund     N/A
4612     Sheriff’s Pre-Trial DiversioN/A
4613     Evercom Rebate Fund           N/A
4614     Court Technology Grant Fund   N/A
4616     DEA Forfeiture Fund           N/A
4617     Hemminger House Fund          N/A
4618     Correction Facility CAGIT     N/A
         Fund
4619     Shady Rest Restoration Grant  N/A
         Fund
4620     Crossroads Museum Project     N/A
         Fund
4701     Employee Benefits Rainy Day   N/A
4702     Medical Benefits Self         N/A
         Insurance
4703     Dental Benefits Self          N/A
         Insurance
5201     Medical Self Insurance        N/A
7330     LIT - Certified Shares        N/A
8101     14.228 OCRA - 4H Multi-       N/A
         Purpose Building
8102     15.904 Courthouse Clock Tower N/A
8103     Ed Byrne Memorial JAG Program N/A
8104     CDBG-COVID Fund               N/A
8105     Community Based Testing Grant N/A
8106     Bridge Inspection/Inventory   N/A
         Program
8107     Bridge 11 - N Union Road      N/A
8108     Bridge 87 - 11th Road         N/A
8109     Bridge 120 - Upas Road        N/A
8110     Bridge 231 - Center Street    N/A
8111     Bridge 232 - Randolph Street  N/A
8112     Bridge 88 - 12th Road         N/A
8113     CDBG - Owner Occupied Rehab   N/A
         Project
8114     HAVA 2023 Election Security   N/A
8118     Public Health Emergency       N/A
         Preparedness
8120     20.205 Countywide Striping    N/A
         Initiative
8804     WIC                           N/A
8807     CHIRP - ICJI Grant            N/A
8810     97.047 EMA Mitigation Grants  N/A
8817     E-911 Grant                   N/A
8818     90.404 HAVA Grant (Election   N/A
         Security Improvement)
8819     14.228 Broadband Planning     N/A
         Grant
8820     93.788 Indiana State Opioid   N/A
         Response
8821     Health Department Federal     N/A
         Grants
8822     93.946 SUID/SDY               N/A
8823     Immunization and Vaccine -    N/A
         Moderna
8824     COVID-19 and Routine          N/A
         Immunizations
8825     Crisis CoAg COVID-19          N/A
         Workforce Sustainment
8826     Domestic Cannabis Eradication N/A
         Suppression
8900     CARES Provider Relief Fund    N/A
8901     CARES Grant - SOS Election    N/A
         Division
8902     CARES-OCRA MCEDC Micro-Loan   N/A
         Program
8903     CARES-LHD Community Based     N/A
         Testing Grant
8905     CARES-ICJI Technology - CC    N/A
8906     CARES-OMB Safety Awareness    N/A
         Grant
8950     ARP Grant Fund                As appropriated by the county’s fiscal
                                       body
8951     ARPA - Lead Level Reduction   N/A
8952     ARPA - Indiana Local Body     N/A
         Cameras
9001     Community Crossing Grant Fund N/A
9002     Pros - IPAC Grant             N/A
9003     CCMG: Beech Rd, US 6 to 3B    N/A
         Road
9004     CCMG: S. Michigan Street to   N/A
         SR 110
9005     Health: INSACCO Hep C Grant   N/A
9006     OCRA Stellar Reg RDP Grant    N/A
9007     CCMG: Dogwood Road - US 6 to  N/A
         County Line Road
9008     CCMG: 11th Road - US 21 to S. N/A
         Michigan Road
9009     CCMG: N. Michigan - City      N/A
         Limits to Veterans Parkway
9010     CCMG: Dogwood Road - State    N/A
         Road 331 to US 6
9011     CCMG: 9B Road - Union Road to N/A
         County Line Road
9012     Jail Chemical Addiction       N/A
         Program (JCAP)
9013     IOCS Pre-Trial Grant Fund     N/A
9014     COVID-19 Vaccination          N/A
         Insurance Reimbursement
9015     IOCS Problem-Solving Court    N/A
         (PSC)
9016     IOCS Court Reform             N/A
9017     Public Safety Grant           N/A
9018     Title IV-E Incentive Payment  N/A
         Program
9123     Community Corrections FY2020  N/A
 
(Council Ord. 2004-08, passed 11-8-2004; Council Ord. 2005-11, passed 7-11-
2005; Council Ord. 2005-12, passed 8-8-2005; Council Ord. 2007-15, passed 12-
10-2007; Council Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-12-2008; Council Ord. 2011-11, passed
7-11-2011; Council Ord. 2011-12, passed 8-8-2011; Council Ord. 2012-07, passed
8-13-2012; Council Ord. 2015-18, passed 10-12-2015; Council Ord. 2016-5, passed
1-11-2016; Council Ord. 2016-9, passed 4-11-2016; Ord. 2016-10, passed 6-20-
2016; Council Ord. 2016-14, passed 8-8-2016; Council Ord. 2016-25, passed 11-
14-2016; Council Ord. 2017-3, passed 1-9-2017; Council Ord. 2017-09, passed 4-
10-2017; Council Ord. 2017-30, passed 11-13-2017; Council Ord. 2017-33, passed
12-11-2017; Council Ord. 2018-04(1), passed 2-12-2018; Council Ord. 2018-04(2),
passed 2-12-2018; Council Ord. 2018-04(3), passed 2-12-2018; Ord. 2018-06,
passed 3-19-2018; Council Ord. 2018-04(4), passed 7-9-2018; Council Ord. 2019-
04(1), passed 4-8-2019; Council Ord. 2019-04(2), passed 4-8-2019; Council Ord.
2019-04(3), passed 8-12-2019; Council Ord. 2019-04(4), passed 9-9-2019; Council
Ord. 2019-04(5), passed 10-14-2019; Council Ord. 2019-04(6), passed 11-13-2019;
Council Ord. 2020-04(1), passed 5-11-2020; Council Ord. 2020-04(2), passed 6-8-
2020; Council Ord. 2020-04(3), passed 7-13-2020; Council Ord. 2020-04(4),
passed 11-9-2020; Council Ord. 2020-04(5), passed 11-9-2020; Council Ord. 2020-
04(6), passed 12-14-2020; Council Ord. 2021-05(1), passed 4-12-2021; Council
Ord. 2021-05(3), passed 4-12-2021; Ord. 2021-05(2), passed 4-19-2021; Council
Ord. 2021-05(4), passed 6-14-2021; Council Ord. 2021-05(5), passed 6-14-2021;
Council Ord. 2021-05(6), passed 6-14-2021; Council Ord. 2021-05(7), passed 6-
14-2021; Council Ord. 2021-05(8), passed 10-11-2021; Council Ord. 2022-04(1),
passed 5-9-2022; Council Ord. 2022-04(2), passed 7-11-2022; Council Ord. 2022-
04(3), passed 7-11-2022; Council Ord. 2022-04(4), passed 9-12-2022; Council
Ord. 2022-04(5), passed 10-10-2022; Council Ord. 2022-04(5), passed 11-14-2022;
Council Ord. 2023-04(1), passed 2-9-2023; Council Ord. 2023-04(2), passed 7-13-
2023; Council Ord. 2023-17, passed 8-10-2023; Council Ord. 2023-31, passed 12-
14-2023; Council Ord. 2023-32, passed 12-14-2023; Council Ord. 2024-4(1),
passed 1-11-2024; Council Ord. 2024-4(2), passed 2-8-2024; Ord. 2024-14, passed
4-11-2024; Council Ord. 2024-4(6), passed 9-12-2024; Council Ord. 2025-5(1),
passed 2-10-2025; Council Ord. 2025-5(2), passed 3-10-2025; Council Ord. 2025-
12, passed 3-10-2025; Council Ord. 2025-5(3), passed 4-14-2025; Council Ord.
2025-5(4), passed 6-9-2025)
FEES
§ 33.060 HEALTH DEPARTMENT COLLECTION OF FEES; SPECIFIC FEES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BOARD OF HEALTH. The County Board of Health as provided for in I.C. 16-
20-2-1 et seq.
      HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The County Health Department.
      PERSON. Any association, company, corporation, firm, individual or
partnership.
   (B)   Collection of fees. The Health Department shall collect the fees for
all services it provides in accordance with this section.
   (C)   Fees for services. The Board of Health shall charge a fee for
providing any person with the services listed in the fee schedule of this
section.
   (D)   Collection of fees, accounting and disposition.
      (1)   Collection of fees. The Health Department shall collect the fees
established by this section in accordance with division (E) below.
      (2)   Accounting for fees. All fees collected by the Health Department
shall be accounted for in detail for each program service area.
      (3)   Disposition of fees. All fees collected by the Health Department
pursuant to this section shall be transferred to the County Health Fund.
      (4)   Fees for other county health jurisdictions. Fees collected for
health services and records provided to persons in other county health
jurisdictions and involving payment from county tax revenues shall be collected
in accordance with agreements entered into pursuant to I.C. 16-20-1-8.
   (E)   Fee schedule. The following fee schedule is established and approved
for services and records provided by the Health Department. (A list does not
necessarily indicate the service is currently provided.)
      (1)   Food protection program. These fees do not include establishments
that have a complete food inspections by other recognized state or federal
agencies, and are not inspected by this Department. Establishments opening in
mid-year pays either the full amount or one-half the price for six months or
less.
Service Amount
Service                                  Amount
A seasonal permit (6 months or less)     $60
Fee to reinstate a permit after it has   Two times the applicable fee
been revoked or refused renewal
Food service plan review                 $0
Food service plan review after           $0
construction starts
Late fee on permit - will include the    Two times the applicable fee (2 times
new permit                               120 equals 240)
Prepackaged food only permit annual      $60
Retail food establishment permit annual  $120
Temporary food service establishment -   $25
1 day
Temporary food service establishment - 2 $50
to 14 days
Training programs per hour per staff     $0
Vending machine permits                  $0
 
      (2)   Environmental health services.
Service Amount
Service                                  Amount
Building release                         $10
   Cluster system                     $10
   Holding tanks                      $10
   Other non-conventional systems (TNT$10
   Pump-assisted system               $0
   Secondary treatment                $10
   Systems described in 410 I.A.C. 6-8$0
Contractor certification fee             $0
Home loan inspections (any kind)         $0
Late fee for registration or             $30 additional and then $30 per start
certificates                             of each additional 30 days
Minor septic installation permit repair/ $0
replacement or alteration
New well permit                          $150
Operating permit new and renew - late on $100 additional and then $100 per
renewing operating 30 days               start of each additional 30 days
Railroad mobile camp inspections         $0
Registration or certification fee -
multiply registration will be highest    N/A
fee for registration
Registration or certification fee -
other registrations for OSS or other     $10
providers
Registration or certification fee -
registration fee for private sewage      $10
disposal contractors
Re-issue a revoked installation permit   New or repair - fee
Reinstate a revoked installation permit  $0
Repair and maintenance of wells permit   $100
Septic installation permit issued after  $200
start of construction
Septic installation permit - new         $60
Septic installation permit repair/       $30
replacement or alteration
Submission of animal specimens for a     $25 per specimen
rabies exam
Swimming pool license late fee           $0
Swimming pool license (public and semi-  $0
public)*
Tattoo parlors                           $0
Training programs per hour per staff     $0
Water, air or other environmental tests  Cost of test, shipping and
                                         administrative fee of $15
 
      (3)   Public health nursing services.
Services Amount
Services                                                                Amount
Copy of shot record                                                     $1
                                                                        Cost of
                                                                        vaccine -
Flu vaccine                                                             plus 10%
                                                                        rounded up
                                                                        to nearest
                                                                        dollar
                                                                        Cost of
                                                                        vaccine -
Hepatitis A                                                             plus 10%
                                                                        rounded up
                                                                        to nearest
                                                                        dollar
                                                                        Cost of
                                                                        vaccine -
Hepatitis A & B combination                                             plus 10%
                                                                        rounded up
                                                                        to nearest
                                                                        dollar
                                                                        Cost of
                                                                        vaccine -
Hepatitis B                                                             plus 10%
                                                                        rounded up
                                                                        to nearest
                                                                        dollar
                                                                        Cost of
                                                                        test -
                                                                        plus 10%
Hepatitis C testing                                                     rounded up
                                                                        to the
                                                                        nearest
                                                                        dollar
                                                                        Cost of
                                                                        test -
                                                                        plus 10%
HIV testing                                                             rounded up
                                                                        to the
                                                                        nearest
                                                                        dollar
                                                                        Actual
                                                                        cost of
                                                                        laboratory
Miscellaneous laboratory fees                                           test
                                                                        rounded up
                                                                        to the
                                                                        nearest
                                                                        dollar
                                                                        Cost of
                                                                        vaccine -
Other vaccines and or test                                              plus 10%
                                                                        rounded up
                                                                        to nearest
                                                                        dollar
                                                                        Cost of
                                                                        test -
                                                                        rounded up
Pregnancy test, actual                                                  to the
                                                                        nearest
                                                                        dollar
                                                                        plus $3
Set up fees for a clinic that the Health Department may choose to set
up with a specific group, such as schools (instead of an administrative $50
fee)**
Sexually transmitted infection clinic services                          $25
                                                                        Cost of
                                                                        vaccine -
Travel vaccinations                                                     plus 10%
                                                                        rounded up
                                                                        to nearest
                                                                        dollar
                                                                        Cost of
                                                                        vaccine -
Tuberculosis test                                                       plus 10%
                                                                        rounded up
                                                                        to nearest
                                                                        dollar
Vaccines for children (VFC) and other vaccines provided at no cost to   $0 - per
the county                                                              vaccine
                                                                        guidelines
                                                                        $8 per
                                                                        shot or
                                                                        $50
   Administrative fee for above no-cost vaccines                     maximum
                                                                        per family
                                                                        per
                                                                        visit**
                                                                        Cost of
                                                                        vaccine -
                                                                        plus 10%
Vaccines for adults or others not covered above                         rounded up
                                                                        to the
                                                                        nearest
                                                                        dollar
   Administrative fee* for shots and test provided - not the no-cost $10
vaccines
Venipuncture fee                                                        $15 per
                                                                        blood draw
*Note that the administrative fee is in addition to other fees.
**This fee may be waived if special clinics are set up by the Health Department to
vaccinate large number of people or if a public health priority warrants. This fee
is dependent on the ability to bill Medicaid.
***Vaccine for children (VFC/317). No one will be refused for inability to pay. A
form and signature on inability to pay will be used to waive the fee as needed.
 
      (4)   Vital records.
Service Amount
Service                                  Amount
Birth record per copy                    $10
   Additional certificates per copy - $10
birth
Death certificate per copy               $8 - plus the cost of the State Coroner’s fee rounded up to the nearest
                                         dollar
   Additional certificates per copy - $8 - plus the cost of the State Coroner’s fee rounded up to the nearest
death                                    dollar
   Non-certified death certificate    $5
Genealogical searches                    $10
ISDA form**
   Affidavit requesting amendment     $35
   Paternity affidavit                $35
   Paternity affidavit upon marriage  $35
Notary for general public                $2
 
      (5)   County Morgue fees.
         (a)   As long as storage of a body is in the County Morgue for the
funeral homes in the county and for a county contiguous to the county, the fees
for storage will be waived.
         (b)   The County Coroner has entered into mutual aid agreements with
contiguous counties which is the basis for the waiver of said fees.
 
Service                                                                  Amount
Storage of a body or human remains after said body has been released by  $50
the Coroner’s office and until the body has been released to a funeral per
home                                                                     day
Storage of human remains that are decomposed as determined by the County $90
Coroner                                                                  per
                                                                         day
 
      (6)   General.
         (a)   When possible, county government and public schools will not be
charged for services; however, actual out of budget cost for the Health
Department or large or continuous request for services may result in fees.
         (b)   Record searches will be done as staff has time to do it and if
it does not interfere with normal office operations.
 
Service                                       Amount
Record searches
   1-2 records                             0
   2-10 records                            $5
   Every additional 1 to 5 records         $5
Color copies are at the Department discretion $0.20 if no county fee schedule
Copies of Health Department records will be   $0.15 if no county fee schedule
charged at the county copy schedule
 
   (F)   Maximum fee schedule.
      (1)   The fees set forth in this section are maximum fees.
      (2)   Specific fees charged shall be determined by and limited in
accordance with any applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations
pertaining thereto. In addition, specific rates charged shall be governed by
any applicable sliding fee scales adopted by the Board of Health which are
based upon the person’s financial ability to pay.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 12-5-2010; Ord. 2017-11, passed 8-7-2017; Ord. 2022-9,
passed 7-18-2022)
§ 33.061 JURY FEES.
   (A)   A juror of a circuit, superior, county or probate court or a member of
a grand jury is entitled to the sum of the following:
      (1)   An amount for mileage at the mileage rate paid to state officers
and employees for each mile necessarily traveled to and from the court; and
      (2)   Payment at the rate of: $30 for each day the juror is in actual
attendance in court until the jury is impaneled; $80 for each day the juror is
in actual attendance after the jury is impaneled through the fifth day of
trial; and $90 for each day the juror is in actual attendance, from the sixth
day of trial until the jury is discharged.
   (B)   As the county’s fiscal body, the Council shall not authorize or
approve compensation to jurors serving in the county more than the amounts
prescribed under state law.
(Council Ord. 2023-16, passed 8-10-2023)
§ 33.062 ACCIDENT REPORT FEES.
   The fee charged by the County Sheriff for accident report reproduction shall
be $8 per report.
(Council Ord. 2008-3, passed 2-11-2008)
§ 33.063 CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INSPECTION AND RELEASE REQUESTS.
   The fees to be established and collected by the County Sheriff for criminal
history requests shall be $3 per request for inspection, and $7 per request for
release, with the exceptions listed in the preamble to the ordinance as
codified herein. All fees collected are to be deposited in the County General
Fund.
(Council Ord. 2005-08, passed 6-13-2005)
§ 33.064 SEX OFFENDER FEES.
   (A)   The County Sheriff’s Department is hereby authorized to charge the sum
of $50 per year for the registration of sex or violent offenders and $5 for
each time a sex or violent offender registers an address change with the County
Sheriff’s Department.
   (B)   The county hereby establishes a County Sex and Violent Offender
Administration Fund and the County Sheriff’s Department shall deposit all funds
collected for sex or violent offender registration fees and address change fees
for sex or violent offenders into this account. The County Auditor shall
monthly transfer 10% of any fees collected to the State Treasurer for deposit
in the State Sex and Violent Offender Administration Fund under I.C. 11-8-8-21.
   (C)   The County Council may appropriate money from the County Sex and
Violent Offender Administration Fund to defray the expense of administering or
ensuring compliance with the laws concerning the state’s sex and violent
offender registry.
(Ord. 2007-09, passed 10-15-2007; Council Ord. 2007-09, passed 11-13-2007)
§ 33.065 COPY FEES.
   (A)   Uniform fee for xerographic copies. All offices of the county (not
otherwise covered by statute or ordinance) shall henceforth charge a uniform
fee of $0.10 per one-sided page (per sheet of paper) for each xerographic
reproduction from a copy machine of county public records provided pursuant to
any oral or written request made of an office maintaining the public record
being sought. This fee shall apply to standard size documents of eight and one-
half inches by 11 inches to 11 by 17 inches in size. The fee shall be $0.20 per
two-sided page.
   (B)   Postage charges. Those requests for copies from an office subject to
this section received through the United States mail shall be charged postage
for the return of those items requested at the prevailing rate per ounce
established by the United States Postal Service for first class postage, along
with the fee for the number of pages requested. If the requestor provides the
appropriate amount of postage in advance with the copy request, then no postage
shall be assessed upon the request for copies.
   (C)   Exceptions by law. The fee established by this section shall not
apply, nor do they supersede the schedules set by state law for copy charges
for those county offices or records governed by state statute or court order as
outlined in I.C. 5-14-3-8(f). (For example, but not limited to, recording copy
fees, Clerk’s certification and/or copy fees.)
   (D)   Reasonable response time to requests.
      (1)   The county office/department from which the request for xerographic
copies is made, shall have reasonable opportunity to provide the requested
information, and shall make a reasonable effort to do so, taking into account
the following factors by way of example, but not limited to:
         (a)   Available staffing:
         (b)   Available equipment; and/or
         (c)   And the volume of information requested.
      (2)   Compilation and copying of public documents may not unreasonably
interfere with the business of the public agency.
      (3)   Depending upon the types of information sought, such office/
department may permit individuals requesting information to make their own
search for documents and to make their own xerographic copies of such
information; however, in such cases, the fee outlined in division (A) above,
shall be charged.
      (4)   No request for records may be denied because the person making such
request refuses to state the purpose of the request, unless such condition is
required by an applicable state or federal statute.
   (E)   Basis of charges for booklets, pamphlets and folded maps. In the event
any county department provides information in booklet or pamphlet or folded map
form, the booklet or pamphlet or folded map shall be provided to the public at
the actual unit price or for the printing of the booklet or pamphlet or folded
map, rounded to the next even dollar.
   (F)   Copy fees for booklets and pamphlets. Xerographic copy fees or fees
collected for booklets, pamphlets or folded maps, as required by this section,
shall be deposited with the County Auditor not less than monthly; and,
accordingly, all such collected fees shall be deposited into the General Fund
of the county.
(Council Ord. 2000-1, passed 1-10-2000)
§ 33.066 BULK COPY FEES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BULK FORM COPY. An aggregation of:
         (a)   Copies of all recorded documents received by the County Recorder
for recording in a calendar day, week, month or year;
         (b)   The indices for finding, retrieving and viewing all recorded
documents received by the County Recorder for recording in a calendar day,
week, month or year; or
         (c)   Both.
      BULK USER. An individual, a corporation, a partnership, a limited
liability company or an unincorporated association that receives bulk form
copies under a contract with the County Recorder.
      COPY. A reproduction, including an image of a recorded document or
indices created by:
         (a)   Duplicating electronically stored data onto a disk, tape, drum
or any other medium of electronic data storage; or
         (b)   Reproducing on microfilm.
      INDICES. All of the indexing information used by the County Recorder for
finding, retrieving and viewing a recorded document.
      RECORDED DOCUMENT. A writing, a paper, a document, a plat, a map, a
survey or anything else received at any time for recording or filing in the
public records maintained by the County Recorder or the County Recorder’s
designee.
   (B)   Manner and form of production. It is hereby established that the
County Recorder shall provide bulk form copies to a bulk user only by
electronically transmitting the copies using an electronic transfer process.
   (C)   Procedure for requesting bulk form copies.
      (1)   A bulk user must submit a written request to the County Recorder
that identifies the requested bulk form copies with reasonable particularity.
Unless the request is refused under division (D) below, upon receipt of a valid
written request the County Recorder or the County Recorder’s designee shall
provide the bulk form copies to the bulk user by the method or methods
established by ordinance. The bulk form copies shall be provided within a
reasonable time after the later of the following events:
         (a)   The Recorder’s archival process is completed and bulk form
copies become available in the County Recorder’s office.
         (b)   The bulk form user executes a contract that meets the
requirements of division (E) below with:
            1.   The County Recorder; and
            2.   If the County Recorder uses a third party to provide bulk copy
services, the County Recorder’s designee.
      (2)   The County Recorder or the County Recorder’s designee shall work
with reasonable diligence to ensure that bulk form copies are timely produced
to the bulk user.
   (D)   Fees charged for bulk form copies.
      (1)   Based on a cost study dated May 1, 2018, and performed by the
County Recorder (which is incorporated herein by reference), this Board finds
and determines that the costs incurred by the County Recorder of producing bulk
form copies (including applying a watermark or other protective feature)
substantially exceed both the standard fee of $0.10 per page or per recorded
document fixed by I.C. 36-2-7-10.1(d) and the fee hereafter fixed. Accordingly,
the following fee schedule is hereby adopted:
         (a)   Sixteen cents per page for a copy of a recorded document,
including the instrument’s book and page, if applicable.
         (b)   Sixteen cents per recorded document for a copy of the indices
used by the County Recorder for finding, retrieving and viewing a recorded
document.
      (2)   The fees charged by the County Recorder are subject to the
following requirements.
         (a)   The County Recorder shall pay the fees into the County Treasury
at the end of each calendar month.
         (b)   The fees prescribed and collected under this section supersede
all other fees for bulk form copies required by law to be charged for services
rendered by the County Recorder to bulk users.
         (c)   All revenue generated by the County Recorder under this section
shall be deposited in the County Recorder’s Records Perpetuation Fund and used
by the Recorder in accordance with I.C. 36-2-7-10(g).
         (d)   The Recorder shall periodically update and verify the cost study
referred to in division (D)(1) above.
   (E)   Bulk user contract; termination.
      (1)   (a)   A bulk user must enter into a contract with the County
Recorder, and if the County Recorder uses a third party to provide bulk copy
services, the County Recorder’s designee, in order to receive bulk form copies.
The contract must be in writing and must require that the bulk user agree not
to do any of the following:
            1.   Except as provided in division (D) above, provide, transfer or
allow the transfer of any copy of a recorded document obtained by the bulk user
under this section to a third party;
            2.   Engage in unauthorized access to recorded documents; and/or
            3.   Engage in unauthorized alteration of recorded documents.
         (b)   A contract required under this division (E) may not include any
restrictions on a bulk form user’s use of the bulk form copies other than those
contained in this section.
      (2)   If a bulk user does not comply with a contract, the County Recorder
may terminate the contract, immediately stop providing bulk form copies to the
bulk user and refuse to provide the bulk form copies required by the bulk user
if all termination provisions and procedures in the contract have been met by
the County Recorder. The County Recorder may refuse subsequent requests from a
bulk user for bulk form copies in the following circumstances.
         (a)   The bulk user is a person that has had a previous bulk form copy
contract terminated by the County Recorder because the Recorder determined that
the bulk user failed to comply with the contract.
         (b)   The bulk user is a corporation or limited liability company in
which a person has a majority or controlling interest, such person requested
bulk form copies under a previous contract with the County Recorder and the
contract was terminated by the County Recorder because the County Recorder
determined that the person failed to comply with the contract.
   (F)   Resale of bulk form copies by bulk user.
      (1)   (a)   A bulk user that is licensed under I.C. 27-1-15.6-6(d) or
holds a certificate of authority under I.C. 27-7-3-6 may provide bulk form
copies related to the specific order for a title search (as defined in I.C. 27-
7-3-2) when operating as:
            1.   A title plant for the issuance of title insurance (as defined
in I.C. 27-7-3-2); or
            2.   A title company (as defined in I.C. 27-7-3-2).
         (b)   A bulk user that meets the requirements of this division (F) may
charge its customers a fee for using the bulk form copies obtained by the bulk
user that may not exceed the costs incurred by the bulk user for obtaining the
bulk form copies. A bulk user that meets the requirements of this section may
not resell, provide, transfer or allow the transfer of any copy of a recorded
document, whether in bulk form or as individual copies or images, to any other
bulk user or title plant.
      (2)   A bulk user that does not meet the requirements of division (F)(1)
above is prohibited from selling, offering for sale, advertising for sale,
soliciting a purchase of, loaning, giving away, allowing subscription service
to or otherwise transferring, providing or allowing the transfer of bulk form
copies for commercial purposes to a third party, whether the copies are in bulk
form or individual copies or images.
   (G)   Enhanced access not affected. This section does not apply to enhanced
access authorized under I.C. 5-14-3-3 and any county ordinances promulgated
   (H)   Watermark. The Recorder shall watermark all bulk form copies with the
following:
 
COPY IMAGE - NOT FOR RESALE I.C. 36-2-7-10.1
ORIGINAL IN MARSHALL COUNTY RECORDER OFFICE
 
(Ord. 2018-07, passed 5-7-2018; Ord. 2018-08, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 33.067 DOCUMENT RECORDATION FEE.
   (A)   Fees established. The fees as set forth in division (D) below are
established as the recording fees for recording documents in the county. All
revenue received by the Recorder pursuant to state statute and this section
shall be deposited in the appropriate fund, including the County Recorder’s
Perpetuation Fund. The County Recorder shall post the appropriate notices and
schedules of fees.
   (B)   Fee schedule.
Mortgages (including Subordinate Mortgages) and re-recorded mortgages   $55
   Fee Allocation:
      Auditor of State                                            $2.50
      County ID Security Fund                                     $1
      County General                                              $34
      Elected Official Training Fund                              $1
      Recorder Perpetuation                                       $11.50
      Surveyor Comer Fund                                         $5
* Any oversize pages fees collected flows to county general
Deeds and all other instruments, including re-recorded instruments (fee $25
includes one oversize page)
Additional pages exceeding 8 1/2" x 14" within any document shall be    $5
charged each page at:
Mechanics lien including one mail out                                   $25
For counties accepting multiple transaction documents (a/k/a blanket    $25
documents)
Plus for each additional cross reference after the first                $7
   Fee Allocation:
      County ID Security Fund                                     $1
      County General                                              $8
      Each additional mail out                                    $2
      Elected Official Training Fund                              $1
      Recorder Perpetuation                                       $10
      Surveyor Corner Fund                                        $5
Uniform Commercial Code:
   UCC, 2 pages or less                                              $6
   3 pages or more                                                   $10
      Fee Allocation:
         County General                                        $4
         County ID Security Fund                               $1
         Elected Official Training Fund                        $1
   UCC Continuation, amendment or assignment, 2 pages or less        $6
   3 pages or more                                                   $10
   Fee Allocation:
      County General                                              $8
      County ID Security Fund                                     $1
      Elected Official Training Fund                              $1
   UCC-11 Information Request, per debtor name                       $7
   Each additional name                                              $5
   Fee Allocation:
      County ID Security Fund                                     $1
      County General                                              $5
      Elected Official Training Fund                              $1
   Recorder Perpetuation:
      Certification of Document                                   $5
      Copies 11" x 17" or smaller per page                        $1
      Copies larger than 11" x 17" per page                       $5
 
(Ord. 2017-13, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 33.068 REAL PROPERTY ENDORSEMENT FEES.
   (A)   The County Auditor shall collect a fee of $10 for the legal
description of each parcel contained in the deed, document, affidavit or other
instrument for which the Auditor makes a real property endorsement.
   (B)   The Auditor shall place the revenue received for this endorsement in a
dedicated fund for use in maintaining plat books, in traditional or electronic
format.
(Ord. 2021-08, passed 5-17-2021)
§ 33.069 ENHANCED ACCESS FEE.
 
Users and Time Period                         Fee
One-month subscription for one user
   (Membership with password)              $15 per month
   Single use 24 hour access (non-membershi$5
Exempt from enhanced access fees are the County Township Assessors, County
City and Town Clerk Treasurers, and others as recommended by the County
Technology Committee to the County Commissioners.
 
(Ord. 2006-17, passed 12-18-2006)
§ 33.070 FEES FOR VENDORS UTILIZING COUNTY PAYROLL SERVICES.
   An administrative fee of $100, payable by every vendor or service provider
seeking to establish payroll deductions through the county. This fee is
assessed to offset to the initial setup and administrative costs for vendor
payroll deduction programs that are primarily a benefit to the vendors of
service providers.
(Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-5-2007)
§ 33.071 ELECTRONIC DATA PROCESSING FEES.
   (A)   The production of electronic data and the electronic maps that require
the geographic information system manager or his or her designee to assemble
data sets or complete specific analysis requests constituting enhanced
electronic data and/or to provide additional layers for said enhanced
electrical data shall be charged in accordance with the following enhanced
digital GIS data fee schedule.
Item Requested Description Unit Price
Item Requested Description                                                               Unit
                                                                                         Price
Countywide     GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
data extract - format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or
community      formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is the boundary of   $25
service data   the county. This product includes community service data layers. Future
               updates are not included in this package.
Countywide     GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
data extract - format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or
environmental  formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is the boundary of   $25
data           the county. This product includes environmental data layers. Future
               updates are not included in this package.
               GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
Countywide     format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or
data extract - formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is the boundary of   $25
land use       the county. This product includes agricultural land use data layer.
               Future updates are not included in this package.
               GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
Countywide     format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or
data extract - formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is the boundary of   $25
neighborhood   the county. This product includes tax assessment neighborhood boundaries
               data layer. Future updates are not included in this package.
               GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
Countywide     format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or
data extract - formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is the boundary of   $15,000
orthoimagery   the county. This product includes the most recent orthoimagery data.
               Future updates are not included in this package.
Countywide     GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
data extract - format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or
parcel/        formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is the boundary of   $15,000
centerline     the county. This product includes parcel, street, centerline and boundary
data           data. Future updates are not included with this package.
               GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
Countywide     format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or
data extract - formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is the boundary of   $25
soils          the county. This product includes soils data layer. Future updates are
               not included in this package.
               GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
Countywide     format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or
data extract - formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is the boundary of   $15,000
topographic    the county. This product includes topographic and contour line data.
               Future updates are not included in this packaging.
               GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
Countywide     format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or
data extract - formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is the boundary of   $25
transportation the county. This product includes transportation data layers. Future
               updates are not included in this package.
Countywide     GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
data extract - format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or
voting         formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is the boundary of   $25
boundaries     the county. This product includes voter data layers. Future updates are
               not included in this package.
               GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
Countywide     format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or
data extract - formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is the boundary of   $25
zoning         the county. This product includes zoning data layers. Future updates are
               not included in this package.
                                                                                         $65 per
Custom         Custom services not provided for in the above categories, e.g. special    hour One
services       analysis custom map generation. These services will be provided as office hour
               staff become available.                                                   minimum
                                                                                         charge
Data extract   GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
for project    format required by the use. The county could provide the raw data or      $500 per
area - address formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is one township.     township
point data     This product includes only address point data. Future updates are not
               included with this package.
               GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the $500 per
Data extract   format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or     public
for project    formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is one public land   land
area - DEM     survey section (PLSS). This product includes digital election model       survey
               (DEM). Future updates are not included in this package.                   section
                                                                                         (PLSS)
               GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the $85 per
Data extract   format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or     public
for project    formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is one public land   land
area -         survey section (PLSS). This product includes the most recent orthoimagery survey
orthoimagery   data. Future updates are not included in this package.                    section
                                                                                         (PLSS)
Data extract   GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
for project    format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or     $0.50
area - parcel/ formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is one public land   per
centerline     survey section (PLSS). This product includes parcel, street centerline    parcel
               and boundary data. Future updates are not included with this package.
Data extract   GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
for project    format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or     $200 per
area - street  formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is one township.     township
centerline     This product includes only street centerline data. Future updates are not
data           included with this package.
               GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the $200 per
Data extract   format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or     public
for project    formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is one public land   land
area -         survey section (PLSS). This product includes topographic and contour line survey
topographic    data and most recent orthoimagery. Future updates are not included in     section
               this package.                                                             (PLSS)
               GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided In the $50 per
Township data  format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or     public
extract -      formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is one township.     land
orthoimagery   This product includes the most recent orthoimagery data. Future updates   survey
               are not included in this package.                                         section
                                                                                         (PLSS)
Township data  GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the
extract-       format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or     $0.25
parcel/        formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is one township.     per
centerline     This product includes parcel, street centerline and boundary data. Future parcel
data           updates are not included with this package.
               GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided in the $150 per
Township data  format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or     public
extract -      formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is the boundary of   land
topographic    the county. This product includes topographic and contour line data and   survey
               orthoimagery.                                                             section
                                                                                         (PLSS)
               GIS data extracted from the county’s electronic map and provided In the $50 per
Township data  format required by the user. The county could provide the raw data or     public
extract -      formatted digital map. The smallest purchasable unit is one Township.     land
orthoimagery   This product includes the most recent orthoimagery data. Future updates   survey
               are not included in this package.                                         section
                                                                                         (PLSS)
Boundary data includes:
   Cadastra_Anno (property text)
   Cartography (land hooks)
   Classified land polygons
   Corporation boundaries
   Deed polygons
   Geographic township boundaries
   Political township boundaries
   Quarter section polygon
   Section polygon
   TIF districts
Community Service data included:
   Campgrounds
   Cemeteries
   Ambulance stations
   Fire departments
   Hospitals
   Parks
   Police departments
   School districts
Environmental data includes:
   Lake
   Legal drains
   Rivers
   Streams
   Watersheds
Transportation data includes:
   Bridges
   County maintained roads
   Mile post signs
   Railroads
   Stop signs
   Yield signs
Voter data includes:
   County Commissioner’s districts
   County Council districts
   Lake of the Woods Sewer district
   Voter polling locations
   Precinct boundaries
 
   (B)   The production of paper maps shall be charged in accordance with
following fee schedule for enhanced paper map fees.
 
Item requested             Description                      Unit Price
Drainage, voter districts, Paper map generated from
voter precincts or zoning  electronic data. Map size 36" by $10
                           52"
                           Custom services not provided for
                           in the above categories, $65 per
Custom services            hour e.g., special analysis,     $65 per hour
                           custom map generation. These     One hour minimum
                           services will be provided as
                           office staff become available
 
   (C)   The production of paper maps shall be charged in accordance with the
following fee schedule for paper map fees, which said fees shall continue to be
deposited in the Plat Mapping Fund previously created and governed by the
appropriate bodies in the county.
 
Item Requested                 Description                           Unit Price
                               Paper map generated from electronic
                               data. Map size 19.25" by 24". Map
Section or quarter section map will display section lines or quarter $5
                               section lines, parcel lines, street
                               centerline, annotation and 2002
                               orthoimagery
 
   (D)   The procedure for requesting the enhanced, special or extraordinary
electronic data is to submit a request in writing to the IT Department. Said
request should specify the data needed and the format needed. The request
should indicate who would be disseminating the information. The IT Department
may provide a form to be completed for such requests. The IT Department or its
designee, after reviewing the request, shall determine whether the information
can be provided and after the individual requesting the information has
verified that the proposed information to be provided by the county satisfies
the request, said information will be provided by the time designated by the IT
Department. Payment of said enhanced data or a deposit for customized enhanced
data shall be made at the time the request is submitted.
   (E)   Anyone requesting to purchase or secure the electronic data that is
the subject herein will be required to sign a disclaimer and all of the other
papers required by the IT Department.
   (F)   The information proposed above are not documents or records that are
subject to a request and for which a copy fee for actual costs are required for
providing such records. Rather, it is contemplated the electronic data and
other information to be provided is that electronic data and other information
over and above such information ordinarily maintained by the county. If the
request for electronic data is no more than a public access request for
electronic data kept in the ordinary course of business, then the production of
said information will be in accordance with the fees normally charged for
copying and production of such public access documents and the actual costs
incurred.
   (G)   County officeholders/department heads or City of Plymouth officials,
and the towns within the county are exempt from the payment of the enhanced
fees ordered herein.
   (H)   Nothing herein shall be construed to require any employee of the
county to provide information contained on or within a public document of any
agency or department by telephone. All requests shall be submitted in written
form.
   (I)   Payment for the information and data to be provided under this section
shall be made at the time of the request, which payment shall be made in the
Auditor’s office. Any person or company, or their designee who fails to pay the
charges shall be liable for the charges, plus interest, attorneys’ fees and
costs of collection.
   (J)   Nothing herein shall compel any office to charge a fee for copies,
data or information imposed by this section which is contrary to state law. The
state statute shall apply.
   (K)   (1)   Pursuant to provisions of I.C. 5-14-3-3(c), no person who
receives enhanced electronic data other than those authorized by the county may
reproduce, store, grant access, deliver or sell any information obtained from
any the county department or office to any other person, partnership or
corporation for commercial purposes.
      (2)   Any person who receives information or data from the county shall
not be permitted to use any mailing lists, addresses or data basis for the
purpose of selling, advertising or soliciting the purchase of merchandise,
goods, services or to sell, loan, gift or otherwise deliver the information
obtained by the request to any other person.
   (L)   The County Auditor shall place all revenue received under the
schedules provided in divisions (A) and (B) above in a dedicated fund for use
in maintaining, upgrading and enhancing the county’s electronic geographic
information system. This Fund is called the Enhanced Technology Fee Fund and
shall be subject to appropriation by the County Council.
   (M)   Any person who has a dispute or seeks relief from the terms of this
section may seek a resolution of that dispute or relief from the Board of
Commissioners of the county.
   (N)   (1)   The County Sheriff shall charge the following rates to respond
to a public records request that requires the collection and provision of
electronic data:
         (a)   One hundred and fifty dollars for full file materials; or
         (b)   Thirty dollar base fee (regardless of media data provided in)
for photo, video, or audio files. Such base fee includes up to one hour of
staff production time for compiling the electronic data request. All staff
production time exceeding one hour shall be charged in $30 per hour increments,
not to exceed a total fee of $150.
      (2)   Nothing herein shall be construed to require the County Sheriff’s
Department to provide information or electronic data that is exempted from
public records statutes.
      (3)   Any person who has a dispute or seeks relief from the terms of this
section may seek relief of that dispute through the application to the County
Board of Commissioners.
      (4)   The County Sheriff may respond to a request for electronic data in
various formats, including but not limited to providing a disk, a USB drive, a
cloud link, email, or other similar delivery method agreed upon by the
requesting party and the Sheriff's staff, all for the same fees set forth
above.
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 3-17-2008; Ord. 2018-12, passed 7-2-2018; Ord. 2025-14,
passed 5-5-2025) Penalty, see §
33.999
§ 33.072 SHERIFF’S SALE PROGRAM AND SERVICE FEE.
   (A)   The Sheriff’s Sale Program is approved and established to provide the
procedure for the Sheriff to contract for those administrative, technical,
clerical and related services that are reasonable and appropriate for the
Sheriff to effectively prepare for, manage and implement foreclosure sales.
   (B)   The Commissioners hereby establish a Fund to be titled the Sheriff’s
Sale Fund into which all collections of foreclosure costs fees, as hereafter
defined, shall be deposited and from which the appropriate expenses of the
Sheriff’s Sale Program shall be appropriated and paid. The Sheriff’s Sale Fund
shall be a non-reverting Fund to be used only for the purposes set forth herein
and shall not revert to the County General Fund at year end.
   (C)   The Sheriff is authorized to negotiate and execute a contract with a
provider to obtain such administrative technical, clerical and related services
(the “Sheriff sale services”) in order for the Sheriff to conduct the Sheriff’s
Sale Program.
   (D)   (1)   The Sheriff’s Sale Services contract shall provide for the
delivery of such services by a contractor in compliance with all applicable
statutory provisions for the conduct of foreclosure sale proceedings and the
Sheriff’s Sale Program. The Sheriff sale services contract shall also provide
for the payment of a fee, not to exceed the amount in division (D)(2) below for
each cause number scheduled in the Sheriff’s Sale Program, to the contractor
for such services.
      (2)   The estimated costs herein are estimates of the County Sheriff for
the administration of foreclosure sales as required by I.C. 32-29-7. The fees
are authorized by I.C. 32-29-7-3.
Service Fees
Service                                                Fees
Captain’s time, one hour at $      per hour
Civil process time - one hour at $       per hour
Contractual services (SRI) per cause number            $180
Mileage (civil process) -       miles at $       each*
Service fee - $      per individual served
Sheriff service fee**
Estimated local total                                  $120
*Mileage is averaged as we serve some in Plymouth; but others in Bremen,
Culver and the like.
 
   (E)   The Sheriff is hereby authorized to charge a fee of the amount in
division (D)(2) above per cause number of property in the Sheriff’s Sale
Program (the “foreclosure cost fees”) and to deposit such foreclosure costs
fees collected by or on behalf of the Sheriff in the Sheriff’s Sale Fund.
   (F)   The foreclosure costs fee shall be payable at the time of filing the
praecipe under I.C. 32-29-7-3(j), which shall be a charge for the sheriff’s
sale in addition to other statutory costs and fees.
   (G)   The Sheriff’s Sale Program contract shall provide for a complete and
accurate accounting of all Sheriff Sale Program proceeds and compliance with
any reporting or record requirements as set forth by the State Board of
Accounts.
(Ord. 2008-06, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2022-14, passed 10-17-2022)
§ 33.073 AUTHORIZING AUDITOR TO COLLECT ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
   The County Auditor is hereby authorized to collect an administration fee
equal to 3% of each fund’s annual budget from the following funds, and direct
the fees to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County’s General Fund;
WIC, Drug Task Force and any other special Fund as determined by the Council
which pays salaries and wages and is not supported by local tax dollars. Said
administration fees are to be budgeted in a separate departmental line item and
paid through the claims process and will begin with the 2003 budget year.
(Council Ord. 2002-05, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 33.074 ELECTRONIC FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION FEE.
   The county shall hereafter provide for the following fees for facsimile
transmissions in the County Courts; specifically, $5 for the first page, $1 for
each additional page and not to exceed $10 per transmission.
(Ord. 2001-6, passed 10-15-2001)
§ 33.075 ENHANCED 9-1-1 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM FEE.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority of and subject to I.C. 36-8-16.7-32, an
emergency telephone system fee is hereby established to provide for the funding
of an enhanced emergency telephone system to serve the citizens of the county.
This fee shall be collected from the telephone services users of the county and
administered in accordance with the terms of this section.
   (B)   A monthly fee of $1.53 per telephone access line will be collected by
the telephone service supplier to pay to the county for the personnel costs,
lease, purchase or maintenance of enhanced emergency telephone equipment (E-9-
1-1), including necessary computer hardware, software and data base
provisioning; and the rates charged by the service suppliers’ enhanced
emergency telephone system network services.
   (C)   The service supplier shall be entitled to retain an administrative fee
of 3% of the monthly fees collected as compensation for collecting the fees.
   (D)   All monthly fees collected, except for the 3% administration fees,
shall be remitted to the County Treasurer within ten days after the last day of
the calendar-year quarter. With the fee remittal, the service supplier shall
provide a fee collection report to the County Auditor on a form provided by
said Auditor.
   (E)   The County Treasurer shall deposit the remitted fees in a separate
Fund named the “County Emergency Telephone System Fund.” The County Treasurer
may invest monies in the Fund in the same manner that other monies of the
county are invested.
   (F)   During January of each year, each service supplier that collects the
enhanced emergency telephone system fee for the county shall provide a
delinquent fee report to the county. The report shall list the name, address
and amount due for each service user who is two or more months delinquent in
paying the fee.
   (G)   This section shall be construed in accordance with I.C. 36-8-16.7-32,
as amended.
   (H)   Each service supplier shall commence collecting the enhanced emergency
telephone system fee from its service users in the month of September, 1991.
(Council Ord. 1991-1, passed 7-9-1991)
§ 33.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   A person who violates the provisions of §
33.065 shall be guilty of an infraction as defined by state law and may be
fined up to a maximum amount of $1,000. Each violation of the provisions of §
33.065 shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   (1)   Any person who violates the terms and conditions of §
33.071 by failing to pay or by violating §
33.071(L) shall be guilty of an infraction and may be fined up to $2,500.
      (2)   In the event there is a violation of the prohibition for
disseminating information as prohibited in §
33.071(L), each violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 3-17-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
APPENDIX A: GRANT APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY CHECKLISTS

   Request to Apply for a Grant
Date:
Department:
Name:
Contact Info:
Grant Due Date:
Grant Name and Funding Agency:
Grant Summary:
Request Received by Auditor         on         by
Copied to Commissioners         on         via
Copied to Council               on         via
Copied to County Attorney         on         via
Authorized to Proceed on by
with Grant Application            on         by
Authorized to Proceed on by with
Grant Application               on         by
DESCRIPTION Paid by Grant Paid by County N/A
DESCRIPTION                                Paid by Grant Paid by County N/A
Salary
INPRS
Social Security (wage x 6.20%)
Medicare (wage x 1.45%)
Who will cover unemployment expense?
Who will cover worker’s compensation
insurance?
Employer’s Share of Insurance Coverage
Dental
Vision
Supplemental Pay
Insurance Expense over Excess Loss
What tools will the Grant require?
Training Expense?
Personal Computer, Software, Internet and
Email
Vehicle/Fuel
Does the Grant require matching funds?
What is the Grant start date?
When does the Grant expire?
Can a Grant administration fee be charged?
 
   Grant Summary
Local Project Name                     ----------------------------------------
-------------------
Award Number                     ----------------------------------------------
-------------
Award Name                        ---------------------------------------------
--------------
Award Method Advanced/Reimbursement/Other*(see note)
                           ----------------------------------------------------
-------
Fund Name/Number                  ---------------------------------------------
--------------
Initiating Office/Department               ------------------------------------
-----------------------
Contact Person Name                  ------------------------------------------
-----------------
Contact Person Phone                  -----------------------------------------
------------------
Contact Person E-Mail                  ----------------------------------------
-------------------
Pass-Through Agency                  ------------------------------------------
-----------------
Contact Person Name                  ------------------------------------------
-----------------
Contact Person Phone                  -----------------------------------------
------------------
Contact Person E-Mail                  ----------------------------------------
-------------------
Federal Grant?                     Yes/No
Federal Agency                     --------------------------------------------
---------------
Federal Program/Project Title               -----------------------------------
------------------------
CFDA Number                     -----------------------------------------------
------------
Passed to Sub-recipients                  Yes/No
Notes:                           ----------------------------------------------
-------------
                           ----------------------------------------------------
-------
                           ----------------------------------------------------
-------
*noncash, loan, income
CHAPTER 34: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
34.01   Emergency management ordinance adopted by reference
§ 34.01 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The emergency management ordinance is hereby adopted and incorporated as
part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 1999-4, passed 5-3-1999; Ord. 2013-06, passed 6-17-2013; Ord. 2014-07,
passed 8-4-2014)
CHAPTER 35: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Section
   
35.01   Bureau established
   
35.02   Schedule of ordinances and penalties
§ 35.01 BUREAU ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The ordinances listed in §
35.02 are affirmed and incorporated herein. In some cases, the fine specified
in the underlying ordinance is modified herein for uniformity. The fine amount
in this section shall apply for all first-time offenses and as applied to
second and third time offenses but does not preclude the county from imposing a
higher fine as allowed by the original, underlying ordinance through the
Ordinance Violation Bureau.
   (B)   The list of ordinance violations in §
35.02 may be enforced through the County Ordinance Violation Bureau.
   (C)   The violation fee schedule in §
35.02 is hereby incorporated into the fee schedule adopted in previous
ordinances setting up the Ordinance Violation Bureau, or separately created by
said county ordinances. In addition to the civil penalties set forth in the
ordinances listed in §
35.02, the fines associated with said ordinances shall be paid to the County
Clerk within 30 days of the ticket. The County Clerk shall set up the
appropriate registers and records to collect said fines and shall periodically
report said fines to the County Sheriff and the County Auditor and shall
deposit the collection of fines with the County Auditor and County Treasurer in
accordance with state law.
   (D)   In the event it is necessary to prosecute the collection of the fines
that have not been paid within 30 days, the County Sheriff and/or County Clerk
shall refer the ticket to the County Attorney who shall prosecute said fines
through the County Ordinance Violation Bureau. Any defendant who has not timely
paid a fine upon which it is necessary to prosecute the civil penalty and file
a complaint in any court in the county, the costs of collection, including
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees, shall be added to the fine
described herein.
   (E)   If it is necessary to expend costs for services in order for a
defendant to be in compliance with an ordinance, in addition to the
responsibility for the fines, attorneys’ fees and court costs, said defendant
shall also be responsible for the cost of services rendered in order to comply
with the ordinance. The county may charge for those services in addition to any
penalty provided herein or in the ordinances.
(Ord. 2016-7, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-13, passed 7-1-2019)
§ 35.02 SCHEDULE OF ORDINANCES AND PENALTIES.
Type of Violation Ordinance No. Fine
Type of Violation                                           Ordinance No. Fine
Abandoned/junk vehicles                                     2016-7a       $50
Animals running at large                                    2016-7b       $50
Buggy                                                       2016-7d       $50
Curfew                                                      2016-7e       $50
Failure to license                                          2016-7c       $50
Home solicitation registration                              2016-7f       $250
Open burning                                                2016-7g       $50
Smoking/tobacco                                             2016-7h       $100
Travel on county roads in violation of the no-through truck 2019-7j       $250
ordinance
Travel during emergency                                     2016-7i       $250
 
(Ord. 2019-13, passed 7-1-2019)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
      
51.   WASTE CONTROL
      
52.   WATER WELLS AND OTHER FACILITIES
      
53.   SEWER
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
Section
   
50.01   Purpose
   
50.02   Definitions
   
50.03   Permits
   
50.04   Inspection of public disposal sites and operations
   
50.05   Sanitary requirements
   
50.06   Enforcement
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is regulating the public disposal of garbage and
rubbish on any land which is situated outside the corporate limits of any city
or town, requiring permits and providing penalties for violations thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-45-1)
§ 50.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Rejected food wastes, including every waste accumulation of animal,
fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attends to the
preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or
vegetables.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The County Health Officer or his or her authorized
representative.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation or association.
   PUBLIC DISPOSAL. Disposal of garbage and rubbish which has been removed from
premises used, owned or leased by one or more persons, firms, corporations or
associations, and transported to other premises and disposed either with or
without the payment of a fee.
   RUBBISH. Includes such matter as ashes, can, metalware, broken glass,
crockery, dirt, sweepings, boxes, wood, grass, weeds or litter of any kind.
   SANITARY FILL. Relates to the placing of garbage and rubbish in a specially-
prepared trench or its equivalent and the aforesaid contents thoroughly
compacted and covered with at least two feet of compacted fresh earth daily.
   THE COUNTY. Areas which are under the jurisdiction of the County Health
Officer and situated outside the corporate limits of any city or town.
(Prior Code, § 3-45-2)
§ 50.03 PERMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the public disposal
of garbage or rubbish in the county who does not possess an unrevoked permit
from the Health Officer. Only persons who comply with the requirements of this
subchapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. The permit
shall be for the term of one year on a calendar-year basis and shall be
renewable annually.
   (B)   Any permit issued by the Health Officer shall contain the name of the
person to whom the permit is granted, the address of the premises for which the
same is issued, the address of the person to whom the same is issued, if such
address be different than the premises for which it is issued, and such other
pertinent information as may be required by the Health Officer. A permit shall
be issued to any person who has complied with the requirements of this
subchapter, and no permit or renewal thereof shall be denied on arbitrary or
capricious grounds. A permit may be temporarily suspended by the Health Officer
upon violation by the holder of any of the terms of this subchapter or revoked
after an opportunity for a hearing by the Health Officer upon serious or
repeated violation.
   (C)   A separate permit shall be required for each public disposal site
operated or to be operated by any person.
(Prior Code, § 3-45-3) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 INSPECTION OF PUBLIC DISPOSAL SITES AND OPERATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   At least once every six months, the Health Officer shall inspect
each garbage and rubbish disposal site located within the county.
      (2)   If the Health Officer discovers a violation of any item of
sanitation pertinent to the provisions of this subchapter, he or she shall make
a second inspection after the lapse of such time as he or she deems necessary
for the defect to be remedied, and the second inspection shall be used in
determining compliance with the terms of this subchapter.
      (3)   Any violation of the same item of this subchapter on such second
inspection shall call for suspension or revocation of permit.
   (B)   One copy of the Health Officer’s inspection report, on which
violations of any item of sanitation pertinent to the provisions of this
subchapter shall be enshrined, shall be left at the garbage and rubbish
disposal site by the Health Officer. Another copy of the aforementioned
inspection report shall be filed by the Health Officer with the records of the
County Health Department.
   (C)   The person operating the public disposal site shall, upon request of
the Health Officer, permit access to all parts of the grounds by said Health
Officer and shall permit him or her to copy any and all records pertaining to
the sources of garbage and rubbish transported thereto for public disposal.
(Prior Code, § 3-45-4) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The issuance of any permit to a person for the operation of a proposed
garbage and rubbish disposal site shall be subject to approval of the Health
Officer, who shall inspect the proposed site prior to the issuance of a permit.
   (B)   A setback line of at least 25 feet from any open watercourses or known
tile drains shall be established at each disposal site.
   (C)   Any and all materials considered food for rodents and insects,
including tin cans and other receptacles for food, shall be disposed of daily
in a sanitary manner by a sanitary fill, or by a method approved by the Health
Officer.
   (D)   All salvable material must be removed from the disposal area at least
once each week.
   (E)   Combustible rubbish completely devoid of garbage may be burned in an
area designated by the County Health Officer to minimize fire hazards and the
creation of a public nuisance resulting from smoke and stench, and the County
Health Officer may order that all material be covered or disposed of in a
satisfactory manner.
   (F)   Any person engaged in public garbage and rubbish disposal by sanitary
fill shall have available at all times earth-moving equipment of adequate size
and capacity to satisfactorily operate such sanitary fill. An all-weather road
shall be provided to the trench or sanitary fill site.
   (G)   It shall be expressly forbidden to make uncooked garbage available for
animal consumption at any public garbage and rubbish disposal site.
   (H)   Infestation of rodents and insects on the premises of a garbage and
rubbish public disposal site shall constitute a violation of this subchapter,
and such violation shall be determined by the County Health Officer.
(Prior Code, § 3-45-5) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   The enforcement of this subchapter shall be by the County Health Officer. It
shall be the duty of the county’s prosecuting attorney, to whom the County
Health Officer shall report any violations of the provisions of this
subchapter, to cause proceedings to be commenced against the person violating
the provisions of this subchapter and to prosecute to final termination.
(Prior Code, § 3-45-6)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any provisions of §§
50.01 through
50.06 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, the violator
shall be punished for the first offense by a fine of not more than $500; for
the second offense by a fine of not more than $1,000; and for the third and
each subsequent offense by a fine of not more than $1,000, to which may be
added imprisonment for any determinate period not exceeding 90 days and each
day after the expiration of the time limit for abating insanitary conditions as
ordered by the County Board of Health, or by the duly-appointed Health Officer
of the county, which shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 3-45-7)
CHAPTER 51: WASTE CONTROL
Section
   
51.01   Title
   
51.02   Purpose
   
51.03   Definitions
   
51.04   County Board of Health powers
   
51.05   Waste facility permit
   
51.06   Application
   
51.07   Application and processing fee
   
51.08   Application procedure
   
51.09   Conditions of the permit
   
51.10   Hazardous waste handler permit
   
51.11   Monitoring and safety
   
51.12   Hours of operation
   
51.13   Enforcement
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Marshall County Waste
Control Ordinance.”
(Ord. 1985-9, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 51.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Regulate the operation and care of waste management facilities dealing
with the storage, transfer, treatment or disposal of waste within the county;
   (B)   Assure that the best management practices are used in handling such
waste; and
   (C)   Assure that the health and well-being of the citizens of the county
are protected against toxic chemicals, radioactive materials and other
substances which are or may be harmful to the health of said citizens.
(Ord. 1985-9, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 51.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS. Owners of land abutting the waste facility site.
   AIR. Atmosphere or space lying above and around the waste site which may be
affected by the presence of the waste facility.
   APPLICANT. Any individual, trust, firm, organization, company, corporation,
association and the like, that applies for a waste permit.
   BOARD. The County Board of Health.
   CONSTRUCTION.
      (1)   The erection or building of new structures or the acquisition,
replacement, expansion, remodeling or alteration of any existing structures;
and
      (2)   The acquisition and installation of equipment required or necessary
for the proper utilization and operation of the waste facility.
   CONSULTANT or CONSULTANTS. An individual or individuals with knowledge that
qualifies them to be able to offer competent advice or opinions regarding the
particular subject under consideration.
   CONTAMINATION. To damage or ruin by contact or transmission by a causative
agent or the degradation of naturally occurring water, air or soil quality
either directly or indirectly as a result of the waste facility.
   COUNTY. Marshall County, Indiana.
   DISPOSAL. The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or
placing of any waste or hazardous material into or on any land, water or
atmosphere.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION MEASURES. Plans, actions and measures to ensure
contamination does not occur to the surrounding soil, air and water.
   ENVIRONMENTALLY SIGNIFICANT LANDS. Any land and property having been so
identified by the state or federal government.
   ESCROW ACCOUNT. An account of funds in lieu of liability insurance or other
security.
   ESCROW AGENT. The County Auditor.
   FACILITY OPERATOR. The person who is responsible for the overall operation
of the facility.
   GENERATE or GENERATOR. Any person whose act or process produces hazardous
waste identified or listed under Subpart A of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., depending on whether they
meet the criteria specified in § 25029 of Subpart B.
   GROUNDWATER. Water in the saturated zone beneath the land surface.
   HANDLE or HANDLER. Any person who generates, stores, treats, transports,
disposes or otherwise manages solid or hazardous waste.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Solid waste, or a combination of solid wastes, which
because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics may:
      (1)   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
      (2)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or
otherwise managed.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE HANDLER PERMIT. A permit required for all persons who
qualify under §
51.10.
   INSPECTOR. Any person authorized by the Board to conduct inspections in
ensuring compliance with this chapter.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT. Any government agency located or operating in the county.
   MONITORING AND MONITORING SYSTEM. Practices, procedures and equipment used
to systematically inspect and collect data on operational parameters of the
facility or on the quality of the air, groundwater, surface water or soils.
   OPERATION. All activities involved in the process of storing, treating or
disposing of waste material.
   OWNER. The person who owns the land on which the facility is located and
other property and equipment necessary for the overall operation of the
facility.
   PERMITTED FACILITY. Any waste facility that has obtained all required
permits from the Board.
   PERSON. Any individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation,
partnership, association, state, municipality, commission, political
subdivision of a state, or any interstate body.
   POST-CLOSURE CARE. The monitoring and facility maintenance activities
conducted after closure.
   SAFETY ACTIVITIES. Activities to ensure the safety and protection of the
health and well-being of the citizens of the county and surrounding
environment.
   SITE CLOSURE. The act of securing a facility in compliance with all federal,
state and county requirements which no longer accepts waste for treatment,
storage or disposal.
   SITE PREPARATION. Any activity in preparing the physical site of the
facility for receiving waste.
   SPECIAL WASTE. Industrial waste as defined in the state statutes, which are
point sources subject to permits under § 402 of the Clean Water Act, being 33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   SPILLS. Any accidental or unplanned discharge of waste onto or into the
land, air, water or environment.
   STORAGE. The containment of waste on a temporary basis in such a manner as
not to constitute disposal or permanent placement.
   STRUCTURES. Something constructed or built by human.
   SURFACE WATER. Water originating above the surface of the land and generally
remaining in or above the upper portion of the soil.
   SUSPECT WASTE. Waste which is surmised or suspected to contain materials
which are in violation of this chapter.
   TECHNOLOGY OF WASTE DISPOSAL. Knowledge, procedures and practices used in
waste disposals.
   TOXIC CHEMICAL. Any chemical so identified by any agency of federal, state
or county government.
   TRANSFER. Movement of waste from one’s property to another’s or from one
site to another within the county.
   TRANSPORTER. Any person engaged in the transportation of waste by air, rail,
highway or water.
   TREAT. Waste that has been processed so as to change the physical, chemical
or biological character so as to neutralize such waste and render it less
harmful.
   TREATMENT. Any method, technique or process designed to change the physical,
chemical or biological character so as to neutralize such waste and to render
it safer for transport, amenable for recovery, storage or reduction in volume.
   WASTE. Refuse, materials or substances, whether gaseous, liquid or solid,
which are of no apparent value or use, and have been placed, dumped or
contracted for disposal.
   WASTE MANAGEMENT. The systematic administration of planning and activities
which provide for the collection, source separation, storage, transportation,
transfer, processing, treatment and disposal of waste.
   WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITIES. Any facility used for the systematic control of
the collection, source separation, storage, transportation, processing,
treatment and disposal of wastes.
   WORKING FACE. The area being actively used for the disposal of waste which
requires or has received only the daily cover.
(Ord. 1985-9, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 51.04 COUNTY BOARD OF HEALTH POWERS.
   (A)   The enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the
County Board of Health and its staff in the Health Department.
   (B)   Its function and powers shall be as follows:
      (1)   To review and approve or deny waste permits as specified in §§
51.05,
51.06,
51.07,
51.09 and
51.12;
      (2)   To issue hazardous waste handler permits as specified in §
51.10;
      (3)   To monitor and enforce the provisions of §§
51.11 and
51.13;
      (4)   To keep in contact with the State Environmental Management Board
and other bodies concerned with waste management;
      (5)   To keep informed about advances in the technology of waste
disposal, hazardous waste and radioactive waste management, and to make
recommendations about ways to keep the county’s regulations and management
practices in tune with the use of both best available technology and best
management practices in the field of waste disposal or hazardous and
radioactive waste management; and
      (6)   To review practices of waste disposal, hazardous waste generators
and radioactive waste generators in the county not currently covered by federal
and state regulations to determine if the county should require these
generators to obtain permits for continued production and management of these
wastes.
(Ord. 1985-9, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 51.05 WASTE FACILITY PERMIT.
   (A)   All waste facilities shall be required to obtain a permit from the
County Board of Health to operate in the county.
   (B)   No construction or site preparation for a new waste facility shall
begin until a permit has been issued by the County Board of Health.
   (C)   Any person holding a state waste facility permit issued prior to or
within 12 months following the adoption of this chapter shall be required to
submit a copy of all documents related to the state permit. Upon confirming the
completeness of these documents, the Board of Health shall issue a waste permit
with restrictions identical to the state permit. Provision for bonding and
liability insurance, as in §
51.09, shall be required, prior to the beginning operation if operation has not
begun prior to adoption of this chapter, or within 12 months if operating prior
to adoption of this chapter. Such a permit shall be valid until the state
permit is due for renewal or for two years, whichever is shorter. The permit
holder must then submit a full county waste permit application for approval as
provided in §§
51.07 and
51.09.
   (D)   All waste facility permits, other than those designated in division
(C) above, shall be submitted for renewal concurrently with the corresponding
state permit or within five years of issuances, whichever is shorter. The
application for renewal shall list all changes in conditions or operations
differing from those in the previous permit. The Board may adjust liability
coverage upon renewal.
   (E)   If the Health Board finds that a permitted facility has significantly
changed the amounts or types of waste entering the facility, or that the
facility has significantly increased its site, the Board may require the
facility operator to amend its application and obtain a new permit.
(Ord. 1985-9, passed 1-6-1986) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 APPLICATION.
   (A)   A permit applicant shall prepare and file an application with the
Board for any waste facility as described in §
51.05. The permit application shall include all related documents submitted to
the federal government and the state. Where information is included in
documents submitted to the federal government, these need not be duplicated for
the county permit; however, additional information as to how these items
directly impact the county as well as cross references to state and federal
documents shall be included.
   (B)   The application for a waste disposal facility shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   A ten-year past history of waste facility operation;
      (2)   A detailed estimate of the types and amounts of municipal and
county services local government will need to provide each year for the
facility;
      (3)   A description of emergency procedures and safety and security
precautions that will be in place at the facility; this information should
include details on emergency assistance that may be required from the
surrounding community;
      (4)   A description of the environmental protection measures to be taken
by the applicant to prevent contamination on and around the facility site and a
description of planned monitoring systems;
      (5)   A description of the site closure plan for the facility, the
anticipated date of closure and an estimate of the site closure costs;
      (6)   A description of anticipated need for post-closure care;
      (7)   A description of the potential for impact on environmentally
significant lands; and
      (8)   A summary of all spills of hazardous, toxic and/or radioactive
waste and the resultant cleanup operation over the past ten years at all
disposal sites operated by the firm in the United States.
(Ord. 1985-9, passed 1-6-1986) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07 APPLICATION AND PROCESSING FEE.
   A permit fee of $100 shall be assessed. Failure to provide these funds
within 30 days of demand therefor shall result in termination of the permit
process or cancellation of the permit.
(Ord. 1985-9, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 51.08 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   (1)   The permit applicant shall submit to the County Health Board
three copies of all information required by federal and state agencies for the
facility for which it requests a county permit and subsequent revisions at the
same time such information is submitted to the state and federal government,
except facilities already located in the county which shall file such documents
when they initiate the application renewal process.
      (2)   The review procedure shall not begin, nor shall the application be
designated as complete, until such time as all required data are submitted and
the appropriate fees are paid, or suitable arrangements for payment have been
approved by the Board of Health.
   (B)   A designee of the Board of Health shall compile copies of all
applications, minutes of Health Board meetings, reports by consultants and
similar material. These shall be placed in one location with free access by the
public and availability of copying any portion or all of any document at cost.
   (C)   Each application may be reviewed by the Health Department and a
consultant or consultants selected by the Health Board. The analysis shall be
completed within 120 days from the day the application is determined to be
complete.
   (D)   The Board’s designee and each consultant shall submit reports on the
application to the Board of Health at a meeting of the Board.
   (E)   The Board shall call a public hearing on the completed application
along with the analysis by county staff and consultants. The staff shall give
notice by regular mail of the time and place of the public hearing to the owner
and adjacent property owners as specified on the map. Said notice shall be
mailed not less than 14 days prior to the date specified thereon. Notice of the
public hearing shall be posted by the Health Department on the proposed
facility property and on streets of access not less than 14 days prior to the
date specified thereon.
   (F)   Within 45 days after review of the final analysis, completed
application and public comment, the Board shall render its decision on the
application at a public meeting.
   (G)   Before making its decision on an application, the Board shall make the
following determinations:
      (1)   The construction and operation of the facility will not pose an
unreasonable health or environmental risk to the surrounding locality;
      (2)   The applicant has taken or consented to take any and all reasonable
measures to comply with applicable federal, state and local regulations,
ordinances and statutes;
      (3)   The applicant’s plan represents the best available technology for
handling the wastes for which the applicant will be permitted and that the
applicant has demonstrated that it will employ the best management practices in
handling the wastes at the proposed facility; and
      (4)   The applicant has a valid state permit for the proposed facility.
   (H)   A permit shall become invalid if construction has not begun within 12
months of approval. If a permit becomes invalid, it may be re-submitted
following the procedure of §
51.07 and this section.
(Ord. 1985-9, passed 1-6-1986) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.09 CONDITIONS OF THE PERMIT.
   (A)   The Board may specify conditions on granting a permit, as will, in its
opinion, assure that the facility in its proposed location will meet the
findings required in §
51.08(G). All such specified conditions shall be entered in the minutes of the
meeting at which the permit request is approved. All specified conditions of
this section shall run with the permit and shall also be binding on the
original applicants, their heirs, successors and assigns. Any noncompliance
with the specified conditions constitutes violation of this chapter and may
invalidate the permit.
   (B)   A waste disposal facility shall have a maximum working face (area
without final cover) of five acres, and the owner shall post a performance bond
of $10,000 for each acre of working face to secure the proper closure of each
area of the landfill. The Board shall, as a condition for issuance of the
permit, require adequate liability insurance or other security for the
protection of persons or property. The amount of liability insurance shall be a
minimum of $1,000,000. In the event that the Board orders other security, the
applicant shall be required to provide alternate security in the form of an
escrow account to be administered by the County Auditor. The security shall be
in the amount of $0.15 per cubic yard of waste. This account shall accumulate
to the equivalent amount of liability insurance specified by the Board. Any
interest earned upon said account shall be added to said account but shall not
apply to computation of security. Applicants shall report his or her volume
quarterly and shall make his or her books and records concerning volume
available to the Board upon reasonable notice. In the event that it is
determined that damages have occurred, the escrow agent shall pay damages as
ordered. The insurance or escrow account shall remain in effect for ten years
after the closure of the waste facility.
   (C)   Under no circumstances shall hazardous or special wastes be accepted
at a waste disposal facility unless authorized in writing by the Board.
   (D)   It shall be a matter of public record that a property is, or has been,
a waste facility. The Recorder shall be directed to place notations to that
effect on all deeds, grants, indexes, plats and other relevant documents.
(Ord. 1985-9, passed 1-6-1986) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.10 HAZARDOUS WASTE HANDLER PERMIT.
   (A)   All persons, companies or facilities that generate or handle hazardous
or radioactive wastes shall be required to obtain a permit from the County
Health Department, except as specified herein:
      (1)   Generators or handlers of hazardous or radioactive wastes in a
quantity of less than 100 kilograms per month are not required to obtain a
permit; and
      (2)   Any transporter carrying hazardous waste originating outside of or
not destined to be unloaded in the county is exempt from this chapter,
providing the following conditions are fulfilled:
         (a)   The hazardous material does not remain in the county for a
period longer than 24 hours;
         (b)   The transporter is in compliance with the storage standards in
40 C.F.R. parts 264 and 265;
         (c)   The permit requirements of 40 C.F.R. part 122; and
         (d)   There is no discharge of any material whether it be accidental
or otherwise.
   (B)   The hazardous waste handler permit shall specify what hazardous waste
materials are generated or handled, how they are disposed of and appropriate
safety measures available at the facility.
   (C)   The Health Department may issue a permit to the applicant based upon
its determination that the applicant is complying with appropriate state and
federal regulations. If the Department denies a permit, the applicant may
appeal to the Board for approval of the permit.
   (D)   The hazardous waste handler permit shall be issued for a specific
person or business, specific wastes and shall not carry over to subsequent
operators or owners.
   (E)   Failure to obtain a hazardous waste handler permit shall be considered
a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the provisions of §
51.13.
   (F)   The Health Department shall provide compliance with this section as
provided for in §
51.11.
(Ord. 1985-9, passed 1-6-1986) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.11 MONITORING AND SAFETY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to supplement and complete the
monitoring and safety activities of the federal and state governments. The
County Commissioners recognize the primary responsibility of the federal and
state governments in this area; however, they also recognize that
appropriations and manpower to fulfill this responsibility is therefore
necessary and lawful. The duties described herein shall begin upon approval of
a permit application.
   (B)   Monitoring and safety duties. The Health Board may undertake the
following monitoring and safety duties:
      (1)   To monitor the air, surface water and groundwater during the
operation of facilities;
      (2)   To monitor soil, plant, microbial, viral and animal samples during
the operation of facilities;
      (3)   To conduct human health surveys and monitoring in the area around
the facilities, including statistical surveys, blood samples and other surveys
which may be necessary to determine the effect of exposure to help trace any
accidental discharges of hazardous or radioactive waste;
      (4)   To verify the content of shipments and storage of hazardous and/or
radioactive waste against shipping manifests and other records;
      (5)   To inspect the interiors of structures located on the waste
facility site(s) for hazardous, unhealthy or otherwise unlawful conditions;
      (6)   To inspect and take samples within the site boundaries;
      (7)   To verify, by laboratory analysis, that samples taken by facility
operators are in fact what they are claimed to be, and to check the accuracy of
any laboratory facilities;
      (8)   To prepare an emergency response plan or request such a plan from
another agency; and
      (9)   To perform such other duties as they may find necessary from time
to time to safeguard the public health and welfare.
   (C)   Authorization of Health Department. In order to carry out the duties
specified in §
51.10(B), the Health Department is authorized to do the following.
      (1)   Immediately upon issuance of the first permit in the county, and
upon approval at that time by the County Board of Commissioners, the Health
Department may hire or designate an individual or individuals trained to
identify unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise hazardous conditions in waste facility
structures. This Inspector is charged with making periodic inspections for such
unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise hazardous and unlawful conditions during the
construction and operation of any and all waste management facilities in the
county. The Inspector may make unannounced inspections.
      (2)   The Health Department may hire or designate persons capable of
performing a background health study on the people of the county and of
outlining before the Board a plan for monitoring the people of the county in
order that health effects of any waste management facility in the county could
be detected.
      (3)   No suspected waste may be handled, treated or disposed of on-site
until the laboratory analysis is complete, and the chemist verifies in writing
to the site manager that the shipment may be further handled.
      (4)   The Inspector, with the approval of the Board of Health, may hire
specialists to analyze samples and to assist in the monitoring of the storage
and disposal of wastes.
      (5)   The Health Department is authorized to require from the facility
operator a list of trained emergency personnel at the facility, particularly
persons trained in emergency response to spills or discharges of hazardous
wastes.
   (D)   Other duties. The Board may request responsible officials of the
county to undertake such other monitoring and safety actions as may he or she
required by this and other sections of this chapter.
   (E)   Fees. The County Commissioners may, by regulation, adopt schedules of
fees for the reimbursement of monitoring and inspection services in accordance
with this chapter; however, any fees shall not exceed the actual cost of said
services.
(Ord. 1985-9, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 51.12 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The Board is hereby authorized to determine the hours of operation of any
facility located in the county.
(Ord. 1985-9, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 51.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Generally. Pursuant to the power vested in the County Commissioners by
I.C. 36-1 et seq., the county, through its responsible officers, shall enforce
the provisions of this chapter to ensure and safeguard the public health,
safety and welfare.
   (B)   Injunction. The county may seek injunctions in the appropriate court
of competent jurisdiction, when the operation of a waste facility is, in the
judgment of the Board, creating an imminent hazard to the health, safety and
welfare of the public. The county may also seek any appropriate equitable
relief that it deems necessary to ensure the public health and welfare.
   (C)   Permit revocation.
      (1)   For any facility operator who has committed a violation of this
chapter, or for whom the continued operation of the facility poses an
unreasonable hazard to the health and welfare of the public, the Board may
publicly announce its intention to consider revocation of its permit. The
facility operator may request a hearing and the Board shall grant such a
hearing within ten days of the decision. The facility operator may present
evidence to the Board in mitigation, to demonstrate subsequent remedial action
and the like. If the Board decides that the permit be revoked, it shall so
revoke the permit.
      (2)   The Board may continue the permit upon finding that:
         (a)   The facility operator has made a good faith effort to comply
with the permit and to remedy violations;
         (b)   Reinstatement of the permit would not endanger the public health
and welfare; and
         (c)   The facility operator has proposed a plan to remedy any other
hazardous conditions on the facility site as expeditiously as possible.
(Ord. 1985-9, passed 1-6-1986)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any noncompliance with conditions of a county permit or operation of a
facility without a permit, any noncompliance with the procedural requirements
of this chapter, or refusal to permit county officials designated under this
chapter to enter buildings, structures, enclosed areas or other areas in the
performance of their lawful duties, any refusal to pay fees as provided for by
this chapter, any failure or refusal to provide information or apply for
amendment to permit(s) as may be required by this chapter upon proper notice,
shall be a violation of this chapter pursuant to I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10). A
judgment of up to $10,000 may be entered for a violation of this chapter. In
addition, pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-2, the Board may enter on the real estate
with the offending facility and ensure compliance with this chapter; with the
costs of doing so to be a lien against the real property.
   (B)   Each day of willful violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 1985-9, passed 1-6-1986)
CHAPTER 52: WATER WELLS AND OTHER FACILITIES
Section
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Well permitting and location
   
52.03   Well testing
   
52.04   Well maintenance and repair
   
52.05   Well abandonment
   
52.06   Notifications
   
52.07   Enforcement
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AQUIFER. A water-bearing formation or stratum.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The County Board of Health.
   CASING. Steel or wrought iron pipe, type K copper or other material approved
by the Health Officer, to exclude unwanted solids or liquids from the interior
of the well.
   FLUSHING. The act of causing a rapid flow of water from a well by pumping,
bailing or similar operation.
   GROUNDWATER. Any water below the surface of the ground within the
interstices of the rock and soil. This includes water in both the unsaturated
near-surface soils and the underlying saturated soils and rock.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The County Health Department.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The County Health Officer or a duly authorized
representative.
   ORDINANCE. An Ordinance Regulating Well Placement, Maintenance and Testing
in Marshall County, Indiana.
   PERSON. Any individual, trust, joint stock company, federal agency,
corporation (including a government corporation), limited liability company,
partnership, co-partnership, company, estate, municipal corporation, city,
school city, town, school town, school district, school corporation, county,
state agency, association, state, commission, political subdivision of a state,
any interstate entity or any other legal entity or their legal representative.
   POLLUTION. Such contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical
or biological properties of water as to render such water harmful, detrimental
or injurious to public health or safety.
   POTABLE WATER. Water suitable for drinking or culinary purposes in its
natural state or through conditioning.
   POTABLE WATER SYSTEM. The well and distribution system of a residential or
commercial water system used or intended for use for drinking or culinary
purposes.
   PRIMARY POINT OF USE. The most commonly used source(s) of drinking water.
For residences, the PRIMARY POINT OF USE is the kitchen faucet.
   PROPERTY. A single continuous property within the county.
   PUBLIC DRINKING WATER SYSTEM. A drinking water well that is under the
regulation of the State Department of Environmental Management
   PUMP INSTALLER. Any individual, partnership, firm or corporation that
installs a pump in a well or opens the well to service a pump.
   RESIDENTIAL WELL. Any well drilled for the use of one or two dwelling units.
   WATER TABLE. The top surface or upper limit of the groundwater zone.
   WELL. Any excavation, whether drilled, bored, driven, jetted or dug for the
purpose of obtaining water from the ground or returning water to the ground or
for the purpose of testing the quantity or quality of such water or for
lowering (either temporarily or permanently) the groundwater level or water
table.
   WELL DRILLER. Any individual, partnership, firm or corporation that produces
or contracts to construct a well.
   WELL DRILLING. Any operation which produces a well.
   WELL OWNER. The legal owner of the real estate containing a well site.
   WELL SEAL. An approved removable arrangement or device used to cap a well or
to establish and maintain a watertight junction between the casing or curbing
of a well and the piping or equipment installed therein, so as to prevent
unwanted water or other contaminating material from entering the well at the
upper terminal.
   WELL VENT. An opening or outlet at the upper end of the well casing to allow
equalization of air pressure in the well.
(Ord. 2017-12, passed 8-7-2017)
§ 52.02 WELL PERMITTING AND LOCATION.
   (A)   Permit requirements.
      (1)   Before commencement of construction of a well, a well owner shall
obtain a written permit signed by the Health Officer, and the permit shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises prior to the commencement of work
thereunder.
      (2)   The application for such permit shall be made on a form provided by
the County Health Department, which applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the Health Officer.
      (3)   A permit fee in accordance with the most updated fee ordinance
shall be paid to the Health Department at the time the application is filed.
The Health Department shall apply a portion of the permit fee for the use and
purpose of laboratory expenses in processing the application.
      (4)   Such permit shall be void if the installation is not completed in
two years.
      (5)   In emergency situations, the well driller may drill the well prior
to obtaining his or her permit, but the water from such well shall not be used
for human consumption until the application for the permit has been filed,
permit secured and well inspected and approved. In such emergency situations,
the applicant for the well permit shall notify the Health Officer by telephone
of the pending well installation prior to such installation. The well permit
shall be obtained within 24 hours of the regularly scheduled work day after the
start of the emergency installation.
      (6)   The installer shall not commence work on the private well until the
owner has provided a copy of the permit to the installer.
   (B)   Separation distances.
      (1)   The separation distances as followed:
Sources of Contamination Distance
Sources of Contamination                                             Distance
A well must be cased to a depth of at least 25 feet below the natural ground
surface*
Independent clear water drain; septic system perimeter drain;
rainwater downspout; cistern; hydrant drain; or building foundation  10 feet
drain
Pit privy (a privy that has brick-, block-, or stone-lined pit
walls); manure pile; manure holding tank; silage pit; dry well;      100 feet
seepage pit or trench; or cesspool
Property lines**                                                     50 feet
Sanitary or storm sewer not constructed of waterworks grade ductile  50 feet
iron, cast iron or PVC pipe with mechanical or push-on joints
Septage or treated sludge disposal area; wastewater absorption;
storage, retention or treatment pond; ridge and furrow waste         500 feet
disposal site; or spray irrigation waste disposal site
Stable; animal bam or feeding pen; milk house; livestock run; or     50 feet
silo
Stream; lake or pond shoreline; below-ground swimming pool; open
ditch or other waterway; sanitary or storm sewer constructed of      25 feet
waterworks grade ductile iron, cast iron or PVC pipe with mechanical
or push-on joints
Surface or subsurface stored chemicals such as gasoline, diesel      100 feet
fuel, home heating oil, fertilizer, pesticides and the like
Uncovered salt storage                                               1,500 feet
Watertight grease basin; septic tank; wastewater holding tank;
absorption field; all pipes and tanks associated with an on-site
sewage system that holds or conveys sewage; constructed wetland;     50 feet
sewage lift station; or sanitary vault privy (a privy that utilizes
a solid wall wastewater holding tank)
*If the well casing terminates less than 25 feet from below natural grade, or
if the well penetrates crevices or highly porous formations, at a minimum, the
distances listed in above table should be doubled
**For properties subdivided prior to the passing of this chapter, the
separation distance to property lines shall be 15 feet
 
      (2)   The public drinking water system shall conform to the separation
distances as prescribed by the State Department of Environmental Management.
   (C)   Process.
      (1)   The installer shall inform the Health Department at least 48 hours
prior to the installation of any new well.
      (2)   No water can be used for human consumption after the installation
of a well until the Health Department has sampled same and determined it to be
fit for human consumption.
      (3)   All well construction must be in accordance with the State
Department of Natural Resources rule, 312 I.A.C. 13 et seq.
      (4)   The installer shall, 30 days after the completion of the
installation of the new water well, provide to the Health Department and the
owner of the property a copy of the well record submitted to the State
Department of Natural Resources.
   (D)   Contamination.
      (1)   The use of a well for disposal of sewage or other material which
may pollute the potable underground water is prohibited.
      (2)   If a well is used for the purpose of returning uncontaminated water
to the ground, consideration shall extend to thermal as well as bacterial
factors and the plans for the well that is to be so used must be submitted to
and be approved by the Health Officer, the State Board of Health and the
Division of Water of the Department of Natural Resources of the state.
   (E)   Installer requirements.
      (1)   All well drillers and installers shall be in compliance with 312
I.A.C. 13.
      (2)   All installers shall be registered and bonded with the county.
(Ord. 2017-12, passed 8-7-2017) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 WELL TESTING.
   (A)   Requirements.
      (1)   Well water testing shall be required for any well installation and
maintenance/repair.
      (2)   Duplicate copies of laboratory test results shall be provided to
the owner and the Health Department. The laboratory shall include the State
Environmental Protection Agency standards so that it is clear to the layperson
whether the water meets standards.
   (B)   Water testing.
      (1)   The Health Department shall submit to a certified laboratory a
sample of the water from the new or repaired residential well for a laboratory
analysis of the following constituents:
         (a)   Total Coliforms (TC);
         (b)   E. coli (Only to be tested if well comes back positive for TC);
         (c)   Nitrates; and
         (d)   Arsenic (newly driven wells only);
      (2)   The permitting fee for a new well shall include the cost of this
initial testing. Further testing that may be required will be the
responsibility of the well owner.
   (C)   Fees. Fees for well testing shall be included in the permitting fees.
Permitting fees will be in accordance with the most recent County Health
Department Fee Ordinance Schedule.
   (D)   State and federal limits. All wells shall be required to be in
compliance with all standards of the state and the Environmental Protection
Agency for wells and drinking water.
   (E)   Disinfection. To prevent contamination of the well or aquifer, it is
desirable to maintain a chlorine residual of 200 parts per million or similar
antibacterial chemicals in the well hole all during the drilling process. Under
these conditions the well need not be disinfected until the pump is set. Every
new, modified or reconditioned water source, including pumping equipment and
gravel used in gravel wall wells, shall be disinfected before being placed in
service for general use. Such treatment shall be performed both when the well
work is finished and when pump is installed or reinstalled. If there is no
significant lapse of time between the two operations, only the latter
disinfection will be required. The casing pipe shall be thoroughly swabbed to
remove oil, grease and joint dope, using alkaline if necessary to obtain clean
metal surfaces. The well or other groundwater development equipment, including
the pumping equipment and gravel used a gravel well construction shall be
disinfected with a solution containing enough chlorine to leave a residual or
25 parts per million in the well after a period of at least 24 hours.
   (F)   Approval required. The water from a new well shall not be used for
human consumption until such time as the well has been approved by the Health
Officer and the water analysis is acceptable to the Health Officer.
   (G)   Sampling faucets. In all pressure water systems provisions shall be
made for collection of water samples by the installation of a smooth bore
sampling faucet on the discharge side of and as close as possible to the pump
prior to the bladder tank. Sampling faucets shall be turned down position.
(Ord. 2017-12, passed 8-7-2017)
§ 52.04 WELL MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
   (A)   After well maintenance wherein the water quality has been compromised
or after the well seal of an existing well has been broken, or a private well
is drilled to replace the existing well, the well shall be disinfected by the
installer pursuant to the procedures set forth in 312 I.A.C. 13-9-1. The upper
terminal of a well located in a well pit that is not properly drained to the
ground surface in the immediate area or is subject to flooding shall be deemed
buried for the purposes of this section. If the well seal is broken, a pit less
adapter shall be installed.
   (B)   The installer shall notify the Health Department, whenever possible,
24 hours prior to the maintenance of any well.
   (C)   The owner shall be responsible for obtaining a permit for maintenance
of the well. The professional working on the well shall inform the owner of
this responsibility.
   (D)   Fees for well maintenance shall be in accordance with the most updated
fee ordinance.
   (E)   Fees for well maintenance shall be submitted along with the
application supplied by the installer.
   (F)   There shall be no human consumption of any water serviced from a
private well until such time as the Health Department has determined that the
water is safe for human consumption.
   (G)   The owner shall submit an application for maintenance of a private
well on the form provided by the Health Department.
   (H)   The installer shall not commence work on the private well until the
owner has provided a copy of the permit to the installer. An emergency repair
permit can be issued after the fact, a permit will need to be obtained within
48 hours of the repair.
   (I)   The Health Department shall be permitted to inspect a private water
well maintenance at any time.
   (J)   The Health Department shall submit a sample of water after maintenance
of the water well for analysis at a laboratory to determine if the bacterial
content is satisfactory. The permitting fee for well maintenance shall include
the cost of this initial testing. Further testing that may be required will be
the responsibility of the owner.
   (K)   Installers who drills or perform maintenance on private water wells
shall be registered with the County Health Department and be a licensed plumber
or well driller.
(Ord. 2017-12, passed 8-7-2017)
§ 52.05 WELL ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   A well to be temporarily abandoned, but which the owner intends to
equip and use at some future time, shall be temporarily sealed at the surface
by a welded or threaded cap or in the case of a dug well in a manner
satisfactory to the Health Officer.
   (B)   A well shall be properly abandoned if the well has not been in service
for two years. Proper abandonment is plugging the well. The following methods
apply.
      (1)   Cement and bentonite slurries shall be pumped into place in a
continuous operation with a grout pipe introducing the plugging material at the
bottom of the well and moving the pipe progressively upward as the well is
filled.
      (2)   Plugging materials other than neat cement or bentonite shiny shall
be installed in a manner to prevent bridging of the well or borehole. The well
or borehole shall be measured periodically throughout the plugging process to
ensure that bridging does not occur.
      (3)   The following procedures apply.
         (a)   An abandoned well shall be disconnected from the water system.
Any substance that may interfere with plugging shall be removed, if
practicable.
         (b)   A well shall be chlorinated before abandonment as provided in
312 I.A.C. 13-9-1.
   (C)   Dewatering wells, temporary service wells, construction water wells,
process wells and/or other structures for withdrawing groundwater or lowering
of water levels or water tables regardless of location, length of intended
service or original use or intent, shall be constructed to the identical
standards and minimums as water supply wells contemplated by this chapter.
   (D)   The abandonment of dewatering wells, construction wells and temporary
wells shall be accomplished via the identical procedure prescribed herein for
permanent abandonment.
(Ord. 2017-12, passed 8-7-2017)
§ 52.06 NOTIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Installation. The well driller shall supply the Health Officer, within
30 days after drilling the well, with an accurate record of the construction
details of the well including a log of the soil formations and deeper material
in which the hole is drilled, results of pumping tests and such other
information that may be requested. The driller shall furnish the owner a
duplicate copy of this information as well as provide copies of the well record
to the Division of Water of the State Department of Natural Resources as
required by state statute.
   (B)   Abandonment. The well driller or owner shall supply the Health
Officer, within 30 days after the well is properly abandoned, a copy of the
well abandonment log submitted to the State Department of Natural Resources.
   (C)   Variances.
      (1)   When a property owner or well driller cannot meet a provision of
this chapter, they may apply for a variance on a form provided by the County
Health Department. The variance request must include the description of what
portion of this chapter cannot be met, a rationale of why it cannot be met and
a proposed alternative to the portion of this chapter that cannot be met.
      (2)   The owner shall supply the Health Officer, within 30 days after the
variance is issued, with all relevant variance details.
(Ord. 2017-12, passed 8-7-2017)
§ 52.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Health Officer or designee, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties at proper times
for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing
necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Whenever the Health Officer determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
chapter, he or she shall give notice to such alleged violation to the person or
persons responsible therefor, and to any known agent of such person, as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a statement of reasons why it is being issued;
      (3)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
      (4)   Be served upon the owner or his or her agent, or the occupant, as
the case may require; provided, that such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is
served upon him or her personally, or if a copy thereof is sent by certified
mail to his or her last known address, or if a copy thereof is posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice, or if he or
she is served with such notice by any other method authorized or required under
the laws of this state; and
      (5)   Contain an outline or remedial action, which if taken, will affect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Any person affected by any such notice issued by the Health Officer
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Health
Officer; provided, that such person shall file in the office of the latter
within ten days after service of the notice, a written petition requesting such
hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. Upon
receipt of such petition, the Health Officer or his or her designated
representative shall arrange a time and place for such hearing and shall give
the petitioner written notice thereof. Such hearing shall be held as soon as
practicable after the receipt of request therefor. At such hearing, the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show just cause why
such notice should not be complied with.
   (D)   After such hearing, the Health Officer shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice, depending upon his or her findings as to whether the
provisions of this chapter have been complied with. If the Health Officer shall
sustain or modify such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice
served pursuant to division (B)(4) above shall automatically become an order if
a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Health
Officer within the ten days after such notice is served. After a hearing in the
case of any notice suspending any permit required by this chapter, when such
notice has been sustained by the Health Officer, the permit shall be deemed to
have been revoked. Any such permit which has been suspended by a notice shall
be deemed to be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in
the office of the Health Officer within ten days after such notice is served.
   (E)   Whenever the Health Officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health may, without notice or
hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and
requiring that such action be taken as he or she deems necessary to meet the
emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such order
shall be effective immediately, but upon petition to the Health Officer shall
be afforded a hearing as soon as possible, in the manner provided in division
(C) above. After such hearing, depending upon the finding as to whether the
provisions of this chapter have been complied with, the Health Officer shall
continue such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
(Ord. 2017-12, passed 8-7-2017)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall
be served by the Health Officer with a written order stating the nature of the
violation and providing a time limit for satisfactory correction thereof.
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation of this chapter beyond the
time limit provided shall be liable of a separate offense punishable by fine.
On a finding of liability, the violator shall be punished for the first offense
by a penalty of not more than $500; for the second offense by a penalty of not
more than $1,000; and for the third and each subsequent offense by a penalty to
be determined by the County Health Board but not to exceed $5,000 per offense,
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter could be
held liable to the county for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by reason
of such violation.
   (D)   In addition to the penalties defined in this section, the Health
Officer may also institute a suit for mandatory injunction in the County
Circuit Court to restrain any individual, corporation or governmental unit from
violating the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-12, passed 8-7-2017)
CHAPTER 53: SEWER
Section
   
53.01   Authority
   
53.02   Definitions
   
53.03   Required on-site sewage system or connection to sanitary sewer
   
53.04   Installer registration
   
53.05   Sewage holding tanks
   
53.06   General requirements for on-site sewage systems
   
53.07   Construction permits
   
53.08   Connection or reconnection to an existing on-site sewage system
   
53.09   Enforcement
   
53.10   Procedure for appeal
   
53.11   Remedies
   
53.12   Fee schedule
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 AUTHORITY.
   The County Health Department is hereby authorized to issue residential and
commercial on-site sewage system permits, collect permit fees and penalties,
perform inspections, hold hearings, and order or otherwise compel correction of
violations of this chapter, and is otherwise authorized to perform all actions
necessary for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-20, passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2024-24, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 53.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION, NEW.
      (1)   Construction of a new home, residential outbuilding, or commercial
facility where there previously was no home, outbuilding, or commercial
facility; or
      (2)   Replacing, rebuilding, or remodeling an existing home, residential
outbuilding, or commercial facility when the design daily flow of the new
structure(s) exceeds what was previously at the site.
      (3)   Best judgment, as described in Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3 for replacement
of failed soil absorption systems, shall not be used for new construction.
   CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR/REPLACEMENT. Repair or replacement of a residential on-
site sewage system for an existing home, residential outbuilding, or commercial
facility or the rebuilding or remodeling of an existing home, residential
outbuilding, or commercial facility without an increase in the design daily
flow of the project. In accordance with Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3, the best judgment
of the County Health Department may be used, when necessary and appropriate,
for the repair or replacement of a failing residential on-site sewage system.
   INSTALLER. Any individual who performs any work in furtherance of
construction, installation, replacement, alteration, repair, or abandonment of
any residential or commercial on-site sewage system in the county.
   INVOLUNTARY. A need to modify or improve a dwelling, residential
outbuilding, or commercial facility due to factors outside of the owner's
control, such as destruction by wind, fire, flood, or other natural disaster,
or due to condemnation of a dwelling.
   ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEM MALFUNCTION OR MALFUNCTION. A residential or
commercial on-site sewage system component that is not functioning in
accordance with this chapter or per manufacturers' requirements. On-site sewage
system malfunction does not have to meet the definition of on-site sewage
system failure but may also be a failure. Malfunction may include, but is not
limited to, one or more of the following:
      (1)   The backup of sewage into an upstream on-site sewage system
component;
      (2)   The liquid level in a septic tank consistently above the invert of
the septic tank outlet;
      (3)   An outlet filter that is plugged sufficiently to cause backup in
the septic tank;
      (4)   The liquid level in a dosing tank above the invert of the dosing
tank inlet;
      (5)   The liquid level in a treatment unit above that recommended by the
manufacturer;
      (6)   The liquid level in a distribution box consistently above the
invert of the outlets or a distribution box that does not provide equal
distribution;
      (7)   Structural failure of a septic tank, dosing tank, treatment unit,
distribution box or other required component;
      (8)   Electrical failure of a float, an effluent pump, alarm, or other
electrical component of an on-site sewage system; or
      (9)   Removal of an outlet filter, an effluent pump, or any other system
component if that outlet filter, pump, or component was required in the
construction or operating permit.
   SITE SURVEY. An inspection of a property conducted by the County Health
Department prior to the issuance of a construction permit to verify the
proposed or repair/replacement residential on-site sewage system or commercial
on-site sewage system meets requirements in Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3 or Rule 410 IAC
6-10.1. Inspection is conducted on-site with the property owner's registered
on-site sewage system installer. At the discretion of the Department, a site
survey may not be required on some repairs.
   VOLUNTARY. An owner's intentional or deliberate action to construct, modify
or improve a dwelling or residential outbuilding or increase the design daily
flow of a structure.
(Ord. 2023-20, passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2024-24, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 53.03 REQUIRED ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEM OR CONNECTION TO SANITARY SEWER.
   (A)   All persons owning, leasing, or otherwise occupying property that has
a residence, residential outbuilding or commercial facility with plumbing not
connected to sanitary sewer shall comply with the requirements of Rules 410 IAC
6-8.3 et seq., 410 IAC 6-10.1 et seq., and/or Bulletin S.E. 11, as applicable,
and the provisions of this chapter for an on-site sewage system.
   (B)   In the event of a residential or commercial on-site sewage system
failure the residence, residential outbuilding, or commercial facility shall be
required to make a direct connection to sanitary sewer, if the sanitary sewer
is available within 300 feet of the affected property line and is available for
connection at a construction cost and connection fee estimated not to exceed
150% of the cost estimated for installing an on-site sewage system to serve the
residence, residential outbuilding or commercial facility.
(Ord. 2023-20, passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2024-24, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 53.04 INSTALLER REGISTRATION.
   (A)   All on-site sewage system installers in the county shall abide by all
associated requirements in state statutes, rules, and ordinances regarding on-
site sewage systems.
   (B)   An installer must register with the County Health Department if they
wish to install, replace, alter, repair, or abandon any residential or
commercial on-site sewage system in the county. Registration requires:
      (1)   Applying to the County Health Department for registration on a form
provided by the Department;
      (2)   Paying the appropriate registration fee as required in the County
Health Department fee ordinance; and
      (3)   Certifying by:
         (a)   Passing an examination offered by the County Health Department
or another entity approved by the County Health Department; or
         (b)   Providing proof of:
            1.   Current, valid registration in another Indiana County;
            2.   A certificate being issued from the Indiana On-site Wastewater
Professional Association (IOWPA) for the type of system(s) to be installed; and
            3.   Membership in good standing with IOWPA.
   (C)   Registration is valid from January 1 to December 31 of the same year
and must be renewed annually. Proof of continued registration in another county
and/or certification is required for renewal of registration.
   (D)   Certification must be maintained throughout the period of
registration. A lapse of certification will render the registration with the
County Health Department invalid.
   (E)   A certification examination will be offered no less than monthly by
the County Health Department.
      (1)   An examination fee as required in the County Health Department fee
ordinance will be due prior to examination.
      (2)   The test will consist of 90 questions all of which will be true/
false or multiple choice.
      (3)   A score of 80% or above is considered passing.
      (4)   A retest will be allowed for anyone failing the test no more
frequently than once per week.
   (F)   A registered installer must be on-site during installation, repair,
replacement, alteration, modification, or system abandonment and shall be
deemed responsible for the work done.
   (G)   A lapse of certification and/or registration or repeated violation of
any state statute, rules, or this chapter pertaining to on-site sewage systems
may result in revocation of registration or denial of registration renewal. Any
registration revocation or denial of registration renewal may be appealed to
the County Board of Health.
      (1)   The period of revocation shall be no less than 90 days, or a time
period deemed appropriate by the County Health Officer; and
      (2)   The registered individual shall be advised in writing for the basis
of the revocation, the right and procedure for appeal and the opportunity for a
hearing.
(Ord. 2023-20, passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2024-24, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 53.05 SEWAGE HOLDING TANKS.
   (A)   A sewage holding tank is an alternative method of sewage disposal in
accordance with I.C. 16-41-25-9.
   (B)   An application for a sewage holding tank must be filed by the property
owner or property owner's agent including:
      (1)   An application form provided by the County Health Department;
      (2)   A construction plan of sufficient clarity to show compliance with
this chapter;
      (3)   A copy of a written contract with an operator of a septage
management vehicle providing for the removal of septage at regular intervals;
      (4)   A written statement, signed by the property owner, indicating that
copies of all receipts and other records as requested be submitted to the local
health department within 30 days of service; and
      (5)   For commercial sites where IDOH has completed plan review and
approval for a commercial holding tank, a copy of the written approval from
IDOH.
   (C)   All sewage holding tanks shall:
      (1)   Have a minimum capacity of:
         (a)   For holding tanks that are permitted as septic and/or dosing
tanks and planned to precede a soil absorption field, the minimum capacity as
determined by Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3 or Rule 410 IAC 6-10.1 for septic and/or
dosing tanks.
         (b)   For permanent holding tanks, the greater of:
            1.   One thousand gallons; or
            2.   At least three times the design daily flow of the home or
commercial structure as determined by Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3 or Rule 410 IAC 6-
10.1.
      (2)   Have a capacity of no more than 10,000 gallons.
   (D)   A sewage holding tank shall meet all separation distances required for
septic tanks in Rules 410 IAC 6-8.3 and 410 IAC 6-10.1.
   (E)   A sewage holding tank shall meet all construction requirements of
septic tanks in Rules 410 IAC 6-8.3 and 410 IAC 6-10.1.
   (F)   All sewage holding tanks shall have at least one riser to the surface
for ease in pumping the tank. A secondary childproof plug shall be installed
under any riser to the surface.
   (G)   A construction permit issued by the County Health Department is
required prior to the installation of the holding tank or sewer.
   (H)   A sewer, meeting the requirements for a residential sewer in Rule 410
IAC 6-8.3 or the requirements for a building sewer in Rule 410 IAC 6-10.1 shall
be used to make a direct connection between the plumbing of the structure and
the holding tank.
   (I)   All sewage holding tanks installed in the county shall have:
      (1)   An installation inspection to confirm proper installation and to
confirm the outlet of the last tank has been appropriately sealed prior to
backfilling; and
      (2)   The alarm wired in and verified operational.
   (J)   All holding tanks shall be required to have an operating permit issued
by the County Health Department.
      (1)   The construction permit issued for the installation of the holding
tank shall also serve as the operating permit for the first two years of
service.
      (2)   An operating permit for a sewage holding tank shall be valid for a
period of two years from the date of issuance.
      (3)   Prior to operating permit renewal, a registered installer must
inspect the holding tank(s) for verification of proper operation of the tank
and alarm system. An inspection report must be provided to the County Health
Department prior to renewal.
      (4)   An operating permit shall be renewed prior to, or within ten days
of, expiration.
      (5)   An operating permit fee as stated in the County Health Department
fee ordinance shall be due at the time of operating permit renewal.
   (K)   All receipts from pumping and maintenance of a sewage holding tank and
other documents for repair or modification of a sewage holding tank need to be
submitted to the County Health Department within 30 days of the service
provided.
   (L)   An operating permit not renewed within 30 days of expiration, or a
sewage holding tank not operated in a safe and sanitary manner, including
receipts and other paperwork not submitted as required, is a violation of this
chapter and may be subject to penalty as described in §
53.99, permit revocation, and/or denial of operating permit renewal.
   (M)   In the event that a sewage holding tank is not operated in a safe and
sanitary manner and in accordance with I.C. 16-41-25-9 and this chapter, the
Health Department may require the residence, residential outbuilding, or
commercial facility to:
      (1)   Connect to sanitary sewer if the sanitary sewer is available within
300 feet of the affected property line and is available for connection at a
construction cost and connection fee estimated not to exceed 150% of the cost
estimated for installing an on-site sewage system to serve the residence,
residential outbuilding or commercial facility; and
      (2)   Install an on-site sewage system with a soil absorption field in
compliance with Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3 or Rule 410 IAC 6-10.1 or connect to an on-
site sewage system that has not failed.
   (N)   Upon connection to an approved soil absorption field, as part of a
full on-site sewage system, or sanitary sewer, the sewage holding tank shall be
abandoned in accordance with the rules unless it will be converted for use as a
septic tank or a dosing tank in an on-site sewage system.
(Ord. 2023-20, passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2024-24, passed 12-16-2024) Penalty, see
§
53.99
§ 53.06 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   An on-site sewage system construction permit issued by the County
Health Department shall be obtained prior to the installation of any component
of an on-site sewage system or prior to the repair, replacement, alteration, or
modification of any component of an on-site sewage system.
   (B)   On-site sewage system soil evaluation.
      (1)   An on-site soil evaluation is required, as described in Rule 410
IAC 6-8.3 or Rule 410 IAC 6-10.1, prior to permit issuance for all residential
and commercial sites where a soil absorption field is to be installed,
expanded, or replaced and as needed for repairs.
      (2)   A minimum of three profile evaluations are required to be evaluated
in the area of the soil absorption field. The soil profile evaluations may be
conducted using three soil borings, three soil pits, or any combination of soil
borings and soil pits. The County Health Department may request additional soil
borings or soil pits if deemed necessary by the County Health Officer.
      (3)   If the on-site soil evaluation report created from the evaluation
of the soil profile is to be used for obtaining an on-site sewage system
construction permit, the report must be signed by the professional soil
scientist and submitted directly to the County Health Department by the soil
scientist.
   (C)   All lots platted after the effective date of this chapter that will
utilize an on-site sewage system shall consist of at least one acre of land.
   (D)   All distribution boxes shall be stabilized so as to prevent movement
during installation and operation.
(Ord. 2023-20, passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2024-24, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 53.07 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a construction permit, the following
stipulations must be met:
      (1)   A site survey inspection must be conducted by the Department. The
inspection will take place on-site at the property and markings (i.e., flags,
stakes) will be required to identify components of the on-site sewage system
including, but not limited to the following: sewer/effluent lines, septic/dose
tank, soil absorption system, drain, or other components as deemed necessary
and applicable to the site.
      (2)   Floor plan showing all bedroom(s), bedroom equivalent(s), and
closets for the property where new construction or repair/replacement on-site
sewage system is being proposed, must be submitted to the Department. Number of
bedroom(s), bedroom equivalent(s) included in the floor plan must correlate
with what is listed on the application.
   (B)   A construction permit for a new construction, repair, or replacement
on-site sewage system shall become null and void after two years from the date
such permit is issued, unless construction/operation or repair/operation shall
be started before the expiration date and completed within 180 days after such
expiration date.
(Ord. 2023-20, passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2024-24, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 53.08 CONNECTION OR RECONNECTION TO AN EXISTING ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   An existing residential or commercial on-site sewage system may be
considered for connection or reconnection to a new or replacement dwelling,
residential outbuilding, or commercial facility if:
      (1)   The system is inspected by an installer registered with the County
Health Department or a qualified inspector and found to consist minimally of a
septic tank and a soil absorption field that has not failed or malfunctioned.
      (2)   Either:
         (a)   The original system installation was permitted through the
County Health Department; or
         (b)   The original system was not permitted through the County Health
Department, but a registered installer develops a plan of the site and system
showing compliance with the rules and this chapter; and
      (3)   The existing system is appropriately sized for the structure to be
served.
         (a)   If the connection or reconnection is due to involuntary events,
the County Health Department may utilize their best judgment for the soil
absorption field when approving a connection or reconnection to an existing
system.
         (b)   If the connection or reconnection is due to voluntary events,
the system being connected to must meet the requirements of the appropriate
rule, unless the site meets the requirements of the definition of repair or
replacement construction in this chapter.
   (B)   All commercial facilities wanting to connect or reconnect to an
existing on-site sewage system must have written approval from the Indiana
Department of Health.
   (C)   A construction permit for connection or reconnection to an existing
on-site sewage system shall be obtained prior to the start of construction of
the residence, residential outbuilding, or commercial facility.
(Ord. 2023-20, passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2024-24, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 53.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the Health Officer determines there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of this chapter, Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3, or
Rule 410 IAC 6-10.1 the County Health Officer shall issue a notice of violation
to the person or persons responsible, as hereafter provided. Such notice shall:
      (1)   Indicate the date and location of the violation.
      (2)   Clearly indicate the nature of the violation and the related
ordinance, statute, and/or rule citation.
      (3)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of necessary
remediation.
      (4)   Be properly served upon the person(s) responsible. Proper service
shall include any of the following:
         (a)   Sent to the person directly via first class mail;
         (b)   Sent by certified mail to the last known mailing address of the
person;
         (c)   Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the property affected
by the notice; or
         (d)   Other methods of service authorized or required under the laws
of this state.
   (B)   After receiving an order in writing from the County Health Officer,
the owner of the property shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and/
or rule as set forth in said order and within the time limit specified therein.
Said order shall be served on the owner but may be served on any person who, by
contract with the owner, has assumed the duty of complying with the provisions
of an order. Failure to comply with such order shall constitute a violation of
this chapter and the violator shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in §
53.99.
   (C)   The County Health Officer may compel an immediate stop work order of
work completed, in progress, or planned, which is in violation of any provision
(s) of this chapter. Such stop work order shall:
      (1)   Result in the immediate suspension of all work at the worksite;
      (2)   Be posted at the construction site and confirmed by written notice
to the owner or occupant of the premises and any person engaged in the
performance of said work or any person causing such work to be performed; and
      (3)   Failure to comply with such stop work order shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and the violator shall be subject to the penalties as
prescribed in §
53.99.
   (D)   Whenever the County Health Officer finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect public health, the County Health
Officer may, without notice or hearing, issue an emergency order declaring the
existence of such an emergency and require that action be taken as the Health
Officer deems necessary. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter,
Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3, Rule 410 IAC 6-10.1, and Bulletin S.E. 11, such order shall
be effective immediately.
   (E)   Any person to whom such an emergency order is directed shall comply
therewith immediately, but upon petition to the County Health Officer, shall be
afforded a hearing, as soon as possible in the manner provided in §
53.10.
(Ord. 2023-20, passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2024-24, passed 12-16-2024) Penalty, see
§
53.99
§ 53.10 PROCEDURE FOR APPEAL.
   (A)   Appeals may be filed with the County Board of Health for any of the
following decisions or actions taken by the County Health Officer:
      (1)   Denial of a permit to install, construct, reconnect, replace,
alter, or repair an on- site sewage system, holding tank, or sanitary vault
privy;
      (2)   Revocation of a permit;
      (3)   The issuance of a notice of violation, a stop work order, or an
emergency order as prescribed in §
53.09;
      (4)   Registration revocation, or duration of revocation, or denial of
registration renewal as prescribed in §
53.04; or
      (5)   A penalty as prescribed in §
53.99.
   (B)   Any person(s) filing such appeal shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the County Health Board. The request shall be in writing and
received at the office of the County Health Department within ten calendar days
of receipt of the notice. If a request for hearing is not received within the
ten calendar days, the decision or action shall stand.
   (C)   Such request shall briefly state the reasons for the requested
hearing. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the County Health Officer
shall arrange a time and a place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner
written notice thereof.
   (D)   Such hearing shall be held as soon as practical after receipt of the
request in compliance with I.C. 5-14-1.5-5 (Open Door Law).
   (E)   At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given the opportunity to be
heard and to show evidence as to why such decision or action should be modified
or withdrawn. Additionally, the Health Officer shall be given time to explain
the circumstances of the decision and/or action.
   (F)   The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision
of the County Health Board, shall be summarized in the minutes of the hearing
and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the County Health
Department. In addition, all pertinent information including, but not limited
to, permit application and written correspondence, shall be included in the
public record. Any person may seek relief thereof from any court of competent
jurisdiction as provided by the law of the state.
(Ord. 2023-20, passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2024-24, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 53.11 REMEDIES.
   Upon refusal or neglect of any person to correct an unlawful or unsanitary
condition when the abatement of the condition has been ordered in writing by
the Health Officer or an appeal against the decision and/or action has been
sustained by the Health Board, the Health Officer may, through the office of
the County Attorney, or an attorney representing the Health Department,
institute proceedings in the judicial court district wherein the offense occurs
for enforcement by prohibitory or mandatory injunction to restrain any person
from violating the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-20, passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2024-24, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 53.12 FEE SCHEDULE .
   All applicable fees as set forth in the County Health Department fee
ordinance and any amendments or revisions hereafter, shall be made payable to
the County Health Department.
(Ord. 2023-20, passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2024-24, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or entity found to be in violation of any provision
of this chapter and/or rule shall be fined not more than $2,500. Each day after
the expiration of the time limit for abating unsanitary conditions and
completing improvements to abate such conditions as ordered by the County
Health Department shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
   (B)   The County Health Department shall also be entitled to seek any other
legal remedy available against any person who shall violate any provision of
this chapter and/or rule.
   (C)   The County Health Department shall be entitled to seek all legal fees
incurred during enforcement of this chapter and/or rule.
   (D)   The penalties provided in this section shall be cumulative, and not
exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law.
(Ord. 2023-20, passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2024-24, passed 12-16-2024)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
72.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
73.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Speed limits
   
70.02   Parking regulations
   
70.03   Highway and bridge weight limitation
   
70.04   Disaster emergencies; county roads
   
70.05   Truck routes
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section hereby establishes speed limits on certain
county highways in the county.
   (B)   Generally.
      (1)   It is a statutory policy of the state to grant the various counties
of the state all powers needed for the effective operation of government as to
local affairs unless such exercise of power is limited by the State
Constitution or by state statutes.
      (2)   It is the proper and lawful exercise of its police powers for the
County Board of Commissioners to alter the prima facie speed limits upon
certain roads and highways by the adoption and amendment of an appropriate
ordinance or ordinances, so long as such ordinances do not conflict with or
duplicate the provisions of state statutes.
      (3)   It is lawful and proper for the County Board of Commissioners to
assess fines and penalties for violation of such ordinances and to deposit such
fines and penalties in the County General Fund.
      (4)   The County Board of Commissioners has previously caused engineering
and traffic investigations to be made on county roads and highways in the
county, which investigations have revealed that the state prima facie speed
limits are greater than is reasonable or safe under conditions found to exist
upon certain county roads and highways in the county as hereinafter designated,
and said investigations have further revealed that the speed limits of the
county roads and highways, as hereinafter noted, should be as hereinafter
designated.
      (5)   The County Board of Commissioners desires to establish reasonable
and safe maximum speed limits upon certain county highways in the county which
are lower than the prima facie speed limits prescribed by state law.
      (6)   Copies of this section, following publication, shall be delivered
by the County Auditor to each of the courts of this county, to all law
enforcement agencies of the county and to the County Highway Superintendent for
appropriate action.
   (C)   Notice. The County Highway Department shall place and maintain
suitable traffic control devices giving notice of the requirements of this
section upon roads and highways so affected as may be appropriate.
   (D)   Exemptions. Authorized emergency vehicles are exempt from the
application of this section; provided, that such vehicles are not operated in a
wanton and reckless manner, and other limits and/or requirements and/or
conditions as imposed by state statue in the operation of the authorized
emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-18-2002) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.02 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section shall establish no-parking zones in the county.
(Prior Code, § 5-82-1)
   (B)   Generally.
      (1)   The County Board of Commissioners desires to establish certain
specific no-parking zones along and/or adjacent to certain county highways.
      (2)   The Board of Commissioners has caused an engineering and traffic
investigation to be made on county highways, which investigation has revealed
that extreme traffic hazards exist by and through the parking of motor vehicles
along and/or adjacent to certain county highways in said county as hereinafter
designated, and the persons and officers conducting said investigation for and
on behalf of the state police, the County Sheriff and the County Highway
Supervisor have unanimously recommended that the areas hereinafter designated
be made no-parking zones and that the same be so designated by appropriate
signs.
      (3)   The Board of Commissioners desires to establish no-parking zones in
accordance with the recommendations of the traffic and engineering
investigation, and further desires to repeal, revoke and set aside all prior
specific no-parking zones heretofore established by either this Board or any
other prior County Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 5-82-2)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 HIGHWAY AND BRIDGE WEIGHT LIMITATION.
   (A)   Purpose. A section for the preservation of county roads and bridges by
limiting the gross weight of vehicles operated on county highways.
(Prior Code, § 5-83-1)
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BRIDGE. Any structure designated to carry vehicular traffic over an
obstacle to the normal flow of traffic, be it water or otherwise.
      PERSON. A human being, corporation, partnership or governmental entity.
(Prior Code, § 5-83-2)
   (C)   Seasonal limitations (frost law).
      (1)   Time restrictions. This division (C) shall be in effect for a
period of time not to exceed 90 days in any one calendar year. This period of
time shall not begin earlier than February 15 and shall not end later than May
15 of each calendar year, only for that portion of time, during such 90-day
period, when signs, giving notice of vehicular weight restrictions as required
by this section, are in fact erected and maintained by the County Highway
Department.
      (2)   Authority. The authority for both the erection and removal of such
signs shall be evidenced each year by a written order of the County Highway
Supervisor filed with the Secretary of the County Board of Commissioners, which
by law is the County Auditor. The authority is exercisable at the discretion of
the County Highway Supervisor whenever any highway or road of the county
highway system, by reason of rain, snow, temperature or other climate
condition, may be deteriorated or seriously damaged or destroyed unless
permissible weight limits for vehicles using such roadways are reduced.
      (3)   Posting of signs and their location. Such signs giving notice of
vehicular weight restrictions shall be erected and maintained at each end of
that portion of any highway affected thereby and at intersecting highways as
required by state statute.
      (4)   Exceptions. A written permit excepting a vehicular user from such
weight limitations may be awarded within the exercise of sound discretion by
said County Highway Supervisor upon due application in writing made to said
Supervisor. Said permit shall allow thereafter the permittee to operate or
cause to be operated upon said county highway system any lawful vehicle or
vehicle combination, having a total gross weight, with or without load, in
excess of the limitations of weight set forth in Ch. 72, Schd. III and Ch. 72,
Schd. IV, but subject to such other restrictions, such as route limitations or
time of use limitations, as the County Highway Supervisor may deem appropriate
to impose to protect the county road system. Such permit shall be issued in
triplicate: one copy retained in the Highway Department; one copy forwarded to
the Sheriff’s Department; and one copy to be carried in the vehicle containing
the overload.
(Prior Code, § 5-83-3)
   (D)   Highway weight limits.
      (1)   Posting. The County Highway Superintendent shall post such signs as
are necessary along such roads having gross weight limitation so as to
effectuate immediate compliance with this division (D) and all county highway
employees shall fully cooperate and assist law enforcement officers in the
enforcement of this division (D).
      (2)   Exemptions. Vehicles whose origination or destination are along
such county roads shall be exempt from the provisions of this division (D).
      (3)   Enforcement. Any law enforcement officer having reason to believe
that a vehicle and/or its load weight is in excess of the stated weight
limitation shall stop, measure and weigh the same on any public road by means
of portable scales or other means not unduly burdensome to the owner or
operator of said vehicle, including requiring the vehicle to be moved to
another location for purposes of ascertaining its weight or for safety
purposes.
      (4)   Detention. When a person is apprehended operating or causing to be
operated a vehicle or combination of vehicles on such designated county roads
having weight limitations with weight in excess of those weight limitations,
the vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be detained until its weight is so
reduced or distributed to comply with the weight limitation of this section.
While so detained, the vehicle may be moved only as directed by a law
enforcement officer who may exercise his or her discretion in so moving said
vehicle so as to prevent a safety hazard.
(Prior Code, § 5-83-4)
   (E)   Bridge weight limits.
      (1)   Posting. The County Highway Supervisor shall post such signs and
markers as are necessary upon the approaches to such bridges having gross
weight limitation so as to effectuate notice to the public and to achieve their
compliance with this division (E). All County Highway employees shall fully
cooperate and assist law enforcement officers in the enforcement of this
division (E).
      (2)   Enforcement. Any law enforcement officer having reason to believe
that a vehicle and/or its load weight is in excess of the stated weight
limitation and has violated this division (E) shall stop, measure and weigh the
same by means of portable scales or other means not unduly burdensome to the
owner or operator of said vehicle, including requiring the vehicle to be moved
to another location for purposes of ascertaining its weight or for safety
purposes.
(Prior Code, § 5-83-5)
§ 70.04 DISASTER EMERGENCIES; COUNTY ROADS.
   (A)   Title. This section shall be known as the county’s Local Disaster
Emergency Declaration Ordinance and shall apply to all roads, highways or
rights-of-way maintained by the county highway department. The mandatory
provisions of this section and of any local disaster emergency issued pursuant
to the ordinance, including the prohibitions on travel and the penalties for
violating those prohibitions shall not apply to streets maintained by a city or
town within the county nor to a state highway maintained by the State
Department of Transportation, nor to a federal interstate highway situated
within the county.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   The County Board of Commissioners, after consultation with the
County Highway Superintendent and the County Emergency Management Agency
Director, if available, or the respective representative designated by each of
the persons to consult in his or her absence for the purpose of recommending a
declaration of local disaster emergency, may declare a local disaster emergency
which may also contain a warning level travel advisory by executive order when,
in the Commissioners judgment, by majority rule, such order would be
appropriate under I.C. 10-14-3-29 and in the best interest of the public safety
and welfare of the residents of the county.
      (2)   If only one member of the County Board of Commissioners is
available to sign the declaration of local disaster emergency, he or she can
declare a local disaster emergency if he or she has obtained and documented the
verbal or written concurrence of at least one other Board member.
      (3)   If, with or without the issuance of a declaration of local disaster
emergency, the Board of Commissioners or the County Emergency Management Agency
Director determines that conditions require an advisory or watch level of
travel advisory, the Board of Commissioners, by majority rule or the Emergency
Management Agency Director, upon written notice to the Board of Commissioners
may issue an advisory or watch travel advisory.
      (4)   Pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-29.5, a warning level travel advisory may
be issued only after as part of a declaration of a local disaster emergency.
Such emergency shall continue in effect until the above-mentioned Board members
and/or officials or their respective designees who declared the emergency
thereafter determine an emergency no longer exists and terminate the emergency
order.
      (5)   The Board of Commissioners may declare a warning level travel
advisory upon its determination that the conditions are appropriate for the
issuance of a local disaster emergency under I.C. 10-14-3-29, and the further
determination that the criteria set forth in division (C) below have been met.
   (C)   Local travel advisories. A local travel advisory shall be declared in
accordance with I.C. 10-14-3-29.5 and this section. The purpose of a local
travel advisory is to keep the residents of the county informed of the weather
and county road conditions, and to assist County Highway Department in the
clearing of the county roads by eliminating stranded vehicles.
      (1)   Advisory level travel advisory. This level may be declared when
routine travel or activities may be restricted in areas of the county because
of a hazardous situation individuals should use caution to avoid these areas.
Schools and businesses may begin to implement their emergency action plans.
      (2)   Watch level travel advisory. This level may be declared when
conditions are threatening to the safety of the public. Only essential travel
is recommended (i.e., to and from work, emergency situations and the like). At
this level, emergency action plans should be implemented by businesses,
schools, government agencies and other organizations.
      (3)   Warning level travel advisory. This level may be declared when
roads have become impassable and the County Highway Department is not able to
keep the roadways cleared due to extreme weather conditions. Such conditions
may include ice covered roads, severe snow fall, high drifts or where blizzard
like conditions are occurring. Travel may be restricted to emergency management
workers only and essential emergency travel by members of the public as the
Board of Commissioners may further direct, such as privately employed health
care workers. Further restrictions that the Board of Commissioners deems
necessary may be included within the local disaster declaration.
   (D)   Publication.
      (1)   Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a
local disaster emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall
be filed promptly in the office of the clerk of the political subdivision
pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-22(b)(2).
      (2)   Publication and broadcast of an advisory, watch or warning level
travel advisory shall be made or caused to be made by the Board of
Commissioners or other officials designating the level of travel advisory using
a press release to all law enforcement agencies, fire departments, hospitals
and news media in the county. The declaration shall be promptly forwarded to
the State Department of Homeland Security and shall be kept on file by the
County Emergency Management Agency, County Clerk and County Auditor.
   (E)   Exemptions. Vehicles which shall be exempt from the travel and parking
restrictions imposed in a travel advisory pursuant to this section shall
include medical assistance, law enforcement, fire department, emergency
management, public utility, railway maintenance, fuel hauling vehicles and
employees of any of the above exempt services, if engaged in performing their
respective duties.
   (F)   Violations.
      (1)   Any order or proclamation of a warning shall be issued when a state
of emergency has been declared by the Board of Commissioners.
      (2)   Travel and parking restrictions of such a declaration include that:
         (a)   No travel is permitted on county roads until the order closing
the roads has been terminated by the Board of Commissioners;
         (b)   The driver or person in charge of a vehicle, whether or not
stalled, that impedes, obstructs, prohibits, impairs or interferes with highway
snow removal crews or emergency personnel and vehicles responding to an
emergency may be directed to remove the vehicle from the county road;
         (c)   A person who stops, parks or leaves a vehicle shall leave a
sufficient unobstructed width of the roadway opposite the vehicle for the free
passage of other vehicles and a clear view of the stopped vehicle from a
distance of 200 feet in either direction;
         (d)   The driver of each vehicle shall drive at a reduced speed
appropriate to the weather and highway conditions; and
         (e)   It is unlawful for a person to knowingly fail to comply with a
lawful order or directions of a law enforcement officer invested by law with
the authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
(Ord. 2019-08, passed 3-4-2019) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 9-21-5-4 and 9-21-8-1
§ 70.05 TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   Authority to regulate. The county exercises its authority to regulate
and restrict heavy large truck commercial traffic on local county roads.
   (B)   Conformity with signs. No person shall operate a vehicle in the county
except in conformity with the requirements or directives of traffic signs
posted on county roads, especially for signs that prohibit no through truck
traffic on county roads.
   (C)   Restrictions.
      (1)   Trucks that are restricted from through traffic include commercial
trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 26,000 pounds.
      (2)   No person shall operate a truck on county roads with posted signs
that prohibit an operator to travel on said county road for either a business
purpose at an address and location or as a resident living on that county road
or at an address and location in the county that can only be accessed by said
county road.
      (3)   This restriction does not apply to school buses or fire trucks.
   (D)   Waiver. The Board of Commissioners, in extraordinary circumstances,
may grant permission to an applicant who applies in writing to permit deviation
from this section when there are unique circumstances, alternate routes are
unreasonable and the use of the restricted road is in the public interest. The
Board of Commissioners may attach conditions to such permit as the Board deems
necessary.
(Ord. 2018-23, passed 1-22-2019) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this traffic code for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate §
70.01(C) by driving, or causing to be driven, a motor vehicle at a speed
greater than the maximum speed limit as prescribed by §
70.01 upon those designated county roads and highways shall be assessed a penal
sum in an amount not to exceed $200.
      (2)   Fines assessed for violation of §
70.01 shall be deposited into the County General Fund.
   (C)   Any person who shall violate §
70.02 by parking, or causing to be parked, a motor vehicle along and/or
adjacent to the designated county highways in a no-parking zone, shall be
prosecuted by the state shall suffer such penalties as by the laws of the state
provided.
(Prior Code, § 5-82-4)
   (D)   (1)   Any person who violates such vehicle weight restriction set
forth in §
70.03(C) during the designated period of vehicular weight restriction, commits
a Class C infraction which, under state law, subject the violator to a fine of
not more than $500.
      (2)   A person who violates §
70.03(D) shall be fined a sum not to exceed $1,000 if the weight violation is
not more than 10,000 pounds in excess of the stated weight limitation or in a
sum not to exceed $2,500 if the weight violation is in excess of 10,000 pounds
over the stated weight limitation.
(Prior Code, § 5-83-3)
   (E)   Failure of an operator to adhere to §
70.05 shall be a violation of this code. A violation shall have a fine of $300.
(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-18-2002; Ord. 2018-23, passed 1-22-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
   Special provisions for moving violations, see I.C. 34-28-5-4
   Traffic regulation, generally, see I.C. 9-21-8-49 and 9-21-16-9
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Off-Road Vehicles
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   Off-road vehicle use; exceptions
   
71.03   Prohibitions
   
71.04   Applicability with state law
   
71.05   Enforcement by law enforcement officials
Golf Carts
   
71.20   Operation of golf carts
   
71.21   Definition
   
71.22   Licensed drivers required
   
71.23   Insurance
   
71.24   Permitted hours
   
71.25   Applicability with state law
   
71.26   Passenger requirements
 
   
71.99   Penalty
OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OFF-ROAD VEHICLE. A motor-driven vehicle (I.C. 14-16-1-23) capable of cross-
country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land,
water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural terrain. It includes, but
is not limited to, a multi-wheel drive or low-pressure tire vehicle, amphibious
machine, ground effect air cushion vehicle or other means of transportation
deriving motive power from a source other than muscle or wind. It does not
include a farm vehicle being used for farming, a vehicle used for military or
law enforcement purposes, construction, mining or other industrial-related
vehicles used in performance of its common function, or a registered aircraft,
or a golf cart, and does not include any other vehicle properly registered by
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles or any watercraft registered pursuant to state
statutes.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on, and to be in actual physical control of the
operation of an off-road vehicle.
   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical possession of an
off-road vehicle.
   OWNER. Any person (other than a lienholder) having property in or title to
an off-road vehicle, or entitled to the use or possession of the off-road
vehicle.
(Ord. 2007-08, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 71.02 OFF-ROAD VEHICLE USE; EXCEPTIONS.
   All highways within the county roads system, excepting highways located
within the corporate limits of a city or town, may be utilized for travel by
off-road vehicles, subject to applicable state laws and the rules and
regulations now existing or enacted after this date by the state.
(Ord. 2007-08, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 71.03 PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall operate an off-road vehicle on a county highway within the
county roads system:
   (A)   At a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having due
regard for the conditions then existing;
   (B)   While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or under the
influence of a narcotic or other habit-forming or dangerous depressant or
stimulant drug;
   (C)   Without displaying a lighted headlight, lighted taillight and lighted
brake lights at all times while operating;
   (D)   In any forest nursery, planting area or public lands posted or
reasonably identified as an area of forest or plant reproduction, and when
growing stock may be damaged;
   (E)   On frozen surface of public water within 100 feet of a person not in
or upon a vehicle or within 100 feet of a fishing shanty or shelter;
   (F)   Unless it is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in
constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke;
   (G)   Within 100 feet of a dwelling in daylight hours only, except on the
operator’s own property, property under the operator’s control or as an invited
guest;
   (H)   On any property without the consent of the landowner or tenant of the
property;
   (I)   While transporting on the off-road vehicle a bow (unless unstrung) or
a firearm (unless unloaded and securely encased or equipped with and made
inoperative by manufactured key-locked trigger housing mechanism);
   (J)   On or across a cemetery or burial ground;
   (K)   Within 100 feet of slide, ski or skating areas, except for the purpose
of servicing the area;
   (L)   On a railroad track or railroad right-of-way, except railroad
personnel in performance of their duties;
   (M)   In or upon any flowing river, stream or creek, except to cross it by
the shortest route, unless that body of water is of sufficient depth to permit
flotation of the vehicle at all times; or
   (N)   Without having liability insurance in an amount that is at least equal
to the minimum required insurance and financial responsibility required by
drivers of automobiles on public roads within the state and to have in the
operator’s possession when operating an off-road vehicle on a county highway
proof of said insurance.
(Ord. 2007-08, passed 10-15-2007) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 APPLICABILITY WITH STATE LAW.
   Nothing in this subchapter is construed to be contradictory to the state
statutes concerning off-road vehicles. Further, anyone violating any provisions
of this subchapter are subject to the same penalties as are set out in the
state statutes.
(Ord. 2007-08, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 71.05 ENFORCEMENT BY LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.
   (A)   A law enforcement officer in the county shall enforce this subchapter.
   (B)   Enforcement of this subchapter can be through the provisions set out
in the state statute or by this subchapter and through the County Ordinance
Violations Bureau.
(Ord. 2007-08, passed 10-15-2007)
GOLF CARTS
§ 71.20 OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS.
   (A)   A golf cart may be operated on any county road that has a 35 mph speed
limit or less under the conditions as set forth in this subchapter. Golf carts
may not be operated on a state highway.
   (B)   An operator of a golf cart shall cross a county road or a highway in a
state highway system at right angles in order to travel from one county road to
another that is permitted herein, but there shall be no travel on a state
highway or on a county road that has a speed limit in excess of 35 mph.
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 8-20-2012) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.21 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOLF CART. Included in the definition of a slow moving vehicle, as the same
is defined in I.C. 9-21-9-1, a vehicle that is not under ordinary circumstances
moved, operated or driven at a speed greater than 25 mph and that is:
      (1)   Pulled;
      (2)   Towed;
      (3)   Self-propelled; or
      (4)   Animal drawn.
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 8-20-2012)
§ 71.22 LICENSED DRIVERS REQUIRED.
   In order to operate a golf cart on certain roads within the county, a driver
of such a golf cart must be a licensed driver under state law and have such
license on his or her person at all times during the operation of said golf
cart.
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 8-20-2012)
§ 71.23 INSURANCE.
   All golf carts must have insurance on said golf cart. Proof of insurance on
the golf cart should be earned by the operator or shall be carried on the golf
cart during the time the operation of said golf cart is operated on the county
roads.
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 8-20-2012)
§ 71.24 PERMITTED HOURS.
   All golf carts may be driven on county roads during daylight hours only from
dawn to dusk. All golf carts must display a red or amber flashing light at
times when headlights are necessary for other motor vehicles, which light must
be visible from a distance of no less than 500 feet from the rear of the golf
cart. If a golf cart is operated at a time when weather conditions would make
it necessary for headlights to be used, the golf cart must be kept equipped
with both headlights and taillights that are in working order.
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 8-20-2012)
§ 71.25 APPLICABILITY WITH STATE LAW.
    While operating said golf cart within the county, any operator of the same
must abide by all state traffic laws in the operation of said golf cart.
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 8-20-2012)
§ 71.26 PASSENGER REQUIREMENTS.
   While in operation, such golf carts must carry no more passengers than such
golf carts are equipped to handle, and all passengers must be seated at all
times.
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 8-20-2012) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Anyone violating any of the provisions of §§
71.20 through
71.26 shall be subject to a fine of $25 for a first violation, $50 for a second
violation and $100 for a third violation. A violation of §§
71.20 through
71.26 governing the use of a golf cart on a state highway in the county will be
considered an ordinance violation rather than a Class C infraction with an
ordinance violation fine of up to $100. Fines are to be paid at the Ordinance
Violation Bureau, County Clerk’s office.
      (2)   The fine assessment shall be deposited in the County General Fund.
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 8-20-2012)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
      
II.   Traffic signs
      
III.   Weight limits generally
      
IV.   Bridge weight limits
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any reason to drive, or cause to be driven, a motor
vehicle at a speed greater than the speed limits hereinafter set forth on the
county roads and highways hereinafter designated, which speed limits upon said
county highways are hereby established and declared by the County Board of
Commissioners to be the maximum reasonable or safe speed thereon.
   (A)   Twenty mph is the maximum vehicular speed limit on the following
county roads and highways.
Road or Highway Ord. No. Date
Road or Highway                                         Ord. No. Date
Academy Drive at Culver Academy                         2002-01  2-18-2002
Cook Lake Trail                                         2002-01  2-18-2002
Donnybrook Subdivision                                  2002-01  2-18-2002
Hidden Hills Subdivision                                2002-01  2-18-2002
Pretty Lake Trail between Quince Road and State Road 17 2010-09  9-7-2010
Union Road north of 14B Road                            2002-01  2-18-2002
West Shore Drive from the Culver town limits to the     2007-04  2-19-2007
intersection of South Shore Drive and Sage Road
 
   (B)   Thirty mph is the maximum vehicular speed limits on the following
county roads and highways.
Road or Highway Ord. No. Date
Road or Highway                                                              Ord.  Date
                                                                             No.
                                                                             2002- 2-
11A Road east from Hawthorn Road east to the town limits of Inwood           01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
All subdivisions in the county not otherwise specifically set out herein     01    18-
                                                                                   2002
All the streets in the unincorporated Towns, including, but not limited to,  2002- 2-
Tyner, Hibbard, Old Tipp Town and Teegarden                                  01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
Blackford Addition west of State Road 331 on 17th Road and Baugher Drive     01    18-
                                                                                   2002
Hawthorne Road in the town limits of Inwood which is approximately one-half  2002- 2-
mile                                                                         01    18-
                                                                                   2002
Koontz Lake Area - Lake Drive between 4B Road and West County Line Road, and 2002- 2-
Underwood Road between 4B Road and South Lake Drive. Lake Drive between      01    18-
South Underwood Road and West County Line Road                                     2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
Menominee Trail from Peach Road to Queen Road                                01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
Mill Pond Trail                                                              01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
Nataka Trail                                                                 01    18-
                                                                                   2002
Nutmeg Road from Discovery Lane to Nutmeg Ridge Road                         2006- 9-5-
                                                                             13    2006
                                                                             2002- 2-
On 3rd Road from East Shore Drive to West Shore Drive                        01    18-
                                                                                   2002
On 4th A Road one-fourth mile east and west of the Lilac Road intersection   2002- 2-
to Linkville town limits                                                     01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
On 4th A Road for one-half mile west of U.S. Highway 30                      01    18-
                                                                                   2002
On 16th Road from U.S. Highway 31 to Jarrah Road, whatever is not in the     2002- 2-
Town of Argos town limits                                                    01    18-
                                                                                   2002
On 18th B Road from South Dewberry Road to Cedar Road and other streets in   2002- 2-
the unincorporated town limits of Tippecanoe                                 01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
On all streets in Carriage Hills Subdivision in West Township                01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
On all streets in Deer Trail Subdivision in Center Township                  01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
On all streets in McCollough Subdivision in North Township                   01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
On Dixon Lake Trail for three-tenths of one mile west of Olive Trail         01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
On East Shore Drive and on West Shore Drive around the Lake-of-the-Woods     01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
On Lawrence Lake Drive in Center Township                                    01    18-
                                                                                   2002
On Lilac Road for three-tenths of one mile south of its intersection with    2002- 2-
4th A Road                                                                   01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
On Olive Trail from 12th Road to Nataka Trail                                01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
On Pretty Lake Road from Queen Road to Quince Road                           01    18-
                                                                                   2002
On South Shore Drive from West Shore Drive to 800 feet north of West 20th B  2002- 2-
Road                                                                         01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
On Union Road from new U.S. Highway 30 to 500 feet south of West 8th Road    01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
On West Shore Drive from Culver city limits to South Shore Drive             01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
Pretty Lake Trail from State Road 17 around Pretty Lake to Quince Road       01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
Queen Road from State Road 17 to Pretty Lake Road                            01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
Quince Road from State Road 17 to Pretty Lake Trail                          01    18-
                                                                                   2002
                                                                             2002- 2-
Rose Road south from 12th Road to south of the public access site            01    18-
                                                                                   2002
Starting at the intersection of State Road 117 and 18B Road and ending at    2018- 9-
Queen Road South intersection, including north on Queen Road approximately   11    17-
one-half mile.                                                                     2018
                                                                             2002- 2-
Tomahawk Trail                                                               01    18-
                                                                                   2002
Tyner Area from the intersections of Main and French Street to the town city 2002- 2-
limits                                                                       01    18-
                                                                                   2002
Union Road from the intersection of 9B Road south to the intersection of 9C  2017- 11-
Road.                                                                        27    6-
                                                                                   2017
Veteran’s Parkway from 650 feet west of the intersection of Linden Road to 2018- 5-
1020 feet east of said intersection                                          09    21-
                                                                                   2018
 
   (C)   Thirty-five mph is the maximum vehicular speed limit on the following
county roads and highways.
 
Road or Highway                                             Ord. No Date
12th Road between Olive Trail west to the Peach Road
intersection and Peach Road from the 12th Road intersection 2012-10 9-17-2012
to south to west Menominee Trail
 
   (D)   Forty mph is the maximum vehicular speed limit on the following county
roads and highways.
County Roads and Highways Ord. No Date
County Roads and Highways                                    Ord. No Date
2B Road from State Road 331 to the East County Line Road     2002-01 2-18-2002
3rd Road west from State Road 331 to Elm Road                2002-01 2-18-2002
12th Road from Olive Trail to 2500 feet west of Pear Road    2002-01 2-18-2002
18th B Road from State Road 117 to 100 feet west of the east 2002-01 2-18-2002
intersection of 18B Road and Queen Road
East 9th A Road east from Plymouth to King Road              2002-01 2-18-2002
Fir Road from south of the Bremen corporate limits to 3rd    2002-01 2-18-2002
Road
Glen Overmyer Drive                                          2002-01 2-18-2002
King Road south of Lincoln Highway one-half mile             2002-01 2-18-2002
Lincoln Highway through Inwood                               2002-01 2-18-2002
On 17th Road from the western line of Old U.S. Highway 31 to 2002-01 2-18-2002
South Linden Road
Olive Trail from State Road 17 to 200 feet south of Dixon    2002-01 2-18-2002
Lake Trail
Union Road from U.S. 6 to 1st Road                           2002-01 2-18-2002
 
   (E)   Forty-five mph is the maximum vehicular speed limit on the following
county roads and highways.
County Roads and Highways Ord. No. Date
County Roads and Highways                                       Ord.    Date
                                                                No.
9th Road between the stop sign at the intersection Lincoln              5-21-
Highway running west to the railroad tracks (that are east of   2012-01 2012
Quince Road)
Hickory Road from 7B Road to 8B Road                            2017-27 11-6-
                                                                        2017
Lincoln Highway west from the Plymouth city limits to Pioneer   2014-08 10-6-
Drive                                                                   2014
Michigan Road north from the city limits of Plymouth to 7B Road 2002-01 2-18-
                                                                        2002
Michigan Road from the Roundabout at Veteran’s Parkway to 7th 2015-20 11-16-
Road                                                                    2015
Muckshaw Road from the Plymouth city limits at the railroad     2004-1  2-16-
tracks to 500 feet south of the 12th Road intersection                  2004
Plymouth-Goshen Trail from U.S. 6 to the East County Line Road  2002-01 2-18-
                                                                        2002
Plymouth-Goshen Trail from U.S. 30 to Randolph Street           2002-01 2-18-
                                                                        2002
Plymouth-LaPorte Trail from 4B Road to Queen Road (including    2016-16 9-6-
between 5th Road and 6th Road near Swan Lake Resort                     2016
Plymouth-LaPorte Trail from 5th Road to 6th Road (near Swan     2003-1  2-17-
Lake Resort)                                                            2003
Queen Road between 12th and 13th Roads                          2002-01 2-18-
                                                                        2002
 
   (F)   Fifty mph is the maximum vehicular speed on the following county roads
and highways.
 
County Roads and Highways                          Ord. No. Date
Pioneer Road between Lincolnway and State Route 17 2011-17  12-5-2011
 
   (G)   Any person who shall violate this schedule by driving, or causing to
be driven, a motor vehicle at a speed greater than the maximum speed limit as
prescribed by §
70.01(A) upon those designated county roads and highways shall be assessed a
penal sum in an amount not to exceed $200.
(Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-18-2002) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. TRAFFIC SIGNS.
   In order to more safely regulate certain intersections, the Board of
Commissioners have enacted ordinances establishing traffic signs in the county.
Location Sign Ord. No. Date
Location                           Sign                     Ord. No. Date
12 Road at the intersection of     Stop sign (eastbound and 2002-08  8-5-2002
Queen Road                         westbound)
13th Street and Olive Trail        Four-way stop sign       1985-10  12-16-1985
17th and Kenilworth Road           Stop sign                1984-5   6-18-1984
Cedar Road at the intersection of  Stop sign (northbound)   1999-7   11-1-1999
12th Road
Collins Drive and Parkview Place   Stop sign                1984-7   11-5-1984
Dogwood Road South of U.S. 6       Stop sign                1989-7   7-5-1989
First Road in Kenilworth Road      All-way stop             1989-7   7-5-1989
Park Place Court at Parkview Drive Yield sign               1984-7   11-5-1984
Park Way Court at Parkview Drive   Yield sign               1984-7   11-5-1984
Parkview Court at Parkview Drive   Yield sign               1984-7   11-5-1984
 
Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE III. WEIGHT LIMITS GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or move or for any owner to
cause or knowingly permit to be operated or moved upon the county roads
described herein, any vehicle or combination of vehicles, including load of a
weight exceeding the gross weight limitation provided in this schedule. Such
restricted use of county roads apply to the following roads with the amount of
total gross weight limitation for each such road as set out below.
Road Identification Weight Limit
Road Identification                                        Weight Limit
1st Road between State Road 331 and U.S. 31                10 tons (20,000 lbs)
3rd Road between Grape Road and Fir Road to East Shore     10 tons (20,000 lbs)
Drive and the bridges thereon
16th Road between Old and New Road 31                      5 tons (10,000 lbs)
17th Road from State Road 331 to Juniper                   10 tons (20,000 lbs)
Chestnut Road between 20th Road                            10 tons (20,000 lbs)
Fir Road, between State Road 10 and State Road 110, said   10 tons (20,000 lbs)
stretch of road being in Walnut Township
Fir Road, between the southern corporate boundary of the
Town of Bremen, south to the intersection of Fir Road with 20 tons (40,000 lbs)
Old U.S. 30 East, now a county roads. Said stretch of road
being in German and Bourbon Townships
Grape Road from 4th Road to Plymouth-Goshen Road           10 tons (20,000 lbs)
Intersection of 9th Road and Sycamore Road at tracks       3 tons (6,000 lbs)
Intersection of Road 30 and Sycamore Road at tracks        3 tons (6,000 lbs)
Ironwood Road from State Road 10 to 18th Street            10 tons (20,000 lbs)
North Dogwood Road between State Highway 6 and St. Joseph  10 tons (20,000 lbs
County Line Road
North Miami Road between State Highway 6 and St. Joseph    10 tons (20,000 lbs
County Line Road
North Sycamore between State Highway 17 and West 9th Road  10 tons (20,000 lbs)
Plymouth-Goshen Trail between the Marshall County-Elkhart
County boundary line on the East and where Plymouth-Goshen 20 tons (40,000 lbs)
Trail intersects U.S. Highway #6 between Dogwood Road and
Beech Road in German Township on the west
Union between 3-B Rd. and U.S. 6.                          10 tons (20,000 lbs)
West 12th Road between State Highway 17 and Marshall/      10 tons (20,000 lbs)
Starke County Line Road
West 14th Road between Olive Trail and Street Highway 17   10 tons (20,000 lbs)
 
(Prior Code, § 5-83-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE IV. BRIDGE WEIGHT LIMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or move, or for any owner to
cause or knowingly permit to be operated or moved over and upon designated
bridges of the county road system, any vehicle or combination of vehicles,
including load of a weight exceeding the gross weight limitation provided in
this schedule. Such restricted use of the bridges of the county road system
shall apply to the following designated bridges with the amount of total gross
weight limitation for each such bridge as set out in the following.
Bridge Identification and Location Weight Limit
Bridge     Identification and Location                    Weight Limit
4 BR 161   North Thorne Road, south of County Line Road   8 tons (16,000 lbs)
6 BR 166   North Sycamore Road, south of County Line Road 5 tons (10,000 lbs)
8 BR 169   North Redwood Road, south of County Line Road  5 tons (10,000 lbs)
14 BR 158  West 2B Road, west of North Rose Road          4 tons ( 8,000 lbs)
16 BR 159  North Sage Road, north of West 3B Road         6 tons (12,000 lbs)
18 BR 164  North Sycamore Road, north of West 3B Rd       9 tons (18,000 lbs)
20 BR 140  West 4th Road, west of North Pine Road         6 tons (12,000 lbs)
22 BR 136  West 4B Road, east of North Quince Road        8 tons (16,000 lbs)
23 BR 143  North Quince Road, north of West 4B Road       8 tons (16,000 lbs)
27 BR 147  West 2C Road, at North Maple Road              8 tons (16,000 lbs)
29 BR 145  West 5A Road, east of Old U.S. South 31        10 tons (20,000 lbs)
30 BR 146  West 6th Road, east of Old U.S. South 31       10 tons (20,000 lbs)
32 BR 175  West 4A Road, west of North Lilac Road         10 tons (20,000 lbs)
33 BR 148  North Lilac Road, south of West 4A Road        8 tons (16,000 lbs)
34 BR 111  East 1st Road, east of North Juniper Road      15 tons (30,000 lbs)
35 BR 112  East 1st Road, east of North Ironwood Road     4 tons (8,000 lbs)
36 BR 177  East 1st Road, east of North Ironwood Road     8 tons (16,000 lbs)
37 BR 110  North Ironwood Road, north of East 1st Road    5 tons (10,000 lbs)
43 BR 209  North Dogwood Road, south of East 1C Road      5 tons (10,000 lbs)
51 BR 107  North Grape Road, south of East 3rd Road       6 tons (12,000 lbs)
52 BR 179  East 2B Road, West of Miami Trail              15 tons (30,000 lbs)
53 BR 104  Ply-Goshen Trail, southwest of Miami Trail     10 tons (20,000 lbs)
55 BR 105  Ply-Goshen Trail, northeast of North Juniper   15 tons (30,000 lbs)
           Road
62 BR 70   North Cedar Road, north of East 7th Road       4 tons (8,000 lbs)
66 BR 132  West 12th Road, west of South Upas Road        10 tons (20,000 lbs)
67 BR 183  South Upas Road, south of West 12 Road         10 tons (20,000 lbs)
69 BR 129  South Union Road, south of West 12 Road        10 tons (20,000 lbs)
71 BR 152  Ply-Goshen Trail, east of Old U.S. South 31    12 tons (24,000 lbs)
78 BR 80   East 8th Road, west of North Hawthorn Road     8 tons (16,000 lbs)
94 BR 185  South Iris Road, north of East 12 Road         15 tons (30,000 lbs)
97 BR 92   East 7th Road, west of North Fir Road          6 tons (12,000 lbs)
98 BR 87   East 7B Road, west of North Filbert Road       5 tons (10,000 lbs)
107 BR 79  North Beech Road, north of East 8th Road       13 tons (26,000 lbs)
128 BR 122 South Underwood Road, north of West 19B Road   8 tons (16,000 lbs)
133 BR 74  South Muchshaw Road, south of West 14C Road    4 tons (8,000 lbs)
143 BR 15  South Linden Road, south of East 19th Road     12 tons (24,000 lbs)
145 BR 23  West 20B Road, west of South Muchshaw Road     15 tons (30,000 lbs)
148 BR 33  West 19C Road, east of South Pine Road         12 tons (24,000 lbs)
149 BR 19  South Maple Road, south of West 19B Road       15 tons (30,000 lbs)
150 BR 27  West 18B Road, east of South Nutmeg Road       6 tons (12,000 lbs)
153 BR 85  East 15th Road, west of South Hickory Road     6 tons (12,000 lbs)
154 BR 44  South Hickory Road, south of East 15th Road    10 tons (20,000 lbs)
156 BR 84  East 15th Road, east of South Fir Road         15 tons (30,000 lbs)
157 BR 50  East 15B Road, east of South Filbert Road      4 tons ( 8,000 lbs)
160 BR 205 East 16th Road, east of South Filbert Road     8 tons (16,000 lbs)
 
(Prior Code, § 5-83-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 73: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   No-parking zones
SCHEDULE I. NO-PARKING ZONES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in the following
designated areas along and/or adjacent to the county highways, and which
designated areas be and the same are hereby declared and established to be no-
parking zones by the County Board of Commissioners and the County Highway
Supervisor is hereby directed and ordered to cause appropriate signs to be
erected designated said no-parking zones.
 
Location                         Prohibition                 Ord. No. Date
2nd A Road from U.S. Highway 31  No parking                  1991-6   7-15-1991
to end of said road
Both sides of 18-B Road from     No parking, from 11:00 p.m.
State Road 110 easterly to Lake  until 5:00 a.m.             1991-6   7-15-1991
Maxinkuckee
The west side of Academy Drive
from State Road 10 to Logansport No parking                  1991-6   7-15-1991
Gate and west to the Railroad
track
West 5th C Road from Old U.S.
Highway 31 west for three-       No parking                  1991-6   7-15-1991
fourths of one mile
West 12th Road from Old U.S.
Highway 31 west to 60 feet west  No parking                  1991-6   7-15-1991
of entrance gate to Plymouth
Speedway, Inc.
 
Penalty, see §
70.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
      
92.   FAIR HOUSING
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Purpose
   
90.02   Definitions
   
90.03   Duties, authority and responsibilities
   
90.04   Licensing and vaccination
   
90.05   Confinement
   
90.06   Animal shelter and impoundment
   
90.07   Enumeration of certain violations and procedure therefor
   
90.08   Payment of violations of this chapter
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 PURPOSE.
   Deeming it advisable to provide for the orderly and uniform administration
of the dog licensing provision of the state and to regulate the control,
conduct, keeping and care of dogs and other animals, the County Board of
Commissioners does hereby adopt this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-06, passed 4-18-2005)
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. As set out in I.C. 15-17-2-3.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person designated and commissioned by the County
Sheriff and the County Board of Commissions to enforce this chapter or state
statutes pertaining to dogs or other animals.
   OWNER. A person who has a right of property in a dog or an animal, a person
who keeps or harbors a dog or an animal or has it in his or her care, or a
person who permits a dog or an animal to remain on or about the premises
occupied by him or her.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership or corporation.
   RUNNING AT LARGE. A dog or an animal not under the control of the owner and
not on the owner’s premises.
(Ord. 2005-06, passed 4-18-2005)
§ 90.03 DUTIES, AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Animal Control Officer is hereby authorized to perform the following
duties and responsibilities.
   (A)   The Animal Control Officer may seize and place in the animal shelter
or other appropriate facility all dogs or animals found running at large within
the county.
   (B)   The Animal Control Officer shall be authorized to issue an appearance
ticket to the owner of a dog or an animal found running at large.
   (C)   If the owner of a dog is known, the Animal Control Officer shall
notify the owner in writing that the dog has been seized and placed in the
animal shelter. If, after five days from the date the written notice was
mailed, the owner has not claimed the dog and paid the shelter expenses, the
Animal Control Officer shall destroy or have destroyed, in a humane manner, the
dog; provided, however, that if in the judgment of the Animal Control Officer
the dog is valuable or otherwise desirable for keeping, he or she may release
the dog to any person who shall become the owner of the dog and who shall keep
the dog in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and state statutes.
   (D)   If the owner of the dog is not known, the Animal Control Officer shall
retain the dog for no less than two days. If the owner of the dog does not
claim the dog and pay the shelter expenses, the Animal Control Officer shall
destroy or have destroyed, in a humane manner, the dog; provided, however, that
if, in the judgment of the Animal Control Officer, the dog is valuable or
otherwise desirable for keeping, he or she may release the dog to any person
who shall become the owner of the dog and who shall keep the dog in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and state statutes.
   (E)   Other animals placed in the shelter or other appropriate facility
shall be retained for a reasonable period of time, considering the health,
sanitation and other factors relating to said animal.
   (F)   An animal seized pursuant to this chapter or pursuant to state statute
shall either be returned to the owner or adopted out, following the procedure
set forth by the County Humane Society, as may be amended from time to time.
   (G)   The Animal Control Officer shall be authorized to investigate
complaints of dogs or other animals alleged to be dangerous to persons or
destructive to property.
   (H)   The Animal Control Officer shall be authorized to investigate
complaints of cruelty to dogs or other animals.
   (I)   The Animal Control Officer shall have such other duties relating to
the enforcement of this chapter as the County Board of Commissioners may from
time to time provide.
   (J)   The Animal Control Officer shall at all times maintain a book of
receipts, properly numbered in sequence for accounting purposes, for the
issuing of dog licenses, as provided in this chapter, and shall issue such dog
licenses in accordance herewith.
   (K)   All fees and monies collected by the Animal Control Officer paid to
the County Clerk, as herein provided, shall be accounted for and turned over to
the County Treasurer on or before the last day of each and every month or more
often if reasonably necessary under the standard practice of the County
Treasurer’s accounting system.
(Ord. 2005-06, passed 4-18-2005)
§ 90.04 LICENSING AND VACCINATION.
   (A)   The owner of any dog six months old or older shall, on or before March
1 of each year or within 30 days of a dog becoming six months old, apply in
writing to the Township Trustee where the owner resides for a license for each
dog owned or kept by him or her. The application for each dog shall state the
breed, sex, age, color and markings of such dog and the name and address of the
owner. No license shall be issued for any dog unless the applicant exhibits
proof of purchase of vaccination of the dog for rabies by a licensed
veterinarian.
   (B)   Fees for leader dogs or dogs in training as such are hereby waived.
   (C)   Current dog licenses issued by other counties within the state and any
other governmental agency shall be honored in the county until the following
March 1.
   (D)   To be adopted, an animal must be properly licensed. Dogs must be
spayed or neutered unless the animal is qualified for breeding purposes. No dog
shall be released from the County Humane Society unless proof of license is
presented.
   (E)   The County Humane Society may issue licenses as designated by the
respective County Township Assessors. As designated, the Humane Society may
retain $0.75 as a fee for that service and shall remit the balance of the money
collected to the Township Trustee by the tenth day of each month.
(Ord. 2005-06, passed 4-18-2005) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 CONFINEMENT.
   Any dog or other animal which bites a person shall be quarantined for ten
days if ordered by the Director of Public Health or his or her designated
representative. During quarantine, the dog or other animal shall be securely
confined and kept from contact with any other animal. At the discretion of the
Director of Public Health or his or her designated representative, the
quarantine may be on the premises of the owner. If the Director of Public
Health or designated representatives requires other confinement, the owner
shall surrender the dog or other animal for the quarantine to the animal
shelter at the owner’s expense or shall, at his or her own expense, place the
dog or other animal in a veterinary hospital.
(Ord. 2005-06, passed 4-18-2005)
§ 90.06 ANIMAL SHELTER AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   Immediately upon seizing any dog or other animal and placing it in the
animal shelter, the Animal Control Officer shall enter upon the records of the
animal shelter in a book to be kept by him or her for such purpose, the date of
the seizing, a description of the dog or other animal seized and a record as to
whether or not the dog has been licensed and tagged as required by this
chapter.
(Ord. 2005-06, passed 4-18-2005)
§ 90.07 ENUMERATION OF CERTAIN VIOLATIONS AND PROCEDURE THEREFOR.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or other animal,
licensed or unlicensed, to permit the dog or other animal to run at large;
provided, however, that a licensed dog actively engaged in hunting need not be
leashed when under the reasonable control of some person.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit such dog to
disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by habitually barking, making
loud or unusual noises or by damaging the property of another.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog or any other animal to
treat a dog or other animal in a cruel or neglectful way. Cruelty and neglect
may include failure to provide shelter, failure to provide food and water,
beating and tormenting a dog or other animal or all other violations of I.C.
35-46-3-7.
   (D)   Owners of dogs are also bound by the State Dog Bite Statute (I.C. 15-
20-1).
(Ord. 2005-06, passed 4-18-2005) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 PAYMENT OF VIOLATIONS OF THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   Any violation of this chapter in which a ticket is issued by an Animal
Control Officer due to a violation of this chapter shall be paid within 30 days
to the County Clerk, which said funds will go into the County General Fund.
Tickets may be paid by mail or use of the night deposit box at the County
Clerk’s office, 211 West Madison Street, Plymouth, Indiana 46563.
   (B)   The County Clerk shall keep account books and financial records and
collect said fines for any violation of this chapter and make all disbursements
in accordance with procedures set out and recommended by the State Board of
Accounts and any other applicable state or federal rules, regulations or law
and applicable ordinances.
(Ord. 2005-06, passed 4-18-2005)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   The owner of any dog who fails to license the dog as required by §
90.04 shall be subject to a civil fine of not less than $20 and not more than
$50, such fine to be in excess of the required license fee.
   (C)   For a violation of any provision in §
90.07, harboring a dog without collar and tag, permitting a dog to disturb the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood or cruelty and neglect of a dog or other
animal, the initial fine for the first offense is $25. For a second offense
within 90 days of the first offense, the fine shall be $100. For a third or
subsequent offense, the county may seek to enforce this chapter in any court of
competent jurisdiction and, if the defendant in such action is found to be in
violation hereof, the county shall be entitled to recover its costs of
prosecution, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, a fine not to exceed $250
and other remedies imposed by the court of competent jurisdiction. The owner of
any dog or other animal violating any of the provisions of this chapter, except
§
90.04(B), shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2005-06, passed 4-18-2005)
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
Section
Junk Vehicles
   
91.01   Abandoned, junked vehicles exposed to public unlawful
   
91.02   Vehicle without license plate may be included
   
91.03   Lawful businesses excepted
   
91.04   Definitions
   
91.05   Citation, removal, disposal of abandoned vehicles
   
91.06   Vehicle abandoned on rental property
   
91.07   Exemptions
   
91.08   Costs charged to abandoned vehicle account
   
91.09   Disposition of proceeds of sale
   
91.10   Use of Abandoned Vehicle Account
   
91.11   Charges for towing, storing or removing abandoned vehicles
Fire Prevention and Protection
   
91.25   Declaration of a fire emergency
   
91.26   Prohibitions
   
91.27   Law enforcement responsibilities
 
   
91.99   Penalty
JUNK VEHICLES
§ 91.01 ABANDONED, JUNKED VEHICLES EXPOSED TO PUBLIC UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   The keeping, parking or storing of any wrecked, junked or abandoned
vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property, exposed to public
view, except as provided in this subchapter, is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, park or store any
wrecked, junked or abandoned automobile or other vehicle or parts thereof on
public or private property within the county, not kept in a garage or other
enclosure so as not to be exposed to public view, except as otherwise set forth
herein.
(Ord. 2000-06, passed 6-5-2000) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 VEHICLE WITHOUT LICENSE PLATE MAY BE INCLUDED.
   Any vehicle shall be deemed to be included in the terms of this subchapter
if such vehicle does not have attached thereto a valid and current license
plate, but such license plate shall not be the sole factor in determining the
status of such vehicle.
(Ord. 2000-06, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 91.03 LAWFUL BUSINESSES EXCEPTED.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to apply to any
person, firm or corporation lawfully engaged in the junk business, the garage,
body shop or other vehicle repair business, auto sales business or other lawful
business in a properly zoned area, in which automobiles or other vehicles are
kept, stored or parked as an incident to the conducting of such business.
(Ord. 2000-06, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 91.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle located on public property illegally;
      (2)   A vehicle left on public property continuously without being moved
for three days;
      (3)   A vehicle located on public property in such a manner as to
constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic on a public right-of-way;
      (4)   A vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent
of the property owner or persons in control of the property for more than 48
hours;
      (5)   A vehicle from which there has been removed the engine,
transmission or differential or that is otherwise partially dismantled or
inoperative and left on public property;
      (6)   A vehicle that has been removed by a towing service or a public
agency upon request of an officer enforcing a statute or ordinance other than
this subchapter, if the vehicle once impounded is not claimed or redeemed by
the owner or his or her agent within 15 days of its removal; or
      (7)   A vehicle that is six or more model years old and mechanically
inoperable and is left on private property continuously in a location visible
from public property for more than 30 days.
   AUTOMOBILE SCRAP YARD. A business organized for the purpose of scrap metal
processing, automobile wrecking or operating a junkyard.
   BUREAU. The State Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
   OFFICER. A regular member of the County Police Department or the County
Building Commission.
   OWNER. The last known record title holder of a vehicle, according to the
records of the State Bureau of Motor Vehicles, or any other comparable bureau
or agency of any other state.
   PARTS. Refers to all components of a vehicle that as assembled do not
constitute a complete vehicle.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, corporation, association, fiduciary or
governmental entity.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. All property, other than public property.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. A public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, sidewalk,
park or other municipal property.
   TOWING SERVICE. A business that engages in moving, removing, storing and
impounding disabled vehicles.
   VEHICLE. An automobile, motorcycle, truck, trailer, semitrailer, tractor,
bus, school bus, recreational vehicle, camper or motorized bicycle.
   VISIBLE FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY. A vehicle that can be seen from public
property and includes vehicles which have been covered by a temporary covering
that allows the form and outline of the vehicle to remain visible from public
property.
(Ord. 2000-06, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 91.05 CITATION, REMOVAL, DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall abandon a vehicle or parts on any public or private
property.
   (B)   The owner of an abandoned vehicle or parts is responsible for the
abandonment and is liable for all of the costs incidental to the removal,
storage and disposal of the vehicle or its parts.
   (C)   In accordance with I.C. 9-22-1-11, if, in the opinion of the officer,
the market value of an abandoned vehicle or parts is less than $100, the
officer shall attach thereto in a prominent place a citation containing the
following information:
      (1)   The date, time, officer’s name, public agency, address and
telephone number to contact for information;
      (2)   The vehicle or parts are considered abandoned;
      (3)   The vehicle or parts will be removed after 72 hours;
      (4)   The owner will be held responsible for all costs incidental to
removal, storage and disposal, and if not paid, the owner’s registration
privileges will be suspended on that car; and
      (5)   The owner may avoid costs by removal of the vehicle or parts within
72 hours.
   (D)   If the tagged vehicle or parts which, in the opinion of the officer,
has a market value of less than $100, are not removed within 72 hours, the
officer shall, in accordance with I.C. 9-22-1-12:
      (1)   Prepare a written abandoned vehicle report of the vehicle or parts
including information on the condition, missing parts and other facts that
substantiate that the market value is less than $100;
      (2)   Take photographs to illustrate the condition of the vehicle or
parts; and
      (3)   Immediately order the removal of the vehicle or parts to an
automobile scrapyard or holding area.
   (E)   In accordance with I.C. 9-22-1-14, if, in the opinion of the officer,
the market value of an abandoned vehicle or parts are $100 or more, the officer
shall make reasonable efforts to ascertain the owner or persons who may be in
control of the vehicle or parts. Thereafter, the officer shall attach to the
vehicle or parts in a prominent place a citation containing the following
information:
      (1)   The date, time, officer’s name, public agency, address and
telephone number to contact for information;
      (2)   The vehicle or parts are considered abandoned;
      (3)   The vehicle or parts will be removed after 72 hours;
      (4)   The owner will be held responsible for all costs incidental to
removal, storage and disposal, and, if not paid, the owner’s registration
privileges will be suspended on that car; and
      (5)   The owner may avoid costs by removal of the vehicle or parts within
72 hours.
   (F)   If the tagged vehicle or parts which, in the opinion of the officer,
has a market value of $100 or more is not removed within the 72-hour period,
the officer shall in accordance with I.C. 9-22-1-14:
      (1)   Take photographs to illustrate the condition of the vehicle or
parts and require the vehicle or parts to be towed to a storage area;
      (2)   Immediately order the removal of the vehicle or parts to a storage
area;
      (3)   In accordance with I.C. 9-22-1-19, within 72 hours after the
removal of an abandoned vehicle or parts to the storage area, the public agency
shall prepare and forward to the Bureau an abandoned vehicle report, including
the make, model, if any, identification number and number of the license plate
(and engine number if applicable), and request that the Bureau advise the
agency of the name and most recent mailing address of the owner and of any
lienholder;
      (4)   Upon receipt of the requested information from the Bureau, the
public agency shall mail notice to the owner or any lien holder that the
vehicle or parts have been impounded at a certain location, that the vehicle or
parts must be claimed within 15 days of the date of the mailing notice, and
that the vehicle or parts will be disposed of after that time. The notice shall
also advise the owner that all costs incurred in removing and storing the
vehicle or parts are the owner’s legal responsibility;
      (5)   If the owner or lienholder appears to claim the vehicle before the
15-day time period, he or she shall be entitled to claim the impounded vehicle.
The costs of towing, storing and keeping of the impounded vehicle must be paid
to the service holding the vehicle before the vehicle may be released. If the
owner or lienholder does not appear within 15 days after the mailing of notice,
the Bureau shall sell the vehicle or parts to the highest bidder at a public
sale conducted after notice under I.C. 5-3-1, except only one newspaper
insertion one week before the public sale is required;
      (6)   If the vehicle is in such condition that the vehicle identification
numbers or other means of identification are not available to determine the
owner of record with the Bureau, the vehicle may be disposed of without notice
as permitted by I.C. 9-22-1-21;
      (7)   Upon complaint of a private property owner or persons in control of
the property upon which a vehicle has been left for more than 48 hours without
the consent of the owner or persons in control, the private property owner
shall follow the procedure set forth in this subchapter; and
      (8)   Neither the owner, lessee or occupant of the property from which an
abandoned vehicle is removed, or any public agency, towing service or
automobile, scrapyard, is liable for any loss or damage to the vehicle or parts
occurring during its removal, storage or disposition.
(Ord. 2000-06, passed 6-5-2000) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 VEHICLE ABANDONED ON RENTAL PROPERTY.
   A person who finds a vehicle believed to be abandoned on the person’s rental
property shall do the following:
   (A)   Attach in a prominent place a notice tag containing the following
information:
      (1)   The date, time, name and address of the person who owns the rental
property and a telephone number to contact for information;
      (2)   The vehicle is considered to be abandoned;
      (3)   The vehicle will be removed after 72 hours;
      (4)   The person who owns the vehicle will be responsible for all cost
incidental to the removal, storage and disposal of the vehicle; and
      (5)   The person who owns the vehicle may avoid costs by removal of the
vehicle or parts within 72 hours.
   (B)   Contact the Bureau to obtain the name and address of the person who
owns the vehicle.
   (C)   Deliver by certified mail a copy of the information contained in the
notice required under division (A) above to the person who owns the vehicle.
   (D)   If after 72 hours the person who owns a vehicle believed to be
abandoned on rental property has not removed the vehicle from the rental
property, the person who owns the rental property may have the vehicle towed
from the rental property. The person who owns the rental property shall give
the towing operator a copy of the certified letter required under division (C)
above as proof that notice of the towing has been given.
(Ord. 2000-06, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 91.07 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter does not apply to the following vehicles:
   (A)   A vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or constructed
for operation on privately-owned raceways;
   (B)   A vehicle stored as the property of a member of the armed forces of
the United States who is on active duty assignment;
   (C)   A vehicle located on a designated vehicle sales lot or at a commercial
servicing facility;
   (D)   A vehicle located upon property licensed or zoned as an automobile
scrapyard; or
   (E)   A vehicle registered and licensed under I.C. 9-18-12 as an antique
motor vehicle.
(Ord. 2000-06, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 91.08 COSTS CHARGED TO ABANDONED VEHICLE ACCOUNT.
   The costs for removal and storage of an abandoned vehicle or parts not
claimed by the owner or lienholder shall be paid from the Abandoned Vehicle
Account, the charge payable by the owner or lienholder for towing, storing or
removing an abandoned vehicle or parts may not exceed the limits established by
ordinance from time to time.
(Ord. 2000-06, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 91.09 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE.
   The proceeds of a sale of an abandoned vehicle or parts in accordance with
this subchapter shall be credited against all costs incidental to the removal,
storage and disposal of the vehicle.
(Ord. 2000-06, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 91.10 USE OF ABANDONED VEHICLE ACCOUNT.
   All costs incurred by the public agency in administering this subchapter
shall be paid from the Abandoned Vehicle Account. The County Council shall
annually appropriate sufficient monies to that Account for the purposes of this
subchapter. All monies remaining in the Account at the end of each year remain
in the Account and do not revert to the General Fund.
(Ord. 2000-06, passed 6-5-2000)
§ 91.11 CHARGES FOR TOWING, STORING OR REMOVING ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   The charge for towing the abandoned vehicle or parts shall not exceed
$100.
   (B)   The charge for removing abandoned vehicles or parts shall not exceed
$100.
   (C)   The charge for storing abandoned vehicles or abandoned parts shall not
exceed $8 per day of storage.
(Ord. 2000-06, passed 6-5-2000)
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
§ 91.25 DECLARATION OF A FIRE EMERGENCY.
   During extremely dry conditions, windy conditions, times of extreme heat or
at other times such that the danger and potential for fire and damage as a
result of spreading fire is great, the President of the County Board of
Commissioners is hereby authorized to declare a period of fire emergency within
the county. Upon declaration of fire emergency, the appropriate and available
news media shall be contacted by officials of the county for dissemination of
the condition to the general public.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 91.26 PROHIBITIONS.
   Upon declaration of fire emergency, no person shall intentionally set fire
to any structure, grasses, fence row, garbage, materials or other substance
unless that substance is completely contained in a closed incinerator. Upon
declaration of fire emergency, no open burning shall occur within county until
termination of the emergency by the President of the County Board of
Commissioners.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 5-20-1996) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.27 LAW ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Any law enforcement officer is charged with the responsibility of enforcing
this subchapter.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of §§
91.01 through
91.11 shall, on conviction, be fined in any sum not less than $10 nor more than
$100. In addition, any person violating the provision would also be responsible
for any related court costs, reasonable attorneys’ fees and for the charges and
costs of towing, storing or removing the subject vehicles.
   (B)   Any person who shall ignite or set any open fire during a declared
fire emergency which causes damage to persons or property shall be guilty of a
Class C misdemeanor as defined by state statutes. In addition, that person may
be assessed the actual costs of fighting and extinguishing the fire and may be
assessed the damages caused by the improper fire.
(Ord. 96-2, passed 5-20-1996; Ord. 2000-06, passed 6-5-2000)
CHAPTER 92: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
92.01   Policy statement
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Unlawful practice
   
92.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
92.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions
   
92.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
92.07   Interference, coercion or intimidation
   
92.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
   
92.09   Exemptions
   
92.10   Administrative enforcement
§ 92.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   It shall be the policy of the county to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq., as
amended, the federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, being 42
U.S.C. §§ 5301 et seq., as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 2017-16, passed 8-21-2017)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who (I.C. 22-9.5-2-2):
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
   COMMISSION. The State Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C. 22-
9.5-4-1.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)
   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint under
I.C. 22-9.5-6.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
92.04 through
92.08 or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or part of a building or structure that is
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a
residence by one or more families.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-8)
   FAMILIAL STATUS. One or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18
years being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody of
such individual or the written permission of such parent or other person. The
protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status
shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing
legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9), with the status of
such family being further defined in the definition for FAMILIAL STATUS.
Pursuant to 24 C.F.R. § 5.403 and 24 C.F.R. § 574.3, the definition of FAMILY
includes families regardless of the actual or perceived sexual orientation,
gender identity or marital status of its members.
   HANDICAP.
      (1)   With respect to a person:
         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of such person’s major life activities;
         (b)   A record of having such an impairment;
         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;
         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.; and
         (e)   Any other impairment defined in 910 I.A.C. 2-3.
      (2)   The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use of or
addictions to a controlled substance as defined in the Controlled Substances
Act, being 21 U.S.C. § 802 (910 I.A.C. 2-3-2(14)); nor does the term HANDICAP
include an individual solely because that individual is a transvestite (910
I.A.C. 2-3-2(14)).
   PERSON. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-11) Includes one or more individuals, corporations,
limited liability companies, partnerships, associations, labor organizations,
legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, non-
incorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under 11 U.S.C.,
receivers and fiduciaries.
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the rights to occupy the premises not owned by the occupant.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)
(Ord. 2017-16, passed 8-21-2017)
§ 92.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this section, §
92.09 and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or
rental of housing set forth in I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in §
92.04 shall apply to all dwellings except as exempted by division (B) below and
I.C. 22-9.5-3.
   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) below, nothing in §
92.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses
at any one time; provided, that in the sale of such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or
exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24-month period. The
private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on his or her behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses
at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be
exempted from application of this section only if such house is sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson or any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of
any such broker, agent or salesperson or person; and
         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
92.04(C), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title.
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purpose of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent,
other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in providing sales
or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions involving the sale
or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
      (3)   They are the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Ord. 2017-16, passed 8-21-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   (A)   As made applicable by §
92.03 and except as exempted by §§
92.03(B) and
92.09, it shall be unlawful:
      (1)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or
to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable
or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin.
      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services of
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin.
      (3)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or
published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status
or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination.
      (4)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not available
for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
      (5)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induct any person to sell or
rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry
into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
      (6)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap
of:
         (a)   That buyer or renter;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (7)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of:
         (a)   That person;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, DISCRIMINATION includes:
      (1)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by
such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification
on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
      (2)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
      (3)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months after
September 13, 1998, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a
manner that;
         (a)   The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
         (b)   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
         (c)   All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
            1.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
            2.   Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other
environmental controls in accessible locations; and
            3.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
   (C)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq. and of the American
National Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility and
usability for physically handicapped people (commonly cited as ANSI A117.1)
suffices to satisfy the requirements of division (B)(3)(c) above.
   (D)   Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made available to
an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health of
safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
(Ord. 2017-16, passed 8-21-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.05 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-
RELATED TRANSACTION means any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or familial status.
(Ord. 2017-16, passed 8-21-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICE.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her
in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on
account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national
origin.
(Ord. 2017-16, passed 8-21-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
92.03 through
92.06.
(Ord. 2017-16, passed 8-21-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempt to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status or national origin and because he or she is or has been
selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings;
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in division (A)
above; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A) above, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate shall be fined according
to local, state and federal law; and if bodily injury results shall be fined
not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and if
death results shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for
life.
(Ord. 2017-16, passed 8-21-2017)
§ 92.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq. shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those activities or
organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national
origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact
open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members
or from giving preference to its members.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply with
respect to housing for older persons. For the purpose of this section, HOUSING
FOR OLDER PERSONS means housing:
      (1)   Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of
the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the State Civil
Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program);
      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, person 62 years of age or
older; or
      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years
of age or older per unit.
(Ord. 2017-16, passed 8-21-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.10 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering this
chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioner as set forth
in division (B) below shall be vested in the chief elected official of the
county.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the county, because
of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully administer
enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this chapter, herein
elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of this chapter by
complainants to the State Civil Rights Commission for administrative
enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6, and the chief elected official
of the county shall refer all said complaints to the Commission as provided for
under division (A) above to said Commission for purposes of investigation,
resolution and appropriate relief as provided for under I.C. 22-9.5-6.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the county shall administer
their departments, programs and activities relating to housing and urban
development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter
and shall cooperate with the chief elected official and the Commission to
further such purposes.
   (D)   The chief elected official of the county, or his or her designee,
shall provide information on remedies available to any aggrieved person or
complainant requesting such information.
(Ord. 2017-16, passed 8-21-2017)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   TRANSIENT AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS, SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
      
111.   BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS
      
112.   RETAIL FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
      
113.   HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES
      
113.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: TRANSIENT AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS,
SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Exemptions
   
110.03   Request for exemptions
   
110.04   License required
   
110.05   License application
   
110.06   License fee
   
110.07   Waiting period
   
110.08   License limited to holder
   
110.09   License to be displayed
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER or SOLICITOR. Every person who shall sell or offer for sale goods,
wares or merchandise directly to a consumer by going from house to house for
the purpose of selling such goods or by selling such goods from a backpack or
vehicle, and every person who shall offer any goods, wares, milks, food stuffs,
bread, vegetables, fruits, farm products or provisions, ice cream, candy or
sundries on any public road, street, square or other place shall be deemed a
PEDDLER or SOLICITOR.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT or ITINERANT MERCHANT. All persons both as principals and
agents who engage in, do or transact any temporary or transient business in the
county by selling goods, wares and merchandise and who, for the purpose of
carrying on such business, hire, lease or occupy any room, building, vehicle,
railway, car, store, shop, vacant lot, parking lot, tent or other structure for
the exhibition and sale of goods, wares and merchandise, excepting those
hereinafter exempted. Any person conducting a business as above set forth
within the county for a period of less than 120 days in any calendar year shall
be deemed a TRANSIENT MERCHANT.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 7-2-2007)
§ 110.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales made to dealers, or
made by commercial travelers or selling agents in the usual course of business,
or to the bona fide sales of goods, wares and merchandise by sample for future
delivery, nor to sheriffs, constables or other public officers selling goods,
wares and merchandise for the benefit of creditors, nor produce or provisions
or fruit when such produce or provisions or fruit is of the seller’s own
raising, nor does it have any application to transient merchants who maintain
booths or other way of selling as part of the annual 4-H Fair or Blueberry
Festival, or other festivals conducted in the various towns within the county,
where such merchants are a part of and who have properly registered and paid
all fees necessary for their operation with the 4-H Fair, Blueberry Festival or
the Festival Committee of a town; provided, however, that all persons who
desire to sell produce, vegetables or fruits of their own raising before
peddling the same, shall apply to the County Auditor and make an affidavit to
the effect that the produce, vegetables or fruits, which he or she desires to
sell is of his or her own raising. If such person fails or refuses to make such
affidavit, then, if he or she peddles, he or she shall be liable to the penalty
provisions contained herein.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 7-2-2007) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 REQUEST FOR EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Any nonprofit or charitable organization desiring an exemption from
the terms of this chapter may make application for such exemption at the office
of the County Auditor, and the Board of County Commissioners shall conduct a
hearing on said application at its next regularly scheduled meeting following
receipt of said application.
   (B)   The County Commissioners are hereby empowered to grant such exemptions
where there is a showing that such organization is of a nonprofit nature and
that the funds raised by such sale are for educational, charitable or other
like purposes. Exemptions by the Commissioners include: County Boy Scouts;
County Girl Scouts; County 4-H; county youth; and school organizations.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 7-2-2007)
§ 110.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant, peddler or solicitor to
engage in, do or transact any business as such in the county without first
having obtained a license as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 7-2-2007) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Each transient merchant, solicitor or peddler desiring to do business
within the county shall file his or her verified application for a license for
that purpose with the County Auditor. Such application shall state the name and
give the residence of the applicant and shall state the room, building,
vehicle, railroad car, store shop, vacant lot or parking lot, tent or other
structure in which the applicant expects to do business and the make and
character of the goods, wares and merchandise he or she intends to sell, and
the length of time for which he or she desires to do business, and such other
matters which may reasonably be required.
   (B)   Further, once a license is obtained, a transient merchant or peddler
shall solicit or transact business only Monday through Friday from 9:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m., but not on a national or county holiday.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 7-2-2007) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 LICENSE FEE.
   The applicant for a license under the provisions of this chapter shall pay
to the County Auditor as a license fee, $100 for each year or any part thereof,
for which the applicant desires to engage in business as a peddler or transient
merchant within the county.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 7-2-2007)
§ 110.07 WAITING PERIOD.
   No license shall be issued under the terms of this chapter until after the
passage of 48 hours from the submission of the license application to the
County Auditor.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 7-2-2007)
§ 110.08 LICENSE LIMITED TO HOLDER.
   No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be good for more than one
person unless such persons are co-partners, nor for more than one place. No
license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 7-2-2007)
§ 110.09 LICENSE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Any license herein issued pursuant to this chapter shall be prominently
displayed by said transient merchant or peddler at all times while said
business is being transacted in this county.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 7-2-2007) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or persons violating this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
fined in a sum of not more than $2,500. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.
(Ord. 2007-07, passed 7-2-2007)
CHAPTER 111: BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS
Section
Contractor Registration and Licensing
   
111.01   Purpose and intent
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Exempt activity
   
111.04   Registration
   
111.05   Non-renewal of registration
   
111.06   Applicant for building permits by homeowner
 
   
111.99   Penalty
CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION AND LICENSING
§ 111.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to require the
registration of all contractors engaged in activities requiring or covered
under a building permit issued pursuant to the state’s One- and Two-Family
Dwelling Code and/or the State Building Code pursuant to Chapter 150 of this
code of ordinances.
   (B)   This subchapter shall not require homeowners to register as a
contractor before performing services covered by this subchapter on their own
property. The owner and/or resident of a parcel of real estate shall be exempt
from the registration requirements of this subchapter to the extent that
activities which would normally require the performer to be registered are
being conducted wholly and totally upon property owned by and/or upon which the
provider of said services is a resident and the owner of the parcel of real
estate assumes all responsibility.
   (C)   The county, by requiring registration of certain service providers, is
not in any way intending to test, license or judge the credibility or ability
of any particular person who should become registered. The county is merely
providing a means whereby service providers shall become registered, and any
complaints against said service provider might be made in a more organized
fashion and against a party about whom basic information has been acquired. The
county in no way presumes or intends to accept any liability for the quality of
work of any said registrant.
   (D)   This registration subchapter does not require a contractor to carry
insurance for the benefit of the homeowner, and nothing herein permits the
homeowner to make a claim through any of the insurance requirements or bonding
requirements set forth below. This subchapter does not guarantee the
contractor’s work to be of any particular quality, and it is recommended that
the homeowner contract with contractors concerning additional insurance.
(Ord. 2013-20, passed 12-2-2013)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTOR. Includes any person, firm or corporation engaging for
remuneration in the building construction business, including any new
construction, repairs, alteration, demolition or remodeling for which a
building permit is required in the county, under
Chapter 150 of this code of ordinances. Such contracting activities shall also
include structural, electrical, plumbing and heating and air conditioning work
and other such related activities.
   HANDYPERSON. Includes any person providing for a fee repair or maintenance
services which would not require a building permit under Chapter 150 of this
code of ordinances.
(Ord. 2013-20, passed 12-2-2013)
§ 111.03 EXEMPT ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Any person working as a handyperson is not required to be registered.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who contracts and engages in any
activity which is not directly related to the building, repair, alteration,
demolition or remodeling of a structure is not required to register.
(Ord. 2013-20, passed 12-2-2013)
§ 111.04 REGISTRATION.
   Any contractor doing business in the incorporated or unincorporated areas of
the county, working on a building project requiring a permit from the County
Building Department or from an incorporated area building department, shall be
required to register with the County Building Department.
   (A)   Registrants shall show proof by a certificate of insurance for general
liability insurance maintained by the registrant.
   (B)   Registrants shall show proof of worker’s compensation insurance
coverage or proof of a duly filed affidavit of independents contractor status
with the state.
   (C)   Registrants shall provide a $20,000 license and permit bond for all
incorporated and unincorporated areas of the county.
   (D)   Registrants shall pay a registration fee of $50, which fee shall cover
a one-year period beginning on January 1 of each year and ending on December 31
of each year.
(Ord. 2013-20, passed 12-2-2013)
§ 111.05 NON-RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION.
   Registration of a contractor may be denied by the County Building
Commissioner if a contractor has refused to comply with the Building Code or
refused to comply with
Chapter 150 of this code of ordinances after having received a written notice
of said violations during the previous year.
(Ord. 2013-20, passed 12-2-2013)
§ 111.06 APPLICANT FOR BUILDING PERMITS BY HOMEOWNER.
   If a homeowner applies for a building permit pursuant to
Chapter 150 of this code of ordinances, the homeowner shall indicate what
contractor the homeowner is employing if the homeowner is not completing all of
the work contemplated by the building permit.
(Ord. 2013-20, passed 12-2-2013)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate §§
111.01 through
111.06. The violation of §§
111.01 through
111.06 by any person, firm or corporation shall be deemed a Class C
misdemeanor. Such violation shall be enforced in any manner that ordinance
violations may be prosecuted. In addition, the county may pursue civil relief
to prevent or enjoin further violations.
(Ord. 2013-20, passed 12-2-2013)
CHAPTER 112: RETAIL FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
Retail Food Service Establishment Sanitation
   
112.01   Adoption of Department of Health retail food establishment sanitation
requirements
   
112.02   Permits
   
112.03   Minimum requirements for food service establishments
   
112.04   Sale, examination and condemnation of unwholesome, adulterated or
misbranded food
   
112.05   Inspection of food service establishments
   
112.06   Inspection of temporary food service establishments
   
112.07   Approval of plans
 
   
112.99   Penalty
RETAIL FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT SANITATION
§ 112.01 ADOPTION OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT SANITATION
REQUIREMENTS.
   The county hereinafter adopts the State Department of Health retail food
establishment sanitation requirements set out in 410 I.A.C. 7-24.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 4-1-2002)
§ 112.02 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service
establishment or temporary food service establishment in the county who does
not possess a valid permit from the County Health Officer or his or her duly-
authorized representative (hereinafter referred to as “Health Officer”). Such
permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in such food service
establishment or temporary food service establishment. Only persons who comply
with the applicable requirements of this subchapter shall be entitled to
receive and retain such a permit. The permit for a retail food service
establishment shall be for a term of one year, beginning January 1 and expiring
December 31 of the same year and shall be for the term of one continuous
operation. Any permit issued by the Health Officer shall contain the name and
address of the person to whom the permit is granted, the address of the
premises for which the same is issued and such other pertinent data as may be
required by the Health Officer.
      (2)   A separate permit shall be required for each food service
establishment or temporary food service establishment operated or to be
operated by any person. A permit issued under this subchapter is not
transferable.
      (3)   A permit shall be issued to any person on application after
inspection and approval by the Health Officer; provided, that the food service
establishment or temporary food service establishment complies with all the
applicable provisions of this subchapter. In the event any permit upon
application for renewal is denied, the aggrieved permittee shall be afforded
the same rights under this subchapter as is applicable to a permittee upon
revocation of a permit under §
112.05(E) and (F).
      (4)   No permit or renewal thereof shall be denied or revoked on
arbitrary or capricious grounds.
   (B)   License and license fee.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service
establishment in the county who does not possess a valid license for the
operation of such establishment. The license shall be for a term of one year,
beginning January 1 and expiring December 31 of the same year and shall be
renewed annually.
      (2)   Such license shall be provided by the County Health Department, if
there is presented at the County Health Department, a valid permit from the
Health Officer, together with the applicable fee based upon the County Health
Department’s fee ordinance as it is presently established or as it may be
amended from time to time.
      (3)   Any person who desires to operate a temporary food service
establishment in the county shall, after securing a permit from the Health
Officer, obtain from the County Health Department a license for a temporary
food service establishment. Such license shall be provided by the County Health
Department, if there is presented at his or her office a valid permit from
Health Officer, together with the applicable fee based upon the County Health
Department’s fee ordinance as established or as may be amended from time to
time.
      (4)   A separate license shall be required for each food service
establishment or temporary food service establishment operated or to be
operated by any person. A license issued under this subchapter is not
transferable.
   (C)   License and license fee.
      (1)   No license shall be required and no license fee shall be paid for
food service establishments or temporary food service establishments owned or
operated by governmental or taxing entities.
      (2)   No license shall be required and no license fee shall be paid for
food service establishments or temporary food service establishments operated
by religious, educational or charitable organizations, unless said
establishment is in operation more than 30 days in a calendar year; however,
such establishments shall comply with other provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 4-1-2002) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS.
   All food service establishments and temporary food service establishments
shall comply with the minimum requirements specified by the State Board of
Health, as now provided in its 410 I.A.C. 7-24, the retail food establishment
sanitation requirements as the same may hereafter be changed or amended. Such
regulation and any changes and amendments thereto which may be hereafter
adopted or promulgated are by reference incorporated herein and made part
hereof, copies of which are on file in the office of the County Auditor for
public inspection.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 4-1-2002)
§ 112.04 SALE, EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF UNWHOLESOME, ADULTERATED OR
MISBRANDED FOOD.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell through a food service
establishment or temporary food service establishment any food which is
unwholesome, adulterated or misbranded.
   (B)   Samples of food maybe taken and examined by the Health Officer as
often as may be necessary to determine freedom from contamination, adulteration
or misbranding. The Health Officer may, on written notice to the owner or
operator, impound and forbid the sale of any food which is unwholesome,
adulterated or misbranded, or which he or she has probable cause to believe is
unfit for human consumption, or is unwholesome, adulterated or misbranded;
provided, that in the case of misbranding which can be corrected by proper
labeling, such food may be released to the operator for correct labeling under
the supervision of the Health Officer. The Health Officer may also cause to be
removed or destroyed any dairy product, meat, meat product, seafood, poultry,
poultry product, confectionery, bakery product, vegetable, fruit or other
perishable articles which in his or her opinion are unsound, or contain any
filthy, decomposed or putrid substance, or that may be poisonous or deleterious
to health or otherwise unsafe.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 4-1-2002) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.05 INSPECTION OF FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Frequency of inspection. At least once each six months the Health
Officer shall inspect each food service establishment for which a permit is
required under the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Procedure when violations noted. If, during the inspection of any food
service establishment, the Health Officer discovers the violation of any of the
requirements in §
112.03, he or she shall issue a written order listing such violations to the
proprietor or, in his or her absence, to the person in charge, and fixing a
time within which the said proprietor of said food service establishment shall
abate and remedy such violations. A copy of the written order shall be filed
with the records of the Health Department.
   (C)   Authority to inspect and to copy food records. The person operating
the food service establishment shall, upon the request of the Health Officer,
permit such Health Officer or his or her authorized representative access to
all parts of such food service establishment and shall permit the Health
Officer or his or her authorized representative to collect evidence and/or
exhibits and to copy, any or all records relative to the enforcement of this
subchapter.
   (D)   Final inspection; prosecution or hearing for violators. If, upon a
second and final inspection, the Health Officer finds that such food service
establishment, person or employee is in violation of any of the provisions of
this subchapter, which were in violation on the previous inspection, and
concerning which a written order was issued, the Health Officer shall furnish
evidence of the violation to the prosecutor having jurisdiction in the county
in which the violation occurs, and he or she shall prosecute all persons
violating said provisions of this subchapter; or the Health Officer may
promptly issue a written order to the permittee of such food service
establishment to appear at a certain time, no later than ten days from the date
of final inspection, and at a place in said county fixed in said order to show
cause why the permit issued under the provision of §
112.02(A) should not be revoked.
   (E)   Revocation. The Health Officer, upon such hearing, if the permittee
should fail to show cause, shall issue an order revoking the permit to be
effective upon the expiration of ten days from date of notification by written
notice of such action to the permittee. The Health Officer shall maintain a
permanent record of his or her proceedings filed in the office of the Health
Department.
   (F)   Review.
      (1)   (a)   Any permittee who has been served or received a written order
revoking a permit issued by the County Health Officer pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter shall have the right of review of said order by
the County Board of Review (consisting of those members described by state
statute, if any, and the County Commissioners), by filing written notice or
petition asking for such review within five days from the date of receipt of
such order at the office of the County Board of Health, setting out therein all
objections and other statements applicable to such order. The permittee shall
duly sign and date the notice or petition and designate thereon the address to
which any notices shall be mailed by said County Board of Review as provided in
this section.
         (b)   The County Board of Review shall notify the permittee three days
in advance of the date of hearing of such notice or petition as set by the
County Board of Review by forwarding the notice to the address as specified on
the petition or notice filed by permittee with full postage prepaid and
deposited in the U.S. mail. The County Board of Review shall hold a hearing not
less than 15 days from the date of filing of the notice to petition for review.
         (c)   Notice of the final action of the County Board of Review shall
be sufficient if a statement in writing showing the determination by the County
Board of Review in either conferring the original order or denying the original
order and also specifying the time limit for compliance therewith by a letter
signed by the Secretary or any member of the County Board of Review and
enclosed in a sealed envelope with full postage pre-paid and addressed to the
permittee at the addresses shown on the petition or notice filed for the review
and deposited in the U.S. mail.
      (2)   In the event an appeal is timely filed under the provisions of this
subchapter, any permit upon which there has been an order of revocation shall
not be effective to revoke said permit during the time the appeal is being
considered by the County Board of Review.
      (3)   In the event the County Board of Review confirms the original
order, the permittee shall be given additional time by the County Board of
Review of not more than ten days from the date of the decision of the County
Board of Review, before the order shall revoke the permit.
   (G)   Reinstatement of permit. Any person whose permit has been suspended
may at any time make application to the Health Officer for the reinstatement of
his or her permit.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 4-1-2002) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.06 INSPECTION OF TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Frequency of inspection. At least once in each 24-hour period the
Health Officer may inspect each temporary food service establishment for which
a permit is required under the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Procedure to follow when any violation noted. If during the inspection
of any temporary food service establishment the Health Officer discovers the
violation of any of the requirements in §
112.03, he or she shall order the immediate correction of the violation.
   (C)   Authority to inspect and to copy records. The person operating the
temporary food service establishment shall, upon the request of the Health
Officer, permit such Health Officer or his or her authorized representative
access to all parts of the temporary food service establishment and shall
permit collecting evidence and/or exhibits and copying any or all records
relative to the enforcement of this subchapter.
   (D)   Revocation of permit and penalties for continued operation. Upon
failure of any person maintaining or operating a temporary food service
establishment to comply with any order of the Health Officer, it shall be the
duty of the Health Officer summarily to revoke the permit of such person and
establishment and to forbid the further sale or serving of food therein. Any
person continuing to sell or serve food in such temporary food service
establishment, the permit of which has been revoked, shall be subject to the
penalties provided in §
112.99.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 4-1-2002) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.07 APPROVAL OF PLANS.
   All food service establishments which are hereafter constructed or altered
shall conform with the applicable requirements set forth in §
112.03. Properly prepared plans and specifications shall be submitted to and
approved by the Health Officer as may be required before starting any
construction work.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 4-1-2002)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§
112.01 through
112.07 shall be fined. The violator shall be punished for the first offense by
a fine of not more than $500, for the second offense by a fine of not more than
$750, and for a third and each subsequent offense by a fine of not more than
$1,000. Each day of operation of a food service establishment or temporary food
service establishment in violation of §
112.02(A) or after the expiration of the time limit for abating unsanitary
conditions and completing improvements to abate such conditions as ordered by
the Health Officer, shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 4-1-2002)
CHAPTER 113: HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   License and tags required
   
113.03   Fees
   
113.04   Exceptions
   
113.05   Administration and enforcement
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLE. A buggy, carriage, dray, wagon or trailer towed
behind a horse-drawn or non-motorized vehicle, or other conveyance on wheels,
used for the purpose of transporting chattels or persons which generally uses
one or more horse(s) as its source of power.
      FIELD WAGONS. Wagons used principally for field work and not typically
used in the conveyance of persons or commodities on the roads. As such, they
shall be specifically exempt from the definition of horse-drawn vehicle, as
described above.
      OWNER OF A HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLE. Any individual, firm, corporation or
association that owns, rents, leases or has exclusive use of a horse-drawn
vehicle for a period of at least 30 days in any calendar year.
      RESIDENT OF THE COUNTY. A person who has his or her principal place of
residence in Marshall County, Indiana, or who owns or operates a business
within said county.
(Ord. 2015-19, passed 12-7-2015)
§ 113.02 LICENSE AND TAGS REQUIRED.
   (A)   The County Highway Department shall make available for sale a numbered
metallic tag bearing the legend “Marshall County, Indiana,” the year of issue
and a consecutive number. The Highway Department shall provide metallic tags or
self-adhesive label tags for calendar years following the adoption of this
section. The County Highway Department shall distribute the tags to an agent
designated by the County Board of Commissioners who shall sell the tags,
collect the established fees (see §
113.03(F)) and transmit the fees to the County Highway Department.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate a horse-
drawn vehicle, if the owner of said horse-drawn vehicle is a resident of the
county upon a public highway in the county, unless the metallic tag required by
this section is attached to the horse-drawn vehicle for which the license fee
required has been paid.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate a horse-drawn
vehicle, if the owner of said horse-drawn vehicle is a resident of the county,
upon a public highway or road in the county, with an expired metallic tag
required by this section.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer the numbered
metallic tags required by this section from one horse-drawn vehicle to another
horse-drawn vehicle, or from one owner to another owner.
(Ord. 2015-19, passed 12-7-2015) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.03 FEES.
   (A)   Annual fee-horse-drawn vehicle.
      (1)   Every resident of the county who is the owner of a horse-drawn
vehicle shall pay an annual fee in the sum of $50. Upon payment of the annual
fee, the resident shall be issued a tag for that horse-drawn vehicle.
      (2)   Each tag sold will be assessed a $3 processing fee to be retained
by the designated collecting agency.
      (3)   Each numbered metallic tag or self-adhesive label tag shall be
valid from March 1 to May 31 the following year and all numbered metallic tags
or self-adhesive label tags shall expire at midnight on May 31 of the year
following the date stamped on said numbered metallic tag.
      (4)   Each owner of a horse-drawn vehicle shall pay the license fee
attributable to a horse-drawn vehicle as set forth by this section to the
designated agent, after March 1 and before May 31 of each year and shall
receive from said designated agent a metallic tag or self-adhesive label tag
for each horse-drawn vehicle license purchased.
      (5)   The owner shall thereafter permanently affix the numbered metallic
tag or self-adhesive label tag to such horse-drawn vehicle.
      (6)   Only one metallic tag provided by this section may be attached to
any horse-drawn vehicle at any one time.
   (B)   Late fees.
      (1)   A late fee of $25 shall be imposed on any person registering for a
horse-drawn vehicle, which includes numbered metallic tags and self-adhesive
label tags, after May 31 of any year. No late fee shall apply to any horse-
drawn vehicle purchased after May 31 (with proof of purchase reflecting such
date) and the owner registers for a license of the horse-drawn vehicle
thereafter within 30 days.
      (2)   In the event that a person registers to replace a horse-drawn
vehicle, then a replacement fee in the amount of $25 shall be imposed for such
replacement of each horse-drawn license (metallic tag or self-adhesive label
tag) replaced. Each tag replaced will be assessed a $3 processing fee to be
retained by the designated collecting agency.
   (C)   Delivery of fees. All fees collected for each metallic tag and/or
self-adhesive label tag and each registration receipt issued shall be deposited
by the County Highway upon receipt from the designated collecting agency with
the County Auditor. The County Auditor shall place the funds in the County
Highway MVH Fund. The metallic tags or self-adhesive label tags shall be paid
from County Highway Funds.
   (D)   Time of collection. Each owner of each horse-drawn vehicle shall pay
the license fee attributable to a horse-drawn vehicle as set forth by this
section to the designated agent, after March 1 and before May 31 of each year
and shall receive from said designated agent a metallic tag and/or self-
adhesive label tag for each horse-drawn vehicle license purchased. The owner
shall thereafter permanently affix the numbered metallic tag and/or self-
adhesive label tag to such horse-drawn vehicle.
   (E)   Registration receipt(s). At the time of collection of the annual
license fee and the issuance of the metallic tag and/or self-adhesive label tag
for subsequent renewal years, a registration receipt shall be issued for each
numbered metallic tag and/or self-adhesive label tag purchased. The
registration receipt shall be countersigned by the owner of the horse-drawn
vehicle. The registration receipt shall be carried in or on the horse-drawn
vehicle at all times of operation upon the highways or roads of the county.
   (F)   Schedule of fees.
 
Annual fee                                                             $50
Processing fee                                                         $3
Processing fee (On registration receipt please note prior plate)       $3
Replacement fee for lost or stolen tag and/or label                    $25
Late fee (After May 31 each year)
Added after May 31 each year. Fee is waived with proof of purchase for $25
vehicle or trailer purchased after May 31 of current year.
 
(Ord. 2015-19, passed 12-7-2015)
§ 113.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing contained in this section shall levy a license fee on or require the
registration of a horse-drawn vehicle by a nonresident of the county, even if
such vehicle or trailer is from time to time used or operated upon the highways
or roads of the county.
(Ord. 2015-19, passed 12-7-2015)
§ 113.05 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the County Sheriff’s Department to enforce
this section, and any duly qualified and acting law enforcement officer may
enforce the terms of this section. Procedures for arrest and court appearances
shall be in accordance with I.C. 9-30-3, as amended. Proceedings for ordinance
violation shall be in accordance with I.C. 34-28-5, as amended.
   (B)   The County Commissioners in cooperation with the County Highway
Department, County Auditor and the designated agent shall arrange for the
administration of this section including the issuance of the metallic tags,
self-adhesive label tags and registration receipts for the licensing of horse-
drawn vehicles pursuant to this section.
   (C)   No part of this section shall be deemed to conflict with statutes of
the state regulating horse-drawn vehicles, but any conflict so far as possible
shall be reconciled under the statutory presumptions in Title 36. Each section
and clause of this section shall be deemed to be separate from every other
section and clause. If any one or more clauses or sections shall be found to be
illegal, or unconstitutional, or unenforceable, such findings shall not affect
any other section of the clause.
(Ord. 2015-19, passed 12-7-2015)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter shall be a Class C Infraction as defined now or
hereafter by I.C. 35. The fine for the first offense in any calendar year is a
presumptive fine of $50. In the event the fine is not paid within 30 days, the
fine may be collected through the County Ordinance Violation Bureau and the
violator is subject to additional court costs as may be allowed by law. A
second offense in any calendar year has an enhanced presumptive fine of $100.
(Ord. 2015-19, passed 12-7-2015)
CHAPTER 114: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Purpose
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   Advertising and lighting regulations
   
114.04   Hours of operation
   
114.05   Exhibition of sexually-explicit films or videos; regulations
   
114.06   Prohibitions regarding minors and sexually-oriented businesses
   
114.07   Nudity at sexually-oriented businesses prohibited
   
114.08   Regulations pertaining to live entertainment
   
114.09   Prohibition of distribution of sexual devices
   
114.10   Exemptions
Permits
   
114.25   Permit required
   
114.26   Investigation and application
   
114.27   Issuance of permit
   
114.28   Annual permit fee
   
114.29   Inspection
   
114.30   Expiration of permit
   
114.31   Suspension of permit
   
114.32   Revocation of permit
   
114.33   Judicial review of permit; denial, suspension or revocation
   
114.34   Transfer of permit
Licenses
   
114.45   Sexually-oriented business employee license
   
114.46   Issuance requirements
   
114.47   Renewal of license
 
   
114.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-oriented businesses
to promote the health and safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of
the county, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent
deleterious effects of sexually-oriented businesses within the county. The
provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing
a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor
effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution or
the State Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this chapter to in any way condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually-oriented
business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of said business.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, regardless of whether it
currently exists as a sexually-oriented business to any of the sexually-
oriented businesses defined in this chapter;
      (3)   The addition of any of the sexually-oriented businesses defined in
this chapter to any other existing sexually-oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any such sexually-oriented business.
   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY.
      (1)   The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male or female
genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or
      (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human
buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of
the female breast.
   OPERATOR. Includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or
person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
   PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES. Any premises that requires a license and/or
permit and that is classified as a sexually-oriented business.
   PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE. A person in whose name a permit and/or license to
operate a sexually-oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual
listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, limited liability company or other legal entity.
   PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building owned, leased or held by the United States,
the state, the county, the city, any special district, school district or any
other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, which
is used for governmental purposes.
   PUBLIC PARK or RECREATION AREA. Public land which has been designated for
park or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas or
similar public land within the county which is under the control, operation or
management of the county.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building,
which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE. A single-family, duplex, multiple-family or
mobile home park or subdivision as defined in the county zoning ordinance.
   SCHOOL. Any public or private educational facility, including, but not
limited to, child daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
college, colleges and universities. The term SCHOOL includes the school grounds
but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only
incidentally as a school.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areola area of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment and
escort agency or nude motel studio. Those businesses defined are as follows.
      (1)   ADULT ARCADE. An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors
or similar machines, or other image producing machines, for viewing by five or
fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized
by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A
commercial establishment which has a significant or substantial portion of its
stock-in-trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues
or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or
more of the following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others; and/or
         (c)   An establishment may have other principal business purposes that
do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video
store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
establishments from being categorized as an ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY
STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE as long as one of its principal business purposes is
offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the specified
materials which depict or describe specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, bottle club or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which
regularly features:
         (a)   Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
         (b)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (4)   ADULT MOTEL. A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment
which:
         (a)   Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration,
which provide patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, and which advertises the availability
of this sexually-oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the
public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including,
but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or
television;
         (b)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than
ten hours; or
         (c)   Allows for a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the sleeping room
for a time period of less than ten hours.
      (5)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
for any form of consideration.
      (6)   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual
activities.
      (7)   ESCORT. A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or
offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees
or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for
another person.
      (8)   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
      (9)   MASSAGE PARLOR. Any place where, for any form of consideration or
gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or
magnetic treatments or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body
which occurs as a part of or in connection with specified sexual activities, or
where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related
thereto, exposes his or her specified anatomical areas. The definition of
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES shall not include the practice of massage in or by
any licensed hospital, nor by a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or
osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional
athlete or athletic team or school athletic program, nor by any person or
entity licensed pursuant to state law.
      (10)   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person regularly appears in a
state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas for money or any form of
consideration, and is to be observed sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
      (11)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT. A business or commercial
establishment that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration a place where two or more persons may congregate,
associate or consort for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities
or the exposure of specified anatomical areas or activities when one or more of
the persons is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude. The definition of
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person
licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual
therapy.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or
      (2)   Human male genital in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence; and
      (5)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in this definition.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Increase in the
floor areas occupied by the business by more than 15%, as the floor areas exist
on the date this chapter takes effect.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Includes
any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; and
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the
ownership or control.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 114.03 ADVERTISING AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually-oriented
business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said
business under this chapter, to advertise the presentation of any activity
prohibited by any applicable state statute or local ordinance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually-oriented
business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said
business under this chapter, to display or otherwise exhibit the materials and/
or performances at such sexually-oriented business in any advertising or any
portion of the interior premises which is visible outside the premises. This
prohibition shall not extend to advertising of the existence or location of
such sexually-oriented business.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually-oriented
business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said
business under this chapter, to allow the exterior portion of the sexually-
oriented business to have flashing lights or any words, lettering, photographs,
silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner, except to the
extent permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually-oriented
business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said
business under this chapter, to erect, construct or maintain any sign for the
sexually-oriented business other than as permitted by the county zoning
ordinance and as follows:
      (1)   Signage shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or
pictorial representations in any manner and may contain only the legal name of
the enterprise; and
      (2)   Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid
color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The
background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall
be of a uniform and solid color.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually-oriented
business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said
business under this chapter, to allow the exterior portions of the
establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color.
This provision shall not apply to a sexually-oriented business if the following
conditions are met: the establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit
center; and the exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial
multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted
the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a
component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial
multi-unit center.
   (F)   All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually-
oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation
with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal
illumination of one footcandle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways.
This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient
illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually-oriented
business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the
incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the
required sketch or diagram of the premises.
   (G)   Nothing contained in this section shall relieve the operators of a
sexually-oriented business from complying with the requirements of the county,
commonly known as the “Sexually-Oriented Business Ordinance,” as it may be
amended from time to time, or any subsequently enacted county ordinances or
regulations.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.04 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be
operated, a sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for said business under this chapter, and allows such business
to remain open for business, or to permit any employee to engage in a
performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a
service or solicit a service between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. of
any particular day.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person while working as an employee of a
sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been
issued for said business under this chapter, and allows such business to remain
open for business, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance,
solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or
solicit a service between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any
particular day.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.05 EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY-EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS; REGULATIONS.
   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business,
other than a sexually-oriented motel/hotel, regardless of whether or not a
permit has been issued to said business under this chapter, which exhibits on
the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a
film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following
requirements.
   (A)   Upon application for a sexually-oriented business permit, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations, the location
of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises
wherein patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed 32
square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight feet. The
diagram shall also designate the place where this permit will be conspicuously
posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an
engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each
diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object
and should be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to
show the various internal dimension of all areas of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The County Board of
Commissioners or its designee may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal
applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted
and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since
it was prepared.
   (B)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
   (C)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station
may be made without the prior approval of the County Board of Commissioners or
its designee.
   (D)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager’s station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
   (E)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises have two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of
the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations.
   (F)   The view required in this section must be by direct line of sight from
the manager’s station.
   (G)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the
view area specified above remains unobstructed by any doors, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials or persons at all times and to
ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has
been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to this section.
   (H)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one
time. No holes, commonly known as “glory holes,” shall be allowed in the walls
or partitions that separate each viewing room from an adjoining viewing room or
restroom.
   (I)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access and an illumination of not less than two footcandle as measured at the
floor level.
   (J)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present on the premises.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.06 PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS AND SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person who operates or causes to be
operated a sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for said business under this chapter, to knowingly or with
reasonable cause knows, permits, suffers or allows:
      (1)   Admittance of a person under 18 years of age to the business
premises; or
      (2)   A person who is under 18 years of age to work at the business
premises as an employee.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually-oriented
business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance at
all times during such sexually-oriented businesses regular business hours.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any person under the
age of 18 years from entering the establishment.
   (D)   It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age
of 18, unless the attendant asked for and was furnished:
      (1)   A valid operator’s, commercial operator’s or chauffeur’s license;
or
      (2)   A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state
reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.07 NUDITY AT SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall allow public nudity in any sexually-oriented business.
   (B)   Any sexually-oriented business, which is found in violation of this
section, shall have its permit suspended pursuant to the provisions of §
114.31.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.08 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO LIVE ENTERTAINMENT.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, LIVE ENTERTAINMENT is defined as a
person who appears nude, semi-nude or a performance, which is characterized by
the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall perform live entertainment for patron(s) of a
sexually-oriented business establishment, except upon a stage at least 18
inches above the level of the floor, which is separated by a distance of at
least ten feet from the nearest area occupied by patron(s).
      (2)   No patron shall be permitted within ten feet of the stage while the
stage is occupied by a performer.
   (C)   The sexually-oriented business establishment shall provide separate
dressing room facilities for female and male performers that shall not be
occupied or used in any way by anyone other than performers.
   (D)   The sexually-oriented business establishment shall provide access for
performers between the stage and the dressing rooms, which are completely
separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible,
the establishment shall provide a minimum four-foot wide walk aisle for
performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence,
or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers, which prevents any
physical contact between the patrons and performers.
   (E)   No entertainer, before, during or after a performance shall have
physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact
with any entertainer before, during or after a performance. This division (E)
shall only apply to physical contact while in or on the premises of the
establishment.
   (F)   Fixed rails at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained
establishing the separations between performers and patrons required by this
section.
   (G)   No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer.
A patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to a performer shall place the
gratuity in a container that is at all times located separately from the
performers for the purpose of preventing any physical contact between a patron
and a performer. No performer shall solicit any gratuity from any patron.
   (H)   No operator of a sexually-oriented business establishment shall cause
or allow a performer to engage in any entertainment such as a couch or straddle
dance with a patron while in or on the establishment premises.
      (1)   No performer shall contract to or engage in a couch or straddle
dance with a patron while in or on the establishment premises.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (H), COUCH OR STRADDLE DANCE is
defined as an employee of the establishment intentionally touching or coming
within ten feet of any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any
specified anatomical area or any specified sexual activity.
      (3)   For the purpose of this division (H), EMPLOYEE is defined as it is
in §
114.02.
   (I)   This section shall not apply to an employee of an establishment who,
while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess or bartender, comes within
ten feet of a patron. No employee shall engage in any specified sexual activity
or display or expose any specified anatomical area while acting as a waiter,
waitress, host, hostess or bartender.
   (J)   (1)   For purposes of this section, ESTABLISHMENT is defined as it is
in §
114.02. No establishment shall be in compliance with this section until the
county’s designated agent(s) have inspected and approved of the establishment’s
compliance. The county shall have ten days from the date it receives written
notice from the operator that the establishment is ready for inspection to
approve or disapprove of compliance required by this section. Failure to
approve or disapprove of compliance within ten days shall constitute a finding
of compliance under this section.
      (2)   The operator of an establishment, who has been providing live
entertainment under a valid sexually-oriented business permit, shall have the
time periods listed below in which to bring the establishment into compliance
with this section. Failure to do so while continuing to provide live
entertainment shall cause the establishment’s permit to be suspended under §
114.31. The permit shall remain suspended until the establishment is approved
by the county’s designated agent(s) as being in full compliance with this
section.
      (3)   The operator of establishment, who has been operating under a valid
permit for another classification of sexually-oriented business and who wishes
to provide live entertainment at that establishment, shall apply for and
receive a sexually-oriented business permit for the operation of an
establishment providing live entertainment before any live entertainment is
provided at that establishment. No live entertainment permit shall be issued
until the establishment is approved as being in full compliance with this
section and all other applicable requirements of this chapter.
      (4)   The applicant for a permit to operate a new establishment, who
wishes to provide live entertainment, shall apply for and receive a sexually-
oriented business permit for the operation of an establishment providing live
entertainment before any live entertainment is provided. No live entertainment
permit shall be issued until the establishment is approved as being in full
compliance with this section and all other applicable requirements of this
chapter.
      (5)   Compliance with division (B) above must occur within 60 days from
the date this section becomes effective.
      (6)   Compliance with division (C) above must occur within 90 days from
the date this section becomes effective.
      (7)   Compliance with division (D) above must occur within 90 days from
the date this section becomes effective.
      (8)   Compliance with division (E) above must occur upon the date this
section becomes effective.
      (9)   Compliance with division (F) above must occur within 60 days from
the date this section becomes effective.
      (10)   Compliance with division (G) above must occur upon the date this
section becomes effective.
      (11)   Compliance with division (H) above must occur upon the date this
section becomes effective.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.09 PROHIBITION OF DISTRIBUTION OF SEXUAL DEVICES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for anyone to distribute for commercial purposes, sell
or offer for sale, any device, instrument or paraphernalia designed or marketed
primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or
abuse of themselves or others.
   (B)   Such devices, instruments or paraphernalia shall include, but are not
limited to, phallic-shaped vibrators, dildos, muzzles, whips, chains, bather
restraints, racks, non-medical enema kits, body piercing elements (excluding
earrings or other decorative jewelry) or other tools or sadomasochistic abuse.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.10 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this chapter that
a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
      (1)   By a college, junior college or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;
      (2)   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
      (3)   In a structure:
         (a)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
         (b)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class; and
         (c)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter that an
employee of a sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether or not it is
permitted under this chapter, exposed any specified anatomical area during the
employee’s bona fide use of a restroom, or during the employee’s bona fide use
of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002)
PERMITS
§ 114.25 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, maintain or operate, or cause to be
conducted, maintained or operated, any sexually-oriented business within the
corporate limits of the county without first being licensed under this chapter.
   (B)   The County Board of Commissioners, or its designee, is responsible for
granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling sexually-
oriented business permits for proposed or existing sexually-oriented
businesses. The County Board of Commissioners, or its designee, is also
responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually-oriented business for
which a permit is being applied complies with all applicable zoning laws and/or
regulations now in effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective
date of this chapter in the county and the comprehensive plan of the county.
   (C)   The County Sheriff’s office shall be responsible for providing
information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
act during the time period set forth.
   (D)   The County Sheriff’s office shall be responsible for inspecting a
proposed permitted or non-permitted sexually-oriented business in order to
ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable statutes and ordinances.
   (E)   An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the
County Board of Commissioners. Any person desiring to operate a sexually-
oriented business shall file with the county an original and two copies of a
sworn permit application on the standard application form supplied by the
County Board of Commissioners or its designee.
   (F)   The completed application shall contain the following information and
shall be accompanied by the following documents:
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name
and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he or she is 18 years of
age;
         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name,
and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited,
and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any;
         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of the state, the names and capacity of all officers,
directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate
agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process; or
         (d)   A limited liability company, the limited liability company shall
state its complete name, the date of the approval of its articles of
organization, evidence that the limited liability company is in good standing
under the laws of the state, the names and capacities of all officers, managers
and members, and the name and address of the registered agent and registered
office for service of process.
      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually-oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state the
sexually-oriented business’s fictitious name and submit the required state
registration documents;
      (3)   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed in the
application has, within the two- or five-year period as specified in §
114.27 immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a
specified criminal act, and if so, the specified act involved and the date and
place of conviction;
      (4)   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed in the
application has had a previous permit under this chapter, or other similar
sexually-oriented business ordinances from another city or county denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually-oriented
business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the
date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any
other individuals listed in the application has been a partner in a partnership
or an officer, director of principal stockholder of a corporation, or an
officer, manager or member of a limited liability company that is permitted
under this chapter whose permit has previously been denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the sexually-oriented business for
which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of
denial, suspension or revocation;
      (5)   Whether the applicant or any other individual listed in the
application holds any other permits and/or licenses under this chapter or other
similar sexually-oriented business ordinance from another city, county or state
and if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses;
      (6)   The single classification of permit for which the applicant is
filing;
      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually-oriented business, including
a legal description of the property, street address and telephone number(s), if
any. The applicant’s mailing address and residential address;
      (8)   A recent photograph of the applicant(s);
      (9)   The applicant’s driver’s license number, Social Security number
and/or his or her state or federally-issued tax identification number;
      (10)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches;
      (11)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by a state registered land surveyor depicting the
property lines and the structures containing any established existing uses
regulated by this chapter within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified;
the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school
or public park or recreation area within 1,000 feet of the property to be
certified; and the property lines of any residentially zoned area or
residential property within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified. For the
purpose of this section, a use shall be considered EXISTING or ESTABLISHED if
it is in existence at the time an application is submitted;
      (12)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is
an individual, he or she must sign the application for a permit as the
applicant. If a person wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business
collectively with a group of individuals, each individual who has a 10% or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as the
applicant. If a corporation or limited liability company is listed as owner of
a sexually-oriented business or as the entity that wishes to operate such a
business, each individual having a 10% or greater interest in the corporation
or limited liability company must sign the application for a permit as the
applicant; and
      (13)   If a person wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business which
shall exhibit on the premises films, videos cassettes or other video
reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, then said person shall comply with the application requirements stated
at §§
114.05 through 114.11.
   (G)   Applicants for a permit under this section shall have a continuing
duty to promptly supplement application information required by this section in
the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the
application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within 30 days
from the date of such change shall be grounds for suspension of a permit.
   (H)   In the event that the County Board of Commissioners or its designee
determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed
the application for a proposed sexually-oriented business, he or she shall
promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten days to
properly complete the application. (The time period for granting or denying a
permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an
opportunity to properly complete the application.)
   (I)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with
health, fire and building codes and laws.
   (J)   The applicant shall be required to pay a non-refundable application
fee of $100 at the time of filing an application under this section.
   (K)   Prior to obtaining any permit or license to operate any sexually-
oriented business defined in this chapter and as part of any application for a
permit under this section, the applicant shall obtain from the County Board of
Commissioners or its designee a certification that the proposed location of
such business complies with the county zoning ordinance.
   (L)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits
and/or licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually-oriented business permit.
   (M)   By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall be
deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise
by the County Board of Commissioners or its designee, the County Sheriff’s
office and all other county agencies charged with enforcing the laws,
ordinances and codes applicable in the county of their respective
responsibilities under this chapter.
   (N)   The applicant shall be required to provide the county with the names
of any and all employees who are required to be licensed pursuant to §§
114.45 through
114.47. This shall be a continuing requirement even after a permit is granted
or renewed.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.26 INVESTIGATION AND APPLICATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the county and upon
payment of the non-refundable application fee, the County Auditor shall
immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately thereafter
send photocopies of the application to the appropriate county agencies
responsible for enforcement of health, fire and building codes and laws. Each
department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant,
application and the proposed sexually-oriented business in accordance with its
responsibilities under law and as set forth in this chapter. Said investigation
shall be completed within 20 days of receipt of the application by the County
Auditor. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency
shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval
of the application, date it, sign it and, in the event it disapproves, state
the reasons. The County Sheriff’s office shall only be required to certify the
NCIC records request check mentioned at §
114.27. The County Sheriff’s office shall not be required to approve or
disapprove applications.
   (B)   A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it finds
that the proposed sexually-oriented business will be in violation of any
provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in
the county. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department or
agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the County
Auditor who shall forward the application and any accompanying materials to the
County Board of Commissioners for consideration.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 114.27 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The County Board of Commissioners or its designee, shall grant or
deny an application for a permit within 30 days from the date of its proper
filing.
      (2)   Upon the expiration of the thirtieth day, unless the applicant
requests and is granted a reasonable extension of time, the applicant shall be
permitted to begin operating the business for which the permit is sought,
unless and until the County Board of Commissioners or its designee, notifies
the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reason(s) for that
denial.
   (B)   Grant of application for permit.
      (1)   The County Board of Commissioners or its designee shall grant the
application unless one or more criteria set forth in division (C) below is
present.
      (2)   The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of
the sexually-oriented business. The permit shall also indicate that the
sexually-oriented business shall be subject to prohibitions against public
nudity and indecency pursuant to the I.C. 35-45-4-1 and 35-45-4-1.5. The permit
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually-
oriented business so that it can be read easily at any time.
   (C)   Denial of application for permit.
      (1)   The County Board of Commissioners or its designee shall deny the
application for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
         (b)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue on his or her
payment to the county of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him
or her or imposed upon him or her in relation to a sexually-oriented business;
         (c)   An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a
permit by the County Board of Commissioners to operate a sexually-oriented
business within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose permit
to operate a sexually-oriented business has been revoked within the preceding
12 months;
         (d)   An applicant has failed to provide information required by this
section or permit application for the issuance of the permit or has falsely
answered a question or request for information on the application form;
         (e)   The premises to be used for the sexually-oriented business have
not been approved as being in compliance with health, fire and building codes
by the department or agency responsible under law for investigating said
compliance;
         (f)   The application or permit fees required by this chapter have not
been paid;
         (g)   An applicant of the proposed business is in violation of, or is
not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter or the county
zoning ordinance;
         (h)   The granting of the application would violate a statute,
ordinance or court order;
         (i)   The applicant has a permit under this chapter that has been
suspended or revoked;
         (j)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act for
which:
            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts which
are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with
another sexually-oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution
of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or tax
violations;
            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a felony offense; for the specified criminal acts which are
sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with
another sexually-oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution
of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution or tax violations;
            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses for specified criminal acts
which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes
connected with another sexually-oriented business, including, but not limited
to, distribution of obscenity or materials harmful to minors, prostitution,
pandering or tax violations; offenses occurring with any 24-month period;
            4.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on disqualification of the applicant; or
            5.   An applicant who has been convicted of the above described
specified criminal acts may qualify for a sexually-oriented business permit
only when the time period required above in this division (C)(1) has elapsed.
         (k)   An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ an employee who
does not have a valid license as required in §§
114.45 through
114.47.
      (2)   If the County Board of Commissioners or its designee denies the
application, he or she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the
reason(s) for the denial.
      (3)   If a person applies for a permit for a particular location within a
period of 12 months from the date of denial of a previous application for a
permit at the location, and there has not been an intervening change in the
circumstances which could reasonably be expected to lead to a different
decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the application shall be
denied.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 114.28 ANNUAL PERMIT FEE.
   The annual fee for a sexually-oriented business permit is $200.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 114.29 INSPECTION.
   (A)   An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the county
to inspect the premises of a sexually-oriented business for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
   (B)   A person who refuses to permit any such inspection of the premises at
any time that it is occupied or open for business shall be in violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 114.30 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in §
114.27 (for renewals, filing of original survey shall be sufficient).
Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration
date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the permit will not be affected.
   (B)   When the County Board of Commissioners or its designee denies renewal
of the permit, the applicant shall not be issued a permit under this chapter
for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the County
Board of Commissioners or its designee finds that the basis for denial of the
renewal of the permit has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a
permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 114.31 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners or its designee shall suspend a
permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if he or she determines that a
permittee, or an employee of a permittee, has:
      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
      (2)   Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages or any controlled
substance while working in the sexually-oriented business premises;
      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of sexually-oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter;
      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually-oriented
business premises;
      (5)   Operated the sexually-oriented business in violation of a building,
fire, health or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal,
state or local agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the event
of such statute, code, ordinance or regulation violation, the County Board of
Commissioners or its designee shall promptly notify the permittee of the
violation and shall allow the permittee a seven-day period in which to correct
the violation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation before the
expiration of the seven-day period, the County Board of Commissioners or its
designee shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee of
the suspension;
      (6)   Operated the sexually-oriented business in violation of the hours
of operation detailed in §
114.04; or
      (7)   Knowingly employed a person who does not have a valid license as
required in §§
114.45 through
114.47.
   (B)   The suspension shall remain in effect until the violation of the
statute, code, ordinance or regulation in question has been corrected.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.32 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners or its designee shall revoke a
permit if a cause of suspension listed in §
114.31 occurs and the permit has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
   (B)   The County Board of Commissioners or its designee shall revoke a
permit upon determining:
      (1)   A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant’s
opportunity for obtaining a permit;
      (2)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or
sale of controlled substances in or on the premises;
      (3)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on
the premises;
      (4)   A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually-oriented
business during a period of time when the permittee’s permit was suspended;
      (5)   A permittee has been convicted of a specified criminal act for
which the time period required in §
114.27 has not elapsed; or on two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a
person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted
premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been
obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually-oriented
business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a conviction is
being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit;
      (6)   A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes or fees
related to a sexually-oriented business;
      (7)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or any other specified
sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises;
      (8)   A permittee has been operating more than one sexually-oriented
business under a single roof; or
      (9)   A permittee has engaged in or attempted to engage in a transfer of
permit in violation of §
114.34.
   (C)   When the County Board of Commissioners or its designee revokes a
permit, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the permittee shall not
be issued a sexually-oriented business permit for one year from the date
revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the County Board of
Commissioners or its designee finds that the basis for revocation under this
section has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least
90 days have elapsed since the date of revocation became effective. If the
permit was revoked under this section, an applicant may not be granted another
permit until the number of years required under this section has elapsed.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 114.33 JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PERMIT; DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or
suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee may seek
judicial review of the administrative action in the County Superior Court or
Circuit Court.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 114.34 TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permittee shall not operate a sexually-oriented business under the
authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the
application for permit.
   (B)   A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another person.
   (C)   A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another location.
   (D)   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in
violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be
deemed revoked.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
LICENSES
§ 114.45 SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   Each individual to be employed in a sexually-oriented business, as defined
in §
114.02, who engaged in the services rendered by a nude model studio, escort or
escort agency, sexual encounter establishment, massage parlor or a live
performer or entertainer, shall be required to obtain a sexually-oriented
business employee license. Each applicant shall pay a permit fee of $25. Said
fee is to cover reasonable administrative costs of the licensing application
process.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.46 ISSUANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Before any applicant may be issued a sexually-oriented business employee
license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the County
Board of Commissioners or its designee the following information:
   (A)   The applicant’s name or any other name (including stage names) or
aliases used by the individual;
   (B)   Age, date and place of birth;
   (C)   Height, weight, hair and eye color;
   (D)   Present residence address and telephone number;
   (E)   Present business address and telephone number;
   (F)   Social Security number;
   (G)   Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of
age;
   (H)   Attached to the application form as provided above, a color photograph
of the applicant clearly showing the applicant’s face, and the applicant’s
fingerprints on a form provided by the County Sheriff’s office. Any fees for
the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;
   (I)   A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant
for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, including whether such applicant previously operating or seeking
to operate in this or any other county, city, state or country has ever had a
license, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended,
or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or
suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, the
statement shall state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction
and describe in full the reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension. A
copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the
application;
   (J)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act
as defined in §
114.27(C)(1)(j). This information shall include the date, place and nature of
each conviction or plea of nolo contendere and identify the convicting
jurisdiction;
   (K)   The County Board of Commissioners or its designee shall refer the
sexually-oriented business employee license application to the County Sheriff’s
office for an investigation to be made of such information as is contained on
the application. The application process shall be completed within ten days
from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the
County Board of Commissioners or its designee shall issue a license unless the
report from the County Sheriff’s office finds that one or more of the following
findings are true;
   (L)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in any report
or record required to be filed with the County Sheriff’s office or other
department of the county;
   (M)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;
   (N)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act as
defined in §
114.27(C)(1)(j);
   (O)   The sexually-oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or
regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this chapter; and
   (P)   The applicant has had a sexually-oriented business employee license
revoked by the county within two years of the date of the current application.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.47 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal by the County Board of Commissioners or its designee upon the written
application of the applicant and a finding by the County Board of Commissioners
or its designee and the County Sheriff’s office that the applicant has not been
convicted of any specified criminal act as defined in §
114.27(C)(1)(j) or committed any act during the existence of the previous
license period which would be grounds to deny the initial permit application.
   (B)   The renewal of the license shall be the same as the initial
application fee.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $2,500 for each violation. Each day of continued
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   In addition to seeking penalties against individuals who violate
provisions of this chapter, the County Attorney or his or her designated
representative may commence legal action seeking injunctive relief against any
individuals violating the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-2002)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   CURFEW
CHAPTER 130: CURFEW
Section
   
130.01   Curfew for minors
   
130.02   Curfew violations
   
130.03   Exemptions
   
130.04   Enforcement
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   It is a curfew violation for a child 15, 16 or 17 years of age to be in a
public place:
   (A)   Between 12:00 midnight on Friday and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday, and 12:00
midnight on Saturday and 5:00 a.m. on Sunday;
   (B)   After 11:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday; or
   (C)   Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday.
(Ord. 95-9, passed 12-4-1995) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 CURFEW VIOLATIONS.
   It is a curfew violation of a child under 15 years of age to be in a public
place after 10:00 p.m. or before 5:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Ord. 95-9, passed 12-4-1995) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   A child is not in violation of this chapter who is:
   (A)   Accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or custodian;
   (B)   Accompanied by an adult specified by his or her parent, guardian or
custodian; or
   (C)   Participating in, going to or returning from:
      (1)   Lawful employment;
      (2)   A school sanctioned activity; or
      (3)   A religious event.
(Ord. 95-9, passed 12-4-1995)
§ 130.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any law enforcement officer is charged with the responsibility of enforcing
this chapter. A child found to be in violation of this chapter shall be issued
a citation which shall then be administered by the Ordinance Violation Bureau
of the County Clerk’s office. In addition, a child found in violation of this
chapter shall immediately be taken into the temporary custody of the law
enforcement officer, who shall then notify the child’s parent, guardian or
custodian. Temporary custody of the child shall remain with the law enforcement
officer until the child is surrendered to the child’s parent, guardian or
custodian, or to an adult specified by the child’s parent, guardian or
custodian, or until 5:00 a.m., whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 95-9, passed 12-4-1995) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   The first time a child is found in violation of this chapter, the Ordinance
Violation Bureau is hereby authorized to assess and collect a $10 fine from the
child. The second time a child is found to be in violation of this chapter, the
Ordinance Violation Bureau is hereby authorized to assess and collect a $25
fine. The third time a child is found in violation of this chapter, the law
enforcement officer shall issue a citation to one of the child’s parents,
guardians or custodians. The Ordinance Violation Bureau is hereby authorized to
assess and collect a fine of $50 from the cited parent, guardian or custodian
of a child found in violation of this chapter for the third time. In addition,
the law enforcement officer may refer the child and the case to the appropriate
juvenile authorities of the county.
(Ord. 95-9, passed 12-4-1995)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING CODE
      
151.   UNSAFE BUILDINGS
      
152.   ADDRESSING SYSTEM
      
153.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
      
154.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
155.   PLANNING, SUBDIVISION AND ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Title
   
150.02   Purpose
   
150.03   Definitions
   
150.04   Scope
   
150.05   Authority
   
150.06   Stop work order
   
150.07   Right of appeal
   
150.08   Fees
Building Permits
   
150.20   Building permit required
   
150.21   Application for building permit
   
150.22   Issuance
   
150.23   Certificate of occupancy
   
150.24   Withholding issuance of permits
   
150.25   Permit revocation
Investigations and Inspections of Construction Activities
   
150.40   General authority to make inspections and investigations
   
150.41   Inspections by Fire Department
Minimum Construction Standards
   
150.55   Adoption of rules by reference
   
150.56   Lifting devices located within a private residence
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 TITLE.
   This chapter and all material included herein by reference shall be known as
the county’s “Building Code.”
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the life, public safety, health
and general welfare of the citizens of the county and shall be construed in
such a manner to effectuate this purpose.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING COMMISSIONER. Includes individuals employed by the Building
Department who are authorized to represent the Building Commissioner.
   CLASS 1 STRUCTURE. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-4:
      (1)   Any part of the following:
         (a)   A building or structure that is intended to be or is occupied or
otherwise used in any part by any of the following:
            1.   The public;
            2.   Three or more tenants; or
            3.   One or more persons who act as employees of another.
         (b)   A site improvement affecting access by persons with physical
disabilities to a building or structure described in division (1)(a) of this
definition.
         (c)   Any class of buildings or structures that the Commission
determines by rules to affect a building or structure described in division (1)
(a) of this definition, except buildings or structures described in divisions
(3) and (5) of this definition.
      (2)   Division (1)(a) of this definition includes a structure that
contains three or more condominium units (as defined in I.C. 32-25-2-9) or
other units that:
         (a)   Are intended to be or are used or leased by the owner of the
unit; and
         (b)   Are not completely separated from each other by an unimproved
space.
      (3)   Division (1)(a) of this definition does not include a building or
structure that:
         (a)   Is intended to be or is used only for an agricultural purpose on
the land where it is located; and
         (2)   Is not used for retail trade or is a stand used for retail sales
of farm produce for eight or less consecutive months in a calendar year.
      (4)   Division (1)(a) of this definition does not include a Class 2
structure.
      (5)   Division (1)(a) of this definition does not include a vehicular
bridge.
      (6)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-24, STRUCTURE includes swimming pool.
   CLASS 2 STRUCTURE. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-5:
      (1)   Any part of the following:
         (a)   A building or structure that is intended to contain or contains
only one dwelling unit or two dwelling units unless any part of the building or
structure is regularly used as a Class 1 structure; or
         (b)   An outbuilding for a structure described in division (1)(a) of
this definition, such as a garage, barn or family swimming pool, unless any
part of the outbuilding is regularly used as a Class 1 structure.
      (2)   Division (1) of this definition does not include a vehicular
bridge; and
      (3)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-24, STRUCTURE includes swimming pool.
   CONSTRUCTION. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-7, any of the following:
      (1)   Fabrication of any part of an industrialized building system or
mobile structure for use at another site;
      (2)   Erection or assembly of any part of a Class 1 or Class 2 structure
at the site where it will be used;
      (3)   Installation of any part of the permanent heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, electrical, plumbing, sanitary, emergency detection, emergency
communication or fire or explosion suppression systems of a Class 1 or Class 2
structure at the site where it will be used;
      (4)   Work undertaken to alter, remodel, rehabilitate or add to any part
of a Class 1 or Class 2 structure; or
      (5)   Work undertaken to relocate any part of a Class 1 or Class 2
structure, except a mobile structure.
   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING SYSTEM. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-14, any part of a
building or other structure that is in whole or in substantial part fabricated
in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the
building site as part of a Class 1 structure, a Class 2 structure or another
building or structure; however, the term does not include a mobile structure or
a system that is capable of inspection at the building site.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-16, has the meaning set forth in
42 U.S.C. § 5402 as it existed on January 1, 1984. This definition is as
follows: MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or
40 body feet in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet,
and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities,
and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems
contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which
meets all requirements of this definition, except the size requirements and
with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification
required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with
the standards established under this 42 U.S.C. § 5402.
   MOBILE STRUCTURE. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-17:
      (1)   Any part of a fabricated unit that is designed to be:
         (a)   Towed on its own chassis; and
         (b)   Connected to utilities for year-round occupancy or use as a
Class 1 structure, a Class 2 structure or another structure.
      (2)   The term includes the following:
         (a)   Two or more components that can be retracted for towing purposes
and subsequently expanded for additional capacity; and
         (b)   Two or more units that are separately towable but designed to be
joined into one integral unit.
   PERSON. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-18, an individual, corporation, limited
liability company, partnership, unincorporated association or governmental
entity.
   STRUCTURE. Both Class 1 and Class 2 structures, unless specifically stated
otherwise.
   VEHICULAR BRIDGE. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-26, any bridge that is suspended
between two or more parts of a building or between two or more buildings, that
is neither:
      (1)   A pedestrian walkway; nor
      (2)   A passageway for light vehicles.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.04 SCOPE.
   (A)   All construction shall be accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-6, this chapter shall not apply to
industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under I.C. 22-
15-4; however, the provisions of this chapter and the rules promulgated by the
Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission do apply to any construction
related to an industrialized building system or mobile structure not certified
under I.C. 22-15-4.
   (C)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-9, this chapter is not applicable to
regulated amusement devices, regulated boilers, regulated pressure vessels or
regulated lifting devices.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.05 AUTHORITY.
   The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to administer
and enforce the following:
   (A)   All of the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Variances granted in accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-11; and
   (C)   Orders issued under I.C. 22-12-7.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.06 STOP WORK ORDER.
   (A)   The Building Commissioner may issue an order requiring suspension of
the pertinent construction (stop work order) in accordance with this section.
   (B)   The stop work order shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   State with specificity the construction to which it is applicable
and the reason for its issuance;
      (3)   Be posted on the property in a conspicuous place;
      (4)   If practicable, be given to:
         (a)   The person doing the construction; and
         (b)   The owner of the property or the owner’s agent.
      (5)   The stop work order shall state the conditions under which
construction may be resumed.
   (C)   The Building Commissioner may issue a stop work order if:
      (1)   Construction is proceeding in an unsafe manner, including, but not
limited to, in violation of any standard set forth in this chapter or any state
law pertaining to safety during construction;
      (2)   Construction is occurring in violation of this chapter in such a
manner that if construction is allowed to proceed, there is a reasonable
probability that it will be substantially difficult to correct the violation;
or
      (3)   Construction for which a building permit is required is proceeding
without a building permit being in force.
   (D)   The issuance of a stop work order shall in no way limit the operation
of penalties provided elsewhere in this chapter.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.07 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by an order issued under this chapter shall have
the right to petition for review of any order of the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   Such a person may file a petition using either, or both, of the
following procedures.
      (1)   Appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
         (a)   A person aggrieved by an order issued under this chapter may
submit a petition for review to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission, in accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-7.
         (b)   The Commission may modify or reverse any order that covers a
subject governed by I.C. 22-12 through 22-15, a fire safety rule or a building
rule.
         (c)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission must review
orders that concern a Class 2 structure if the person aggrieved by the order
petitions for review under I.C. 4-21.5-3-7 within 30 days after the issuance of
the order.
         (d)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission may review
all other orders issued under this chapter that cover a subject governed by
I.C. 22-12 through 22-15, a fire safety rule or a building rule.
         (e)   The review of an order by the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission does not suspend the running of the time period under any
statute in which a person must petition a court for judicial review of the
order.
      (2)   Appeal to an established local administration body or court.
Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-8-9, a person aggrieved by a decision of the Building
Department may appeal as in other civil actions. The appellant must, by
registered mail, give the County Executive a 15-days’ written notice of his or
her intention to appeal. This notice must concisely state the appellant’s
grievance. If, pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-9, the county has established by
ordinance to hear appeals of orders issued under ordinances, then a person
aggrieved by an order may petition for review with this administrative body in
accordance with said ordinance. If no such administrative body exists, then the
person may petition a court for judicial review of the order.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.08 FEES.
   (A)   The County Building Commissioner shall make inspections for all towns
enacting proper resolution designating the County Building Inspector to make
said inspections.
   (B)   The fee charged for inspections at each building site activity in
which the County Building Department and the County Building Inspector make
inspections shall be the sum of $50.
   (C)   (1)   The County Building Department and the towns will develop the
procedure for the collection and payment of said inspection fees in accordance
with state statute and the rules and regulations for the collection of
inspection fees set out by the county and in coordination with the County
Auditor.
      (2)   The collection and recording of said fees shall be distributable
into the appropriate accounts within the county.
         (a)   Improvement/location permit and building permit fees; combined
fees.
Structure Fee
Structure                                  Fee
Accessory building                         $30
Commercial (requires state design release) $200
Conventional home                          $100
Home addition                              $50
Modular home                               $50
Type A manufactured home (single-wide)     $50
Type B manufactured home (double-wide)     $50
 
         (b)   Improvement/location permit and building permit fees; buildings,
electrical and plumbing.
Improvement/Location Permit and Building Permit Fees
 Buildings Electrical Plumbing
Improvement/Location Permit and Building Permit Fees
                                                  Buildings Electrical Plumbing
Accessory structures
Permanent foundation                              $30       $30
Additions                                         $50       $30        $25
Additions - renovations
State release                                     $200      $30        $25
Deck, carport, open porch, enclosing existing     $30
structure
Manufactured and mobile homes                     $50       $30        $25
Mobile home park (elec) per unit                            $30
New building
State release                                     $200      $30        $25
New home (per unit)
2,000 sq. ft. or less                             $100      $30        $25
Over 2,000 sq. ft.                                $150      $30        $25
Re-inspection fee                                 $20       $20        $20
Roof
Structural changes                                $25
Swimming pools
In-ground                                         $50
On-ground                                         $30
Upgrade, new service, relocation of service,
alteration to service, connection of service to a           $30
manufactured home or mobile home
Upgrade, new service, relocation of service,                $30
replacement of service panel
 
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 2003-8, passed 11-3-2003; Ord. 2006-09,
passed 6-5-2006)
BUILDING PERMITS
§ 150.20 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Construction is prohibited unless in conformity with a valid building permit
obtained from the Building Commissioner prior to commencement of construction.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.21 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person required to have a building permit shall submit a complete
application to the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   This application shall be submitted on a form prepared by the Building
Commissioner and shall contain the following:
      (1)   Information that the Building Commissioner determines to be
necessary to locate and contact the applicant;
      (2)   A clear and understandable copy of detailed plans and
specifications drawn to scale which indicate in a precise manner the nature and
location of all work to be accomplished;
      (3)   A plot plan drawn to scale. This plot plan shall reflect the
location of the structure in relation to existing property lines and show
streets, curbs and sidewalks and proposed changes or additions to such streets,
curbs and sidewalks;
      (4)   If required by state law or any rule of the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission, a copy of a design release for the work to be done
that has been issued by the State Building Commissioner and the State Fire
Marshal pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3;
      (5)   Any additional information that the Building Commissioner finds to
be necessary to determine that the construction will conform to all applicable
building laws and will not violate any other applicable ordinances or laws; and
      (6)   The fee established by the Board of County Commissioners in §
150.08(C)(2)(a).
   (C)   Application for a building permit shall be made by the person entitled
to obtain the permit or by an employee or agent of that person. The Building
Commissioner may require that such an employee or agent provide written
authority to apply for a permit.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.22 ISSUANCE.
   The Building Commissioners shall issue a building permit to a person after
the person has submitted a complete application, including any applicable feel;
provided, that the proposed construction will conform to all applicable
building laws and will not violate any other applicable ordinances or laws.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.23 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure shall be
issued unless such building or structure was constructed in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to occupy any such building or structure unless a
full, partial or temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
Building Commissioner.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.24 WITHHOLDING ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Whenever a person who is either an applicant for a building permit or
an obtainer of a building permit owes fees (including checks returned for
insufficient funds, permit fees owed pursuant to §
150.08 or inspection fees owed pursuant to § 150.08 or another building code
with concurrent jurisdiction) to the Building Commissioner, the Building
Commissioner may withhold the issuance of subsequently requested permits, until
such time that the debt is satisfied.
   (B)   Whenever a person applies for a building permit for a structure that
is not being used or constructed in conformance with applicable provisions of
an applicable zoning ordinance or other ordinance relating to land use, the
Building Commissioner is authorized to withhold the issuance of requested
permits until such time that the property is brought into conformance with
applicable ordinances.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.25 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The Building Commissioner may revoke a building permit when any of the
following are applicable:
   (A)   The application, plans or supporting documents contain a false
statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact;
   (B)   The application, plans or supporting documents reflect a lack of
compliance with building standards and procedures;
   (C)   There is failure to comply with this chapter; or
   (D)   The structure for which the building permit has been issued is not
being used or constructed in conformance with an applicable zoning ordinance or
other ordinance relating to land use.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
§ 150.40 GENERAL AUTHORITY TO MAKE INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   All construction shall be subject to periodic inspections by the
Building Commissioner, irrespective of whether a building permit has been or is
required to be obtained.
   (B)   (1)   The Building Commissioner may at any reasonable time go in,
upon, around or about the premises where any structure subject to the
provisions of this chapter or to the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission is located for the purposes of inspection and investigation
of such structure.
      (2)   Such inspection and investigation may be made before and/or after
construction on the project is completed for the purposes of determining
whether the structure meets building standards and procedures and ascertaining
whether the construction and procedures have been accomplished in a manner
consistent with this chapter and the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.41 INSPECTIONS BY FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The Building Commissioner and the Fire Department shall work cooperatively
to conduct inspections and investigations to promote compliance with fire
safety laws. (The Fire Department has independent authority to conduct
inspections and take enforcement actions under I.C. 36-8-17.)
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 150.55 ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-3(b), the rules of the State Fire Prevention
and Building Safety Commission as set out in the following articles of 675
I.A.C. are hereby incorporated by reference in this code and shall include any
later amendments to those rules:
      (1)   Article 13: Building Codes:
         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards; and
         (b)   State Building Code.
      (2)   Article 14: State Residential Code;
      (3)   Article 16: State Plumbing Code;
      (4)   Article 17: State Electrical Code;
      (5)   Article 18: State Mechanical Code;
      (6)   Article 19: State Energy Conservation Code;
      (7)   Article 20: State Swimming Pool Code; and
      (8)   Article 22: State Fire Code.
   (B)   Two copies of the above building rules incorporated by reference are
on file in the office of the Clerk for the legislative body for public
inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
   (C)   The Building Commissioner and the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission may grant a variance to the fire safety laws and building laws
adopted in this chapter. Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-7(b), a variance granted by
the Building Commissioner is not effective until it has been approved by the
Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.56 LIFTING DEVICES LOCATED WITHIN A PRIVATE RESIDENCE.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-22(b)(12), lifting devices, such as elevators
and wheelchair lifts, located within a private residence are not regulated
lifting devices. Therefore, the following standards applicable to lifting
devices located within a private residence are incorporated by reference:
      (1)   Part 5.3, Private Residence Elevators, ANSI/ASME A17.1-2000, Safety
Code for Elevators and Escalators published by the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016;
      (2)   Part 5.4, Private Residence Inclined Elevators, ANSI/ASME A17.1-
2000, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators published by the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016;
      (3)   Section 5, Private Residence Vertical Platform Lifts, ASME A18.1a,
2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway
Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three
Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016;
      (4)   Section 6, Private Residence Inclined Platform Lifts, ASME A18.1a,
2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway
Chair Lifts, published the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park
Avenue, New York, New York 10016; and
      (5)   Section 7, Private Inclined Stairway Lifts, ASME A18.1a, 2001
(Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway Chair
Lifts, published the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park
Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
   (B)   Two copies of the above lifting device standards incorporated by
reference are on file in the office of the Clerk for the legislative body for
public inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be subject to a fine
in any sum not exceeding $2,500. The assessment of a monetary penalty shall in
no way limit the operation of penalties provided elsewhere in this chapter.
(Ord. 2003-03, passed 3-3-2003)
CHAPTER 151: UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Section
   
151.01   Title
   
151.02   State law adopted by reference
   
151.03   Unsafe buildings as public nuisance
   
151.04   Right of entry
   
151.05   Administration
   
151.06   Unsafe Building Board
   
151.07   Definitions
   
151.08   Reconstruction, alterations, repair or demolition
   
151.09   Funds
   
151.10   Violations
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 TITLE.
   In accordance with I.C. 36-7-9 et seq., this chapter is established and
shall be known as the county’s “Unsafe Building and Property Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 151.02 STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   For the purpose of vigorously protecting the health, safety and environment
of the public, the county adopts by reference I.C. 36-7-9 et seq. as the
county’s Unsafe Building and Property Ordinance. All proceedings within the
county for the inspection, repair and removal of unsafe buildings shall be
governed by I.C. 36-7-9 et seq. and the provisions of this chapter. In the
event the provisions of this chapter conflict with state statutes, the
provisions of the state statute shall control.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 151.03 UNSAFE BUILDINGS AS PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   All buildings and properties or portions thereof within the county which are
determined after inspection by the County Building Commissioner or his or her
duly designated representative, such as a representative from the County Health
Department or the code enforcement officer from the Plan Commission to be
unsafe as defined in this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances
and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 151.04 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Building Commissioner or his or her designated representative is
authorized under this chapter and under I.C. 36-7-2-3, as amended, to enter any
subject premises, structure or improvement at reasonable times to inspect the
same. If entry is refused, the Building Commissioner or his or her designated
representative is authorized to pursue an inspection warrant as provided by
law.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 151.05 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The County Building Commissioner shall be authorized to administer and
to proceed under the provisions of this chapter and state statutes in ordering
the repair or removal of any buildings or materials found to be unsafe as
specified therein or as specified hereafter.
   (B)   The County Building Commissioner is designated as the enforcement
authority.
      (1)   Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this
jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the Building
Commissioner shall have the authority to appoint a deputy code officer, other
related technical officer, inspectors and other employees.
      (2)   Liability. The Building Commissioner, while engaging in lawful
actions for the county, is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any
damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or
permitted in the discharge of official duties.
      (3)   Authority. The Building Commissioner has the authority to act
within the confines of this chapter and state statute. The Unsafe Building
Board, also designated as the hearing authority, has the authority to act
within the confines of this chapter and state statute.
      (4)   Identification. The Building Commissioner or his or her designated
representative shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or
premises in the performance of duties under this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 151.06 UNSAFE BUILDING BOARD.
   (A)   Membership.
      (1)   The County Unsafe Building Board is hereby designated the hearing
authority as outlined in I.C. 36-7-9 et seq. The Unsafe Building Board will
hear cases in accordance with I.C. 36-7-9 et seq.
      (2)   Membership of the Unsafe Building Board will consist of nine
members. Each member must be a resident of the county and be appointed as
follows.
         (a)   Each of the following towns in the county may appoint a member
to the Unsafe Board. The towns include: Argos, Bourbon, Bremen, Culver,
Plymouth and LaPaz.
         (b)   The County Commissioners will appoint one member of the Board.
         (c)   The County Council will appoint one member to the Board.
         (d)   One social services advocate will be appointed to the Board by
the County Commissioners.
      (3)   Neither the Building Commissioner nor his or her staff or his or
her designee may be a member of the Unsafe Building Board.
   (B)   Organization.
      (1)   Quorum. A quorum consists of a majority of the entire membership of
the Unsafe Building Board, who are qualified to vote.
      (2)   Organization; President and Vice President. At the first regular
meeting in each year, the Unsafe Building Board shall elect from its members a
President and a Vice President. The Vice President may act as President of the
Unsafe Building Board during the absence or disability of the President.
      (3)   Organization; Secretary. The Unsafe Building Board may appoint and
fix the duties of a secretary, who is not required to be a member of the Board.
      (4)   Organization; regular meeting and minutes. The Unsafe Building
Board shall fix the time for holding regular meetings as necessary. The Unsafe
Building Board shall keep minutes of its meetings, The minutes of the Unsafe
Building Board meetings and all records shall be filed in the office of the
Building Commissioner and are public records.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 151.07 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning, in
addition to the description of an unsafe building and unsafe premises described
in I.C. 36-7-9-4.
   SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. As set forth in I.C. 36-7-9-2.
   UNSAFE BUILDING. Any building or structure which has any or all of the
condition or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be unsafe;
provided, that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that life,
health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered:
      (1)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway or other means of exit is not
of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and
adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;
      (2)   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof,
due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working
stress or stresses allowed for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or
location;
      (3)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural
strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such
catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements for a new building or
similar structure, purpose or location;
      (4)   Whenever any portion, member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fall, to become detached or dislodged or to collapse and thereby injure persons
or damage property;
      (5)   Whenever any portion of a building or any member, appurtenance,
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not sufficient strength or stability
or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of
resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified for new buildings or
similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses
permitted for such buildings;
      (6)   Whenever any portion thereof has racked, warped, buckled or settled
to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new
construction;
      (7)   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because
of: dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; the removal,
movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose
of supporting such building; the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its
foundation; or any other cause is likely to partially or completely collapse;
      (8)   Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;
      (9)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base;
      (10)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation,
shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members,
or 50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, enclosing or
outside walls or coverings;
      (11)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire,
wind, earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated so as to
become an attractive nuisance or freely accessible to persons for the purpose
of committing unlawful acts;
      (12)   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or
is maintained in violation of any specific requirements or prohibition
applicable to such building structure provided by the building regulations of
the county, or of any law or ordinance of this state or county, relating to the
condition, location or structure of buildings;
      (13)   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected
in accordance with all applicable laws or ordinances has in any non-supporting
parts, member or portion less than 50%, or is any support part, member or
portion less than 66% of the strength, fire-resisting qualities or
characteristics or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by
law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and
occupancy in the same location;
      (14)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangements, inadequate light, air or
sanitation facilities or otherwise, is determined by the Building Commissioner
to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is
likely to cause sickness or disease;
      (15)   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections
or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Building
Commissioner to be a fire hazard; and
      (16)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site
after the demolition or destruction of the building structure or whenever any
building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as
to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard
to the public.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 151.08 RECONSTRUCTION, ALTERATIONS, REPAIR OR DEMOLITION.
   All work for the reconstruction, alteration, repair or demolition of
buildings and other structures shall be performed in a good workmanlike manner
according to the accepted standards and practices in the trade. The provisions
of the rules pertaining to construction, plumbing, electrical, mechanical and
one- and two-family dwellings promulgated by the State Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission shall be considered standard and acceptable practice
for all matters covered by this chapter or orders issued pursuant to this
chapter by the County Building Commissioner.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 151.09 FUNDS.
   An Unsafe Building and Unsafe Premises Fund is hereby designated and
established in the operating budget of the Building Department in accordance
with the provision of I.C. 36-7-9-14.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 151.10 VIOLATIONS.
   No person, firm, entity or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee
or occupant shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises, or
cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, I.C. 36-7-9 et seq. or any order issued by the
enforcement authority or hearing authority.
   (A)   Emergency orders. Emergency action in order to protect life, safety or
property may be taken by the enforcement authority without issuing an order or
giving notice, but any such action must be taken in accordance with I.C. 36-7-
9-9. The action is limited to the abatement or removal of any immediate danger.
   (B)   General procedure. Violations will be prosecuted in the manner set
forth in I.C. 36-7-9 et seq. If the action required by an order of the
enforcement authority or hearing authority is not taken in the requisite time,
the enforcement authority or hearing authority may take any or all actions
provided for in I.C. 36-7-9 et seq., common law or other statute or ordinance
to enforce the order.
   (C)   Payment of civil penalty or costs. If a violation is not corrected
within the time specified in the order or in the time allowed under I.C. 36-7-
9 et seq., a civil penalty or costs may be imposed as provided under I.C. 36-7-
9 et seq. and under this chapter. No provision of this chapter is to be
construed as providing any additional due process rights beyond those granted
by the U.S. Constitution, the State Constitution or I.C. 36-7-9 et seq. No
provision of this chapter prohibits the Unsafe Building Board from pursuing any
remedy available to it under I.C. 36-7-9 et seq., common law or other statute
or ordinance.
   (D)   Costs. Any and all costs associated with enforcing this chapter may be
collected as provided for in I.C. 36-7-9 et seq.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-7-2021) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Violations may be punished at the rate of $100 per day that the violation
exists. However, the total civil penalty assessed may not exceed any amount
provided in I.C. 36-7-9 et seq. Notice of fines will be given according to I.C.
36-7-9 et seq.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 6-7-2021)
CHAPTER 152: ADDRESSING SYSTEM
Section
   
152.01   Authority
   
152.02   Addressing system
   
152.03   Implementation
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 AUTHORITY.
   The authority to develop, plan, coordinate, facilitate and implement address
identification numbers for all premises in the unincorporated limits of the
county shall be vested in the County Plan Director.
(Ord. 1994-3, passed 3-21-1994)
§ 152.02 ADDRESSING SYSTEM.
   Address numbers shall begin at the northeast corner of the county. They
shall become progressively larger from the starting point at the rate of 1,000
numbers per mile in both southerly and westerly directions. A complete address
shall include a number and road name.
(Ord. 1994-3, passed 3-21-1994)
§ 152.03 IMPLEMENTATION.
   (A)   The owner or other person having an interest in all homes, businesses,
premises and improved parcels of real estate in the unincorporated areas of the
county shall prominently display the road address in numerals not less than
three inches in height in a location clearly visible from the nearest road.
   (B)   The County Plan Director will maintain a master address listing of all
homes and businesses within the unincorporated areas of the county. The Plan
Director shall have the responsibility and authority for issuing new addresses
with building permits, as well as reissuing new addresses to homes and
businesses using incorrect addresses based upon the county road numbering and
addressing system.
   (C)   The County Plan Director shall have the power and authority, from time
to time, to inspect all premises and to compile a list of premises not
complying with this chapter.
   (D)   The County Plan Director may cause due notice of noncompliance to be
sent to each affected property owner or other person having an interest in such
property and said persons shall be given 30 days within which to comply with
the terms of this chapter.
   (E)   Information concerning the violation of the terms of this chapter may
be referred to the prosecuting attorney for representation and enforcement.
(Ord. 1994-3, passed 3-21-1994) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   A property owner or other person having an interest in such property who
fails to comply with the terms of this chapter within 30 days after due notice
is given, as provided in §
152.03(D) commits a Class C infraction. Each day a violation continues
constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 1994-3, passed 3-21-1994)
CHAPTER 153: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
153.01   Purpose
   
153.02   Compliance with other ordinances
   
153.03   Definitions
   
153.04   Stormwater control policy
   
153.05   Information requirements
   
153.06   Determination of runoff quantities
   
153.07   Amount of runoff quantities
   
153.08   Storm sewer design standards
   
153.09   Workmanship and materials
   
153.10   Open channel design standards
   
153.11   Construction materials
   
153.12   Stormwater detention
   
153.13   Certification required
   
153.14   Changes in plan
   
153.15   Other requirements
   
153.16   Disclaimer of liability
   
153.17   Corrective action
   
153.18   Exempt projects
   
153.19   Projects sizes and types regulated by ordinance
   
153.20   Financial guarantees
   
153.21   Application and review procedure
   
Appendix A:   Storm Drainage and Sediment Control Waiver
   
Appendix B:   Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance
§ 153.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is recognized that smaller streams and drainage channels serving
the county may not have sufficient capacity to receive and convey stormwater
runoff, resulting when land use changes from open or agricultural use to a more
urbanized use. It is further recognized that deposits of sediment from
developments during and after construction can reduce capacities of storm
sewers and drainage systems and result in damages to receiving lakes and
streams.
   (B)   Therefore, it shall be the policy of the County Commissioners that the
storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required of all
new development, any redevelopment and other new construction in the county.
The release rate of stormwater from developed lands shall not exceed the
release rate from the land area in its present land use.
   (C)   Because topography and the availability and adequacy of outlets for
storm runoff vary with almost every site, the requirements for storm drainage
tend to be an individual matter for any project. It is recommended that each
proposed project be discussed with the County Surveyor and Plan Director at the
earliest practical time in the planning stage.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.02 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   In addition to the requirements of this chapter, compliance with the
requirements set forth in other applicable ordinances with respect to
submission and approval of preliminary and final subdivision plats, improvement
plans, building and zoning permits, construction inspections, appeals and
similar matters, and compliance with applicable state statutes and regulations
shall be required.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAPACITY OF A STORM DRAINAGE FACILITY. The maximum flow that can be conveyed
or stored by a storm drainage facility without causing damage to public or
private property.
   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse which periodically or
continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting link between
two bodies of water. It has a defined bed and banks which serve to confine the
water.
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificial volume of storage within a floodplain
used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill
or structures are placed within the floodplain.
   CONTIGUOUS. Adjoining or in actual contact with.
   COUNTY SURVEYOR. The elected county official responsible for the regulated
drain system and this chapter.
   CULVERT. A closed conduit used for the passage of surface drainage water
under a roadway, railroad, canal or other impediment.
   DETENTION BASIN. A facility constructed or modified to restrict the flow of
stormwater to a prescribed maximum rate, and to detain concurrently the excess
waters that accumulate behind the outlet.
   DETENTION STORAGE. The temporary detaining or storage of stormwater in
storage basins, on rooftops, in streets, parking lots, school yards, parks,
open spaces or other areas under predetermined and controlled conditions, with
the rate of drainage there from regulated by appropriately installed devices.
   DRAINAGE AREA. The area from which water is carried off by a drainage
system; a watershed or catchment area.
   DROP MANHOLE. A manhole having a vertical drop pipe connecting the inlet
pipe to the outlet pipe. The vertical drop pipe shall be located immediately
outside the manhole.
   DRY BOTTOM DETENTION BASIN. A basin designed to be completely de-watered
after having provided its planned detention of runoff during a storm event.
   DURATION. The time period of a rainfall event.
   EROSION. Wearing away of the land by running water, waves, temperature
changes, ice or wind,
   FLOOD or FLOODWATERS. The water of any watercourse which is above the banks
of the watercourse. It also means the water of any lake which is above and
outside the banks thereof.
   FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation at all locations delineating the maximum
level of high waters for a flood of given return period and rainfall duration.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Any floodplain, floodway, floodway fringe or any
combination thereof which is subject to inundation by the regulatory flood; or
any floodplain as delineated by Zone A on a flood hazard boundary map.
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE. The elevation of the lowest floor of a building. If
a basement is included, the basement floor is considered the lowest floor.
   FLOODPLAIN. The area adjoining the river or stream which has been or may
hereafter be covered by floodwaters.
   FLOODWAY. See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain lying outside the floodway,
which is inundated by the regulatory flood.
   FOOTING DRAIN. A drain pipe installed around the exterior of a basement wall
foundation to relieve water pressure caused by high groundwater elevation.
   GRADE. The inclination or slope of a channel, canal, conduit and the like,
or natural ground surface usually expressed in terms of the percentage the
vertical rise (or fall) bears to the corresponding horizontal distance.
   IMPACT AREAS. Areas defined and mapped by the Plan Commission which are
unlikely to be easily drained because of one or more factors, including, but
not limited to, any of the following: soil type; topography; land where there
is not adequate outlet; a floodway or floodplain; or land within 75 feet of
each bank of any regulated drain or within 75 feet from the centerline of any
regulated tile ditch.
   IMPERVIOUS. A term applied to material through which water cannot pass, or
through which water passes with difficulty.
   INLET. An opening into a storm sewer system for the entrance of surface
stormwater runoff, more completely described as a STORM SEWER INLET.
   JUNCTION CHAMBER. A converging section of conduit, usually large enough for
a person to enter, used to facilitate the flow from one or more conduits into a
main conduit.
   LATERAL STORM SEWER. A sewer that has inlets connected to it but has no
other storm sewer connected.
   MAJOR DRAINAGE SYSTEMS. Drainage systems carrying runoff from an area of one
or more square miles.
   MANHOLE. Storm sewer structure through which a person may enter to gain
access to an underground storm sewer or enclosed structure.
   MINOR DRAINAGE SYSTEMS. Drainage systems having an area of less than one
square mile.
   OFF-SITE. Everything not on-site.
   ON-SITE. Located within the controlled area where runoff originates.
   OUTFALL. The point or location where storm runoff discharges from a sewer or
drain. Also applies to the outfall sewer or channel which carries the storm
runoff to the point of OUTFALL.
   PEAK FLOW. The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel
or conduit resulting from a particular storm or flood.
   PLAN COMMISSION. The County Plan Commission.
   PLAN DIRECTOR. The person appointed by and/or delegated the responsibility
for the administration of §§
155.01 and
155.02 by the County Advisory Plan Commission or the Plan Director’s designees.
   RADIUS OF CURVATURE. Length of radius of a circle used to define a curve.
   RAINFALL INTENSITY. The cumulative depth of rainfall occurring over a given
duration, normally expressed in inches per hour.
   REACH. Any length of river, channel or storm sewer.
   REGULATED AREA. All of the unincorporated land under the jurisdiction of the
County Plan Commission. In addition, this will include major and minor
residential subdivisions within the two-mile zoning jurisdictions of the Town
of Argos and the Town of Bourbon, as well as the City of Plymouth.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a peak discharge which can be equaled or
exceeded on the average of once in a 100-year period, as calculated by a method
and procedure which is acceptable to the Plan Commission. If a permit from the
National Resources Commission for construction in the floodway is required (see
§
153.05), then the regulatory flood peak discharge should be calculated by a
method acceptable to the Board and the Natural Resources Commission. This
REGULATORY FLOOD is equivalent to a flood having a probability of occurrence of
1% any given year.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge the peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river or stream.
   RELEASE RATE. The amount of stormwater released from a stormwater control
facility per unit of time.
   RETURN PERIOD. The average interval of time within which a given rainfall
event will be equaled or exceeded once. A flood having a RETURN PERIOD of 100
years has a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded in any one year.
   RUNOFF COEFFICIENT. A decimal fraction relating to the amount of rain which
appears as runoff and reaches the storm drainage system to the total amount of
rain falling. A coefficient of 0.5 implies that 50% of the rain falling on a
given surface appears as stormwater runoff.
   SEDIMENT. Material of soil and rock origin, transported, earned or deposited
by water.
   SIPHON. A closed conduit or portion of which lies above the hydraulic grade
line, resulting in a pressure less than atmospheric and requiring a vacuum
within the conduit to start flow. A SIPHON utilizes atmospheric pressure to
effect or increase the flow of water through a conduit. An inverted SIPHON is
used to carry stormwater flow under an obstruction such as a sanitary sewer.
   SPILLWAY. A waterway, in or about a hydraulic structure, for the escape of
excess water.
   STILLING BASIN. A basin used to slow water down or dissipate its energy.
   STORAGE DURATION. The length of time that water may be stored in any
stormwater control facility, computed from the time water first begins to be
stored.
   STORM SEWER. A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater.
   STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All means, natural or human-made, used for
conducting stormwater to, through or from a drainage area to any of the
following: conduits and appurtenant features; canals; channels; ditches;
streams; culverts; streets; and pumping stations.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. The water derived from rains falling within a tributary
basin, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
   TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE. A committee designated in §
155.02 for the purpose of providing technical review of certain types of
petitions and applications.
   TRIBUTARY. Contributing stormwater from upstream land areas.
   URBANIZATION. The development, change or improvement of any parcel of land
consisting of one or more lots for residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional, recreational or public utility purposes.
   WATERCOURSE. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch or natural or human-
made drainage way in or into which stormwater runoff or floodwaters flow either
regularly or intermittently.
   WATERSHED. See DRAINAGE AREA.
   WET BOTTOM DETENTION BASIN (RETENTION BASIN). A basin designed to retain a
permanent pool of water after having provided its planned detention of runoff
during a storm event.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.04 STORMWATER CONTROL POLICY.
   (A)   It is recognized that the smaller streams and drainage channels
serving the county may not have sufficient capacity to receive and convey
stormwater runoff resulting from continued urbanization. Accordingly, the
storage and controlled release rate of excess stormwater runoff shall be
required for any development, redevelopment and new construction located within
the county.
   (B)   Possible exceptions to the requirement are minor subdivisions as
described in §
155.01. The County Surveyor together with the County Plan Director, after
thorough investigation and evaluation, may waive the requirement of controlled
runoff for minor subdivisions.
      (1)   The release rate of stormwater from development, redevelopment and
new construction may not exceed the stormwater runoff from the land area in its
present state of development. The developer must submit to the Plan Commission
detailed computations of runoff before and after development, redevelopment or
new construction which demonstrates that runoff will not be increased.
      (2)   These computations must show that the peak runoff rate after
development for the 100-year return period storm of critical duration must not
exceed the ten-year return period pre-development peak runoff rate. The
critical duration storm is that storm duration that requires the greatest
detention storage.
   (C)   Computations for areas up to and including 200 acres may be based on
the rational method; typical runoff coefficients are listed herein. For areas
larger than 200 acres, hydrograph techniques and/or computer drainage modeling
methods may be used. Hydrograph techniques and computer modeling methods used
to determine stormwater runoff shall be proven methods, subject to approval of
the Plan Director, County Surveyor or if appropriate, the Technical Review
Committee.
   (D)   In the event the natural downstream channel or storm sewer is
inadequate to accommodate the release rate provided above, then the allowable
release rate shall be reduced to that rate permitted by the capacity of the
receiving downstream channel or storm sewer system. Additional detention as
determined by the County Surveyor’s office may be required to store that
portion of the runoff exceeding the capacity of the receiving sewers or
waterways.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.05 INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The following information and data provided by a state-licensed professional
engineer, architect or land surveyor engaged in storm drainage design shall be
submitted to the Plan Commission office at the time of application for a
building permit for any development, redevelopment or new construction on real
estate which meets the criteria of project size and type that is regulated
under this chapter.
   (A)   Topographic and soil maps. A soil map of the proposed development
indicating soil’s names and their hydrologic classification must be provided
when Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) hydrologic methods are used.
In addition, a topographic map of the land to be subdivided and such adjoining
land whose topography may affect the layout or drainage of the development must
be provided. The contour intervals shall be no greater than two feet. On this
map, the following shall be shown:
      (1)   The location of streams and other floodwater runoff channels, the
extent of the floodplains at the established 100-year flood elevation where
available (regulatory floodway), and the limits of the floodway, all properly
identified;
      (2)   The normal shoreline of lakes, ponds, swamps and detention basins,
their floodplains, and lines of inflow and outflow if any;
      (3)   The location of regulated drains, farm drains, inlets and outfalls,
if any of record;
      (4)   Storm, sanitary and combined sewers and outfalls, if any of record;
      (5)   Septic tank systems and outlets, if any of record;
      (6)   Seeps, springs, flowing and other wells, that are visible or of
record; and
      (7)   Soil names and their hydrologic classification for the proposed
development when hydrologic methods requiring soils information are used.
   (B)   Preliminary drainage plan. A comprehensive plan, in preliminary form
(or in combined preliminary and final form), designed to handle safely the
stormwater runoff and to detain the increased stormwater runoff must be
provided. The plan shall provide or be accompanied by maps or other descriptive
materials indicating the feasibility of the drainage plan and showing the
following:
      (1)   The extent and area of each watershed affecting the design of
detention facilities as shown on USGS quadrangle maps or other more detailed
maps as required by the Plan Commission Office;
      (2)   The preliminary layout and design of proposed storm sewers, the
outfall and outlet locations and approximate elevations, the receiving stream
or channel and its 100-year return period water elevation;
      (3)   The location and design of the proposed street system, especially
including depressed pavements used to conveyor temporarily store overflow from
the heavier rainstorms, and the outlets for such overflow;
      (4)   The locations, cross-sections and profiles of existing streams and
floodplains to be maintained, and new channels to be constructed;
      (5)   The materials, elevations, waterway openings and the basis for
design of proposed culverts and bridges;
      (6)   Existing ponds and basins to be maintained, enlarged or otherwise
altered and new ponds or basins to be built and the basis of their design;
      (7)   The estimated depth and amount of storage required in the new ponds
or basins;
      (8)   The estimated location and percentage of impervious surfaces
existing and expected to be constructed when the development is completed; and
      (9)   Any interim plan which is to be incorporated into the development
pending completion of the development and the final drainage plan.
   (C)   Valley cross-section. One or more typical cross-sections must be
provided showing all existing and proposed channels or other open drainage
facilities carried to a point above the 100-year high water elevation, showing
the elevation of the existing land and the proposed changes thereto, together
with the high water elevations expected from the 100-year storm under the
controlled conditions called for by this chapter and showing the relationship
of structures, streets and other facilities.
   (D)   Site plan. A plan drawn to scale showing dimensions of the site with
existing and proposed storm drainage facilities must be provided.
   (E)   Final drainage plans. Upon review of the preliminary drainage plans by
the Plan Director and County Surveyor, final drainage plans shall be submitted
to the Plan Commission. The final plans shall provide or be accompanied by
calculations, maps and other descriptive material showing the following:
      (1)   The extent and area of each watershed tributary to the drainage
channels in the development;
      (2)   The street storm sewers and other storm drains to be built, the
basis of their design, outfall and outlet locations and elevations, the
receiving stream or channel and its high water elevation, and the functioning
of the drains during high water conditions;
      (3)   The parts of the proposed street system where pavements are planned
to be depressed sufficiently to conveyor temporarily store overflow from storm
sewers and over the curb runoff resulting from the heavier rainstorms and the
outlets for such overflow;
      (4)   Existing streams and floodplains to be maintained, and new channels
to be constructed, their locations, cross-sections and profiles;
      (5)   Proposed culverts and bridges to be built, their materials,
elevations, waterway openings and basis of their design;
      (6)   Existing detention basins and ponds to be maintained, enlarged or
otherwise altered, and new basins or ponds to be built and the basis of their
design;
      (7)   The estimated location and percentage of impervious surfaces
existing and expected to be constructed when the development is completed;
      (8)   The slope, type and size of all sewers and other waterways; and
      (9)   For all detention basins, a plot or tabulation of storage volumes
with corresponding water surface elevations and a plot or tabulation of the
basin outflow rates for those water surface elevations.
   (F)   Submittal and consideration of plans.
      (1)   (a)   Preliminary and final drainage plans and/or construction
plans shall be submitted to the Plan Commission office at least 21 days prior
to their regularly scheduled meeting.
         (b)   All preliminary plans, final plans and/or construction plans in
compliance with the standards of this chapter must be approved by the Plan
Commission office.
         (c)   The Plan Commission office shall stamp such approval on a copy
of such plans and deliver the same to the applicant. The Plan Commission office
shall approve or disapprove any preliminary plans, final plans and/or
construction plans within 60 days of submission unless the applicant consents
to a continuance or extension.
         (d)   All approvals and disapprovals with written reasons shall be
incorporated into the Plan Commission minutes.
      (2)   (a)   The County Plan Director and Surveyor are authorized to
review engineering summaries of projects and based upon the same, grant
exemptions from any and all requirements of this chapter and/or waive any
requirements of this chapter.
         (b)   Any applicant may appeal the decision of the Plan Director or
County Surveyor to the Plan Commission which shall also be authorized to grant
exemptions from any and all requirements of this chapter and/or waive any
requirements of this chapter at its discretion.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.06 DETERMINATION OF RUNOFF QUANTITIES.
   (A)   Development sites less than or equal to five acres in size, with a
drainage area less than or equal to 50 acres and no depressional storage.
   (B)   (1)   The rational method may be used for sites meeting the stated
criteria. In the rational method, the peak rate of runoff, “Q,” in cubic feet
per second (cfs) is computed as the following.
 
Q = CIA
C Runoff coefficient, replacing the characteristics of the drainage area and
  defined as the ratio of runoff to rainfall
I Average intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for a duration equal to the
  time of concentration (tc) for a selected rainfall frequency
A Tributary drainage area in acres
 
      (2)   Guidance to selection of the runoff coefficient “C” is provided by
Table 1 and Table 1A below which show values for different types of surfaces
and local soil characteristics. The composite “C” value used for a given
drainage area with various surface types shall be the weighted average value
for the total area calculated from a breakdown of individual areas having
different surface types.
      (3)   Table 2 below provides runoff coefficients and inlet times for
different land use classifications. In the instance of undeveloped land
situated in an upstream area, a coefficient or coefficients shall be used for
this area in its present or existing state of development.
Table 1
Urban Runoff Coefficients
Table 1
Urban Runoff Coefficients
Hard Surfaces
Asphalt                       0.82
Concrete                      0.85
Roof                          0.85
Lawns (Clay)
Flat (0-2% slope)             0.16
Rolling (2-7% slope)          0.21
Steep (greater than 7% slope) 0.30
Lawns (Sandy)
Flat (0-2% slope)             0.07
Rolling (2-7% slope)          0.12
Steep (greater than 7% slope) 0.17
Source: HERPICC Stormwater Drainage Manual, July 1994
 
The coefficients of this tabulation are applicable to storms of 5- to 10-year
frequencies. Coefficients for less frequent higher intensity storms shall be
modified as follows:
 
      Return Period (years)            Multiply “C” by
      25                        1.1
      50                        1.2
      100                        1.25
Table 1A
Rural Runoff Coefficients
Table 1A
Rural Runoff Coefficients
Cultivated (Clay)
Flat (0-5% slope)              0.50
Rolling ( 5-10% slope)         0.60
Steep (greater than 10% slope) 0.72
Cultivated (Sandy)
Flat (0-5% slope)              0.30
Rolling (5-10% slope)          0.40
Steep (greater than 10% slope) 0.52
Pasture (Clay)
Flat (0-5% slope)              0.30
Rolling (5-10% slope)          0.36
Steep (greater than 10% slope) 0.42
Pasture (Sandy)
Flat (0-5% slope)              0.10
Rolling (5-10% slope)          0.16
Steep (greater than 10% slope) 0.22
Woodland (Clay)
Flat (0-5% slope)              0.30
Rolling (5-10% slope)          0.35
Steep (greater than 10% slope) 0.50
Woodland (Sandy)
Flat (0-5% slope)              0.10
Rolling (5-10% slope)          0.25
Steep (greater than 10% slope) 0.30
Source: HERPICC Stormwater Drainage Manual, July 1994.
The coefficients of this tabulation are applicable to storms of 5- to 10-year
frequencies. Coefficients for less frequent higher intensity storms shall be
modified as follows:
      Return Period (years)         Multiply “C” by
         25                  1.1
         50                  1.2
         100                  1.25
Table 2
Runoff Coefficients “C”
By Land Use and Typical Inlet Times
Land Use Runoff Coefficients            Inlet Times (Minutes) (4)
         Flat (1) Rolling (2) Steep (3)
Table 2
Runoff Coefficients “C”
By Land Use and Typical Inlet Times
Land Use             Runoff Coefficients            Inlet Times (Minutes) (4)
                     Flat (1) Rolling (2) Steep (3)
Churches             0.54     0.60        0.66      5
Commercial (CBD)     0.75     0.83        0.91
Commercial           0.54     0.60        0.66
(neighborhood)                                      5-10
Garden apartments    0.54     0.60        0.66
Industrial           0.63     0.70        0.77
Detached residential 0.40     0.45        0.50
Schools              0.31     0.35        0.39
Semi-detached        0.45     0.50        0.55      10-15
residential                                         To be computed
Half-acre lots       0.31     0.35        0.39
Parkland             0.18     0.20        0.22
Quarter acre lots    0.36     0.40        0.44
(1) Flat terrain involves slopes of 0-2%
(2) Rolling terrain involves slopes of 2-7%
(3) Steep terrain involves slopes greater than 7%
(4) Interpolation, extrapolation and adjustment for local conditions shall be
based on engineering experience and judgment
(5) The coefficients of this tabulation are applicable to storms of 5- to 10-
year frequencies. Coefficients for less frequent higher intensity storms
shall be modified as follows:
 
      Return Period (years)      Multiply “C” by
         25               1.1
         50               1.2
         100               1.25
 
Rainfall intensity shall be determined from the rainfall frequency curves
shown in Tables 5A in §
153.06(c)(3)(b) and Table B in this division (B). The time of concentration
(tc) to be used shall be the sum of the inlet time and flow time in the
drainage facility from the most remote part of the drainage area to the point
under consideration. The flow time in the storm sewers may be estimated by
the distance in feet divided by velocity of flow in feet per second. The
velocity shall be determined by the Manning formula
Inlet time is the combined time required for the runoff to reach the inlet of
the storm sewer. It includes overland flow time and flow time through
established surface drainage channels such as swales, ditches and sheet flow
across such areas as lawns, fields and other graded surfaces. It may be
computed by using the image below, also known as Figure 1 as shown in this
division (B)
 
 
 
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.07 AMOUNT OF RUNOFF QUANTITIES.
   Various parts of a drainage facility must accommodate runoff water as
follows.
   (A)   (1)   The minor drainage system such as inlets, catch basins, street
gutters, swales, sewers and small channels which collect stormwater must
accommodate peak runoff from a ten-year return period storm.
      (2)   Rainfall duration shall be equal to the time of concentration or
one hour if the time of concentration is less than one hour.
      (3)   A first quartile storm distribution shall be used for computer
modeling.
      (4)   These minimum requirements must be satisfied.
         (a)   1.   The allowable spread of water on collector streets is
limited to maintaining two clear ten-foot moving lanes of traffic.
            2.   One lane is to be maintained on local roads, while places can
have a water spread equal to one-half of their width.
         (b)   Open channels carrying peak flows greater than 30 cubic feet per
second shall be capable of accommodating peak runoff for a 50-year return
period storm within the drainage easement.
         (c)   Culverts shall be capable of accommodating peak runoff from a
50-year return period storm when crossing under a road which is part of the
State Department of Highways rural functional classification system and are
classified as principal or minor arterial, major or minor collector roads.
   (B)   Major drainage systems are defined in §
153.03.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.08 STORM SEWER DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All storm sewers, whether private or public, and whether constructed on
private or public property shall conform to the design standards and other
requirements contained herein.
   (A)   Manning’s equation.
      (1)   The hydraulic capacity of storm sewers shall be determined using
the Manning’s equation to determine velocity.
 
V Mean velocity of flow in feet per second
R The hydraulic radius in feet
S The slope of the energy grade line in feet per foot
N Manning’s “n” or roughness coefficient
 
      (2)   The hydraulic radius, R, is defined as the cross-sectional area of
flow divided by the wetted flow surface or wetted perimeter. Typical V values
and maximum permissible velocities for storm sewer materials are listed in
Table 3 in division (C) below. Roughness coefficient (n) values for other sewer
materials can be found in standard hydraulics tests and references.
   (B)   Minimum size. The minimum size of all storm sewers shall be 12 inches.
Rate of release for detention storage shall be controlled by an office plate or
other devices, subject to approval of the Plan Commission, where the 12-inch
pipe will not limit rate of release as required.
   (C)   Grade. Sewer grade shall be such that, in general, a minimum of two
feet of cover is maintained over the top of the pipe. Pipe cover less than the
minimum may be used only upon approval of the Plan Commission office. Uniform
slopes shall be maintained between inlets, manholes and inlets to manholes.
Final grade shall be set with full consideration of the capacity required,
sedimentation problems and other design parameters. Minimum and maximum
allowable slopes shall be those capable of producing velocities of two and one-
half and 15 feet per second, respectively, when the sewer is flowing full.
Table 3
Typical Values of Manning’s “n”
Material Manning’s �Maximum Velocities (feet/second)
Table 3
Typical Values of Manning’s “n”
Material                Manning’s �Maximum Velocities (feet/second)
Circular CMP, Annular Corrugations, 2-2/3 x 1/2 inch
25% paved               0.021         7
50% paved               0.018         7
100% paved              0.013         7
Concrete culverts       0.013         15
HDPE or PVC             0.012         10
Unpaved                 0.024         7
Closed Conduits
Concrete                0.013         15
HDPE                    0.012         15
PVC                     0.011         15
Vitrified clay          0.013         15
Open Channels
Concrete, broom finish  0.015         15
Concrete, trowel finish 0.013         15
Dense growth of weeds   0.040         3-5
Dense weeds and brush   0.040         3-5
Existing earth (2)      0.030         3-5
Gabion                  0.028         10
Gunite                  0.018         15
New earth (1)           0.025         3-5
Riprap dumped           0.035         10
Riprap placed           0.030         10
Swale with grass        0.035         3-5
Source: HERPICC Stormwater Drainage Manual, July 1994
(1) New earth (uniform, sodded, clay soil)
(2) Existing earth (fairly uniform, with some weeds)
 
   (D)   Alignment. Storm sewers shall be straight between manholes insofar as
possible. Where long radius curves are necessary to conform to street layout,
the minimum radius of curvature shall be no less than 100 feet for sewers 42
inches and larger in diameter. Deflection of pipe sections shall not exceed the
maximum deflection recommended by the pipe manufacturer. The deflection shall
be uniform and finished installation shall follow a smooth curve.
   (E)   Manholes.
      (1)   Manholes shall be installed to provide access to continuous
underground storm sewers for the purpose of inspection and maintenance.
      (2)   Manholes shall be provided at the following locations:
         (a)   Where two or more storm sewers converge;
         (b)   Where pipe size changes;
         (c)   Where a change in horizontal alignment occurs;
         (d)   Where a change in grade occurs; and
         (e)   At intervals in straight sections of sewer, not to exceed the
maximum allowed.
      (3)   The maximum distance between storm sewer manholes shall be as
follows.
 
Size of Pipe (Inches) Maximum Distance (Feet)
12 through 42         400
48 and larger         600
 
   (F)   Inlets. Inlets or drainage structures shall be utilized to collect
surface water through grated openings and convey it to storm sewers, channels
or culverts. Inlet design and spacing shall be in accordance with § 7-400 of
the State Department of Highways’ Road Design Manual: Volume One or other
approved design-procedure. The inlet grate opening provided must be adequate to
pass the design ten-year flow with 50% of the sag inlet areas clogged. An
overload channel from sag inlets to the overflow channel or basin shall be
provided at sag inlets, so that the maximum depth of water that might be ponded
in the street sag shall not exceed seven inches.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.09 WORKMANSHIP AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Workmanship. The specifications for the construction of storm sewers
shall not be less stringent than those set forth in the latest edition of the
State Department of Highways’ Standard Specifications; additionally, ductile
iron pipe shall be laid in accordance with American Water Works Association
(AWWA) C-600, and clay pipe shall be laid in accordance with American Society
of Testing Materials (ASTM) C-12).
   (B)   Materials.
      (1)   Storm sewer manholes and inlets shall be constructed of masonry,
cast in place concrete or precast reinforced concrete. Material and
construction shall conform to State Department of Highways’ Standard
Specifications, § 720.
      (2)   Pipe and fittings used in storm sewer construction shall be extra
strength clay pipe (ASTM C-700), ductile iron pipe (AWWA C-151) or concrete
pipe (ASTM C-76). Other pipe and fittings not specified herein may be used only
when specifically authorized by the Plan Commission. Pipe joints shall be
flexible and watertight and shall conform to the requirements of § 715.02:
Materials, of the latest edition of the State Department of Highways’ Standard
Specifications.
   (C)   Special hydraulic structures. Special hydraulic structures required to
control the flow of water in storm runoff drainage systems include junction
chambers, drop manholes, inverted siphons, stilling basins and other special
structures. The use of these structures shall be limited to those locations
justified by prudent planning and by careful and thorough hydraulic engineering
analysis.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.10 OPEN CHANNEL DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All open channels, whether private or public, and whether constructed on
private or public land, shall conform to the design standards and other design
requirements contained herein.
   (A)   Manning’s equation. The waterway for channels shall be determined
using Manning’s equation.
 
Q             Discharge in cubic feet per second (cfs)
A             Waterway area of channel in square feet
V, R, S and N Explained in §
              153.08(A)
 
   (B)   Channel cross-section and grade.
      (1)   (a)   The required channel cross-section and grade are determined
by the design capacity, the material in which the channel is to be constructed
and the requirements for maintenance.
         (b)   A minimum depth may be required to provide adequate outlets for
subsurface drains, tributary ditches or streams.
         (c)   The channel grade shall be such that the velocity in the channel
is high enough to prevent siltation but low enough to prevent erosion.
      (2)   (a)   Velocities less than one and on-half feet per second should
be avoided because siltation will take place and ultimately reduce the channel
cross-section.
         (b)   The maximum permissible velocities in vegetal-lined channels are
shown in division (C)(1)(c) below.
         (c)   Developments through which the channel is to be constructed must
be considered in design of the channel section.
   (C)   Side slopes.
      (1)   (a)   Earthen channel side slopes shall be no steeper than three to
one.
         (b)   Flatter slopes may be required to prevent erosion and for ease
of maintenance.
         (c)   Where channels will be lined, side slopes shall be no steeper
than one and one-half to one with adequate provisions made for weep holes.
Table 4
Maximum Permissible Velocities in Vegetal-Lined Channels (1)
                        Permissible Velocity (2)
Cover Side Slope Range  Erosion Resistant Soils  Easily Eroded Soils (ft.
      (Percent) (3)     (ft. per sec.) (4)       per sec.) (4)
Table 4
Maximum Permissible Velocities in Vegetal-Lined Channels (1)
                                     Permissible Velocity (2)
                   Side Slope Range  Erosion Resistant     Easily Eroded Soils
Cover              (Percent) (3)     Soils (ft. per sec.)  (ft. per sec.) (4)
                                     (4)
                   0-5               8                     6
Bermuda Grass      5-10              7                     5
                   Over 10           6                     4
Bahia
Blue Grama         Over 10           5                     3
Buffalo Grass
Kentucky Bluegrass 0-5               7                     5
Smooth Brome       5-10              6                     4
Grass mixture      (3) 0-5           5                     4
Reed Canary Grass  5-10              4                     3
Alfalfa
Lespedeza Sericea  (4)
Red Fescue
Redtop             5-10
Weeping Lovegrass
Yellow Bluestem    0-5               3.4                   2.5
Common             (6)               3.5                   2.5
Lespedeza (5)      0-5
Sudangrass (5)
(1) From Soil Conservation Service, SCS-TP-61, Handbook of Channel Design for
Soil & Water Conservation.
(2) Use velocities exceeding 5 feet per second only where good covers and
proper maintenance can be obtained.
(3) Do not use on slopes steeper than 10% except for vegetated side slopes in
combination with a stone, concrete or highly resistant vegetative center
section.
(4) Do not use on slopes steeper than 5% except for vegetated side slopes in
combination with stone, concrete or highly resistant vegetative center section.
(5) Annuals, use on mild slopes or as temporary protection until permanent
covers are established.
(6) Use on slopes steeper than 5% is not recommended.
 
      (2)   Side slopes steeper than one and one-half may be used for lined
channels; provided, that the side lining and structural retaining wall are
designed and constructed with provisions for live and dead load surcharge.
   (D)   Channel stability.
      (1)   Characteristics of a stable channel are:
         (a)   It neither aggrades nor degrades beyond tolerable limits;
         (b)   The channel banks do not erode to the extent that the channel
cross-section is changed appreciably;
         (c)   Excessive sediment bars do not develop;
         (d)   Excessive erosion does not occur around culverts, bridges or
elsewhere; and
         (e)   Gullies do not form or enlarge due to the entry of uncontrolled
surface flow to the channel.
      (2)   (a)   Channel stability shall be determined for an aged condition
and the velocity shall be based on the design flow or the bank full flow,
whichever is greater, using “n” values for various channel linings as shown in
§
153.08(C).
         (b)   In no case is it necessary to check channel stability for
discharges greater than that from a 100-year return period storm.
      (3)   (a)   Channel stability must be checked for conditions immediately
after construction. For this stability analysis, the velocity shall be
calculated for the expected flow from a ten-year return period storm on the
watershed, or the bank full flow, whichever is smaller. The “n” value for
newly-constructed channels in fine-grained soils and sands may be determined in
accordance with the National Engineering Handbook 5, Supplement B, Soil
Conservation Service, and shall not exceed 0.025.
         (b)   The allowable velocity in the newly-constructed channel may be
increased by a maximum of 20% to reflect the effects of vegetation to be
established under the following conditions.
            1.   The soil and site in which the channel is to be constructed
are suitable for rapid establishment and support of erosion controlling
vegetation.
            2.   Species of erosion controlling vegetation adapted to the area
and proven methods of establishment are shown.
            3.   The channel design includes detailed plans for establishment
of vegetation on the channel side slopes.
   (E)   Drainage of waterways.
      (1)   Vegetated waterways that are subject to low flows of long duration
or where wet conditions prevail shall be drained with a tile system or by other
means such as paved gutters.
      (2)   Tile lines may be outletted through a drop structure at the end of
the waterway or through a standard tile outlet.
   (F)   Establishment of new regulated drain.
      (1)   The County Drainage Board may mandate that storm drains and
detention basins in residential subdivisions become regulated drains to ensure
the proper maintenance of the system.
      (2)   If the Board mandates the establishment of a new regulated drain,
each developer must provide the necessary information and meet the requirements
of the 1965 State Drainage Code, as amended, for the establishment of a new
regulated drain.
      (3)   The Board shall determine the necessary easements for adequate
maintenance of any new regulated drain.
   (G)   Appurtenant structures.
      (1)   (a)   The design of channels will provide all structures required
for the proper functioning of the channel and the laterals thereto and
travelways for operation and maintenance.
         (b)   Recessed inlets and structures needed for entry of surface and
subsurface flow into channels without significant erosion or degradation shall
be included in the design of channel improvements.
         (c)   The design is also to provide the necessary flood gates, water
level control devices and any other appurtenance affecting the functioning of
the channels and the attainment of the purpose for which they are built.
      (2)   (a)   The effect of channel improvements on existing culverts,
bridges, buried cables, pipelines and inlet structures for surface and
subsurface drainage on the channel being improved and laterals thereto shall be
evaluated to determine the need for modification or replacement.
         (b)   Culverts and bridges which are modified or added as part of
channel improvement projects shall meet reasonable standards for the type of
structure and shall have a minimum capacity equal to the design discharge or
governmental agency design requirements, whichever is greater.
   (H)   Disposition of spoil. Spoil material resulting from clearing, grubbing
and channel excavation shall be disposed in such a manner which will:
      (1)   Minimize overbank wash;
      (2)   Provide for the free flow of water between the channel and
floodplain unless the valley routing and water surface profile are based on
continuous dikes being installed;
      (3)   Not hinder the development of travelways for maintenance;
      (4)   Leave the right-of-way in the best condition feasible, consistent
with the project purposes, for productive use by the owner;
      (5)   Improve the aesthetic appearance of the site to the extent
feasible; and
      (6)   Be approved by the IDNR or U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (whichever
is applicable), if deposited in the floodway.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.11 CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS.
   (A)   Construction. Specifications shall be in keeping with the current
standards of engineering practice and shall describe the requirements for
proper installation of the project to achieve its intended purpose.
   (B)   Materials.
      (1)   Materials acceptable for use as channel lining are:
         (a)   Grass;
         (b)   Revetment riprap;
         (c)   Concrete;
         (d)   Hand-laid riprap;
         (e)   Precast cement concrete riprap;
         (f)   Grouted riprap; and
         (g)   Gabions.
      (2)   Other lining materials shall receive specific approval of the Plan
Commission, and materials shall comply with the latest edition of the State
Department of Highways’ Standard Specifications.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.12 STORMWATER DETENTION.
   The following shall govern the design of any improvement with respect to the
detention of stormwater runoff.
   (A)   Acceptable detention methods.
      (1)   The increased stormwater runoff resulting from a proposed
development should be detained on-site by the provisions of appropriate wet or
dry bottom reservoirs, by storage on flat roofs, parking lots, streets, lawns
or other acceptable techniques.
      (2)   Measures which retard the rate of overland flow and the velocity in
runoff channels shall also be used to control the runoff rate partially.
      (3)   Detention basins shall be sized to store excess flows from storms
with a 100-year return period.
      (4)   Control devices shall limit the discharge to a rate no greater than
that prescribed by divisions (E) and (F) below.
   (B)   Design storm. Design of stormwater detention facilities shall be based
on a return period of once in 100 years. The storage volume and outflow rate
shall be sufficient to handle stormwater runoff from a critical duration storm,
as defined in divisions (E) and (F) below. Rainfall intensity duration
frequency relationships shall be those given in division (C)(3)(b) below.
   (C)   Allowable release rate.
      (1)   The allowable release rate of stormwater originating from a
proposed development shall not exceed the amount specified in §
153.04 and as described in divisions (E) and (F) below.
      (2)   In the event the natural downstream channel or storm sewer system
is inadequate to accommodate the release rate provided above, then the
allowable release rate shall be reduced to that rate permitted by the capacity
of the receiving downstream channel or storm sewer system, and additional
detention as determined by the Plan Commission shall be required to store that
portion of the runoff exceeding the capacity of the receiving sewers or
waterways.
      (3)   (a)   Generally. If more than one detention basin is involved in
the development of the area upstream of the limiting restriction, the allowable
release rate from any one detention basin shall be in direct proportion to the
ratio of its drainage area to the drainage area of the entire watershed
upstream of the restriction.
         (b)   Precipitation intensity estimates in inches per hour.
Table 5
Precipitation Intensity Estimates in Inches Per Hour
Precipitation Intensity Estimates (in/br)
ARI*    5   10 15 30 60 120 3hr 6hr 12 24 48 hr 4 day 7 day 10  20  30  45  60
(years) min mi mi mi mi mi          hr hr                   day day day day day
Table 5
Precipitation Intensity Estimates in Inches Per Hour
Precipitation Intensity Estimates (in/br)
ARI*    5 min 10   15   30   60   120  3hr  6hr  12   24   48   4    7    10   20   30   45   60
(years)       mi   mi   mi   mi   mi             hr   hr   hr   day  day  day  day  day  day  day
1       4.46  3.47 2.84 1.88 1.15 0.67 0.48 0.29 0.17 0.10 0.06 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
2       5.34  4.16 3.40 2.27 1.39 0.82 0.59 0.35 0.20 0.12 0.07 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
5       6.41  4.98 4.08 2.79 1.75 1.05 0.75 0.45 0.25 0.15 0.08 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01
10      7.25  5.59 4.59 3.18 2.03 1.23 0.88 0.52 0.30 0.17 0.10 0.05 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01
25      8.33  6.37 5.24 3.70 2.40 1.48 1.07 0.64 0.36 0.21 0.11 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01
50      9.17  6.94 5.73 4.10 2.70 1.69 1.22 0.73 0.41 0.23 0.13 0.07 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01
100     9.98  7.52 6.22 4.49 3.00 1.90 1.38 0.83 0.47 0.26 0.14 0.08 0.05 0.04 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01
200     10.84 8.09 6.71 4.90 3.32 2.13 1.55 0.94 0.53 0.29 0.16 0.08 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01
500     11.99 8.81 7.33 5.43 3.76 2.45 1.80 1.09 0.62 0.34 0.18 0.09 0.06 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01
1,000   12.85 9.36 7.80 5.84 4.10 2.72 2.00 1.22 0.69 0.37 0.20 0.10 0.06 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02
These precipitation frequency estimnates are based on a partial duration series. ARI is the
average recurrence interval.
Please refer to NOAA Atlas 14 Document for more information. NOTE: Formatting forces estimates
near zero to appear as zero.
 
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
Table 5A. Precipitation Frequency estimates in inches for
Plymouth. IN
Precipitation Frequency Estimates (inches)
ARI*    5   10  15  30  60  120 3hr 6 hr 12 24 48 4   7 day 10  20  30  45  60
(years) min min min min min min          hr hr hr day       day day day day day
Table 5A. Precipitation Frequency estimates in inches for
Plymouth. IN
Precipitation Frequency Estimates (inches)
ARI*    5    10   15   30   60   120  3hr  6 hr 12   24   48   4    7 day 10    20    30   45    60
(years) min  min  min  min  min  min            hr   hr   hr   day        day   day   day  day   day
1       0.37 0.58 0.71 0.94 1.15 1.35 1.46 1.73 2.01 2.35 2.71 3.06 3.62  4.10  5.54  6.92 8.75  10.55
2       0.45 0.69 0.85 1.14 1.39 1.65 1.77 2.10 243  2.84 3.26 3.65 4.30  4.86  6.53  8.13 10.25 12.33
5       0.53 0.83 1.02 1.40 1.75 2.10 2.26 2.67 3.07 3.55 4.02 4.44 5.17  5.78  7.66  9.41 11.72 14.00
10      0.60 0.93 1.15 1.59 2.03 2.46 2.65 3.14 3.60 4.13 4.64 5.07 5.85  6.52  8.56  10.3 12.84 15.27
                                                                                      9
25      0.69 1.06 1.31 1.85 2.40 2.96 3.21 3.81 4.36 4.94 5.50 5.94 6.77  7.52  9.77  11.6 14.28 16.86
                                                                                      6
50      0.76 1.16 1.43 2.05 2.70 3.37 3.66 4.36 4.99 5.62 6.20 6.64 7.50  8.31  10.71 12.6 15.35 18.02
                                                                                      2
100     0.83 1.25 1.56 2.25 3.00 3.81 4.14 4.96 5.67 6.32 6.92 7.35 8.23  9.11  11.64 13.5 16.36 19.12
                                                                                      5
200     0.90 1.35 1.68 2.45 3.32 4.26 4.66 5.61 6.40 7.07 7.68 8.09 8.98  9.92  12.58 14.4 17.33 20.14
                                                                                      5
500     1.00 1.47 1.83 2.72 3.76 4.91 5.40 6.55 7.47 8.12 8.75 9.10 9.99  11.01 13.82 15.6 18.54 21.39
                                                                                      0
1,000   1.07 1.56 1.95 2.92 4.10 5.44 6.01 7.33 8.35 8.98 9.59 9.90 10.78 11.84 14.77 16.4 19.41 22.27
                                                                                      4
*These precipitation frequency estimates are based on a partial duration series. ARI is the average
recurrence interval.
Please refer to NOAA Alias Document for more information. NOTE: Formatting forces estimates to appear
as zero.
 
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
   (D)   Drainage system overflow design. Drainage systems shall have adequate
capacity to convey the stormwater runoff from all upstream tributary areas
through the development under consideration for a storm of 100-year design
return period calculated on the basis of the upstream land in its present state
of development. An allowance, equivalent to the reduction in flow rate
provided, shall be made for upstream detention when such upstream detention and
release rate have previously been approved by the Board and evidence of its
construction can be shown.
   (E)   Determination of storage volume; rational method.
      (1)   Generally. For areas of 200 acres or less, the rational method may
be used to determine the required volume of stormwater storage. The following
11-step procedure may be used to determine the required volume of storage.
Other design methods may also be used, subject to approval of the Board, and as
described in division (F) below.
      (2)   Step procedure.
         (a)   Determine total drainage area in acres “A”;
         (b)   Determine composite runoff coefficient “Cu” based on existing
land use (undeveloped);
         (c)   Determine time of concentration “tc” in minutes based on
existing conditions;
         (d)   Determine rainfall intensity “Iu” in inches per hour, based on
time of concentration and using Figure 1 in §
153.06(B), or from data given in Table 5 in division (C)(3)(b) above for the
ten-year return period;
         (e)   Compute runoff based on existing land use (undeveloped) and ten-
year return period (Qu=CuIuA);
         (f)   Determine composite runoff coefficient “Cd” based on developed
conditions and a 100-year return period;
         (g)    Determine the 100-year return period rainfall intensity “Td”
for various storm durations “td” up through the time of concentration for the
developed area using Table 5 in division (C)(3)(b) above;
         (h)   Determine developed inflow rates “Qd” for various storm
durations “td,” measured in hours;
         (i)   Compute a storage rate “Std” for various storm durations, ”td”
up through the time of concentration of the developed area (S(Td)=(Qd)-(Qu));
         (j)   Compute required storage volume “SR” in acre-feet for each storm
duration “td.” This assumes a triangular hydrograph of duration (two times d)
hours with the peak flow of “Std” at “td” hours (SR = S(td)(td)/12); and
         (k)   Select the largest storage volume computed in division (E)(2)(j)
above for detention basin design.
   (F)   Determination of storage volume; other methods.
      (1)   Generally. Methods other than the rational method for determining
runoff and routing of stormwater may be used to determine the storage volume
required to control stormwater runoff. The procedures or methods used must
receive the prior approval of the Plan Director and County Surveyor. The TR-20
and TR-55 models are approved for the appropriate use in analysis of the runoff
and routing of stormwater. The use of these models or other approved procedures
can be defined in a seven-step procedure to determine the required storage
volume of the detention basin.
      (2)   Step procedure.
         (a)   Calibrate the hydrologic/hydraulic model that is to be used for
prediction of runoff and routing of stormwater;
         (b)   For each storm duration listed in division (C)(3)(b), perform
steps in division (F)(2)(c) through (F)(2)(f) below;
         (c)   Determine the ten-year, undeveloped peak flow. Denote this flow
by Qu10;
         (d)   Determine the 100-year runoff hydrograph (Hd100) for developed
conditions;
         (e)   Determine the hydrograph that must be stored (Hs100) by
subtracting a flow up to Qu10 from the hydro graph (Hd100) found in (F)(2)(d)
above;
         (f)   Determine the volume of water (Vs) to be stored by calculating
the area under the hydrograph Hs100; and
         (g)   The detention basin must be designed to store the largest volume
(Vs) found for any storm duration analyzed in division (F)(2)(f) above.
   (G)   General detention basin design requirements.
      (1)   Basins shall be constructed to detain temporarily the stormwater
runoff which exceeds the maximum peak flow rate authorized by this chapter. The
volume of storage provided in these basins, together with such storage as may
be authorized in other on-site facilities shall be sufficient to control excess
runoff from the 100-year storm.
      (2)   The following design principles shall be observed.
         (a)   The maximum volume of water stored and subsequently released at
the design release rate shall not result in a storage duration in excess of 48
hours unless additional storms occur within the period.
         (b)   The maximum planned depth of stormwater stored (without a
permanent pool) shall not exceed four feet.
         (c)   All stormwater detention facilities shall be separated by not
less than 75 feet from any building or structure to be occupied.
         (d)   All excavated excess spoil may be spread so as to provide for
aesthetic and recreational features such as sliding hills, sports fields and
the like. Slopes no steeper than six horizontal to one vertical for safety,
erosion control, stability and ease of maintenance shall be permitted.
         (e)   Safety screens having a maximum opening of four inches shall be
provided for any pipe or opening to prevent children or large animals from
crawling into the structures.
         (f)   Danger signs shall be mounted at appropriate locations to warn
of deep water, possible flooding conditions during storm periods and other
dangers that exist. Fencing shall be provided if deemed necessary by the Board.
         (g)   Outlet control structures shall be designed to operate as simply
as possible and shall require little or no maintenance and/or attention for
proper operation. They shall limit discharges into existing or planned
downstream channels or conduits so as not to exceed the predetermined maximum
authorized peak flow rate.
         (h)   Emergency overflow facilities such as a weir or spillway shall
be provided for the release of exceptional storm runoffs or in emergency
conditions should the normal discharge devices become totally or partially
inoperative. The overflow facility shall be of such design that its operation
is automatic and does not require manual attention.
         (i)   Grass or other suitable vegetative cover shall be provided
throughout the entire basin area. Grass should be cut regularly at
approximately monthly intervals during the growing season or as required.
         (j)   Debris and trash removal and other necessary maintenance shall
be performed on a regular basis to assure continued operation in conformance to
design.
         (k)   1.   A report shall be submitted to the Plan Commission
describing the following:
               a.   The proposed development;
               b.   The current land use conditions;
               c.   The method of hydraulic and hydrologic analysis used,
including any assumptions or special conditions;
               d.   The results of the analysis; and
               e.   The recommended drainage control facilities.
            2.   Hydraulic and hydrologic calculations, including input and
output files, shall be included as appendices to the report.
   (H)   Dry bottom basin design requirements. Detention basins which will not
contain a permanent pool of water shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   Provisions shall be incorporated to facilitate complete interior
drainage of dry bottom basins, to include the provisions of natural grades to
outlet structures, longitudinal and transverse grades to perimeter drainage
facilities, paved gutters or the installation of subsurface drains.
      (2)   The detention basin shall, whenever possible, be designed to serve
a secondary or multi-purpose function. Recreational facilities, aesthetic
qualities (open spaces) or other types of use shall be considered in planning
the detention facility.
   (I)   Wet bottom basin design requirements.
      (1)   Where part of a detention basin will contain a permanent pool of
water, all the items required for detention storage shall apply, except that
the system of drains with a positive gravity outlet required to maintain a dry
bottom basin will not be required. A controlled positive outlet will be
required to maintain the design water level in the wet bottom basin and provide
required detention storage above the design water level.
      (2)   However, the following additional conditions shall apply.
         (a)   Basins designed with permanent pools or containing permanent
ponds shall have a water area of at least one-half acre. If fish are to be
maintained in the pond, a minimum depth of approximately ten feet shall be
maintained over at least 25% of the pond area. The remaining pond area shall
have no extensive shallow areas, except as required by division (I)(2)(c)
below.
         (b)   In excavated ponds, the underwater side slopes in the pond shall
be stable. In the case of valley storage, natural slopes may be considered to
be stable.
         (c)   A safety ledge four to six feet in width is required and must be
installed in all ponds approximately 30 to 36 inches below the permanent water
level. In addition, a similar maintenance ledge 12 to 18 inches above the
permanent water line shall be provided. The slope between the two ledges shall
be stable and of a material such as stone or riprap which will prevent erosion
due to wave action.
         (d)   A safety ramp exit from the pond is required in all cases and
shall have a minimum width of 20 feet and exit slope to six horizontal to one
vertical. The ramp shall be of a material that will prevent its deterioration
due to vehicle use and/or wave action.
         (e)   Periodic maintenance is required in ponds to control weed and
larval growth. The pond shall also be designed to provide for the easy removal
of sediment which will accumulate during periods of pond operation. A means of
maintaining the designed water level of the pond during prolonged periods of
dry weather is also required.
         (f)   For emergency use, basin cleaning or shoreline maintenance,
facilities shall be provided or plans prepared for auxiliary equipment to
permit emptying and drainage.
         (g)   Facilities to enhance and maintain pond water quality shall be
provided if required to meet applicable water quality standards. Design
calculations to substantiate the effectiveness of these aeration facilities
shall be submitted with final engineering plans. Agreements for the perpetual
operation and maintenance of aeration facilities shall be prepared to the
satisfaction of the Plan Commission.
   (J)   Roof top storage. Detention storage requirements may be met in total
or in part by detention on flat roofs. Details of such designs are to be
included in the building permit application and shall include the depth and
volume of storage, details of outlet devices and down drains, elevations of
emergency overflow provisions and certification of the structural portion of
the building design plans by a structural engineer. This type of storage is
allowable but should only be utilized as a last resort if no other options are
available.
   (K)   Parking lot storage. Paved parking lots may be designed to provide
temporary detention storage of stormwaters on all or a portion of their
surfaces. Outlets will be designed so as to empty the stored waters slowly.
Depths of storage must be limited to a maximum depth of seven inches so as to
prevent damage to parked vehicles and so that access to parked vehicles is not
impaired. Ponding should, in general, be confined to those positions of the
parking lots farthest from the area served.
   (L)   Facility financial responsibilities. The construction cost of
stormwater control systems and facilities as required by this chapter shall be
accepted as part of the cost of land development. If general public use of the
facility can be demonstrated, negotiations for public participation in the cost
of such development may be considered.
   (M)   Facility maintenance responsibility.
      (1)   Maintenance of detention/retention facilities during construction
and thereafter shall be the responsibility of the land developer/owner.
Assignment of responsibility for maintaining facilities serving more than one
lot or holding shall be documented by appropriate covenants to property deeds,
unless responsibility is formally accepted by a public body, and shall be
determined before the final drainage plans are approved.
      (2)   Stormwater detention and retention basins may be donated to the
county or other unit of government designated by the county, for ownership and
permanent maintenance, providing:
         (a)   The county or other governmental unit is willing to accept
responsibility;
         (b)   The facility has been designed and constructed according to all
applicable provisions of this chapter;
         (c)   All improvements have been constructed, approved and accepted by
the county for the land area served by the drainage basin;
         (d)   Retention ponds containing a permanent pool of water have all
slopes between the riprap and high water line sodded and the remaining land
area hydroseeded; are equipped with electrically driven aeration devices, if
required, to maintain proper aerobic conditions and sustain aquatic life; have
a four-foot wide crushed limestone walkway at the high water line entirely
around the body of water; provided, suitable public access acceptable to the
responsible governmental agency; and have the high water line not closer than
75 feet to any property line; and
         (e)   Dry detention ponds shall have all slopes, bottom of the basin
and areas above the high water line hydroseeded; and shall have the high water
line not closer than 50 feet to any development boundary.
   (N)   Inspections. All public and privately-owned detention storage
facilities can be inspected by representatives of the county not less often
than once every two years. If inspected, a certified inspection report covering
physical conditions, available storage capacity and operational condition of
key facility elements will be provided to the owner.
   (O)   Corrective measures. If deficiencies are found by the Building
Inspector, the owner of the detention/retention facility will be required to
take the necessary measures to correct such deficiencies. If the owner fails to
do so, the county will undertake the work and collect from the owner using lien
rights, if necessary.
   (P)   Joint development of control systems. Stormwater control systems may
be planned and constructed jointly by two or more developers as long as
compliance with this chapter is maintained.
   (Q)   Installation of control systems. Runoff and erosion control systems
shall be installed as soon as possible during the course of site development.
Detention/retention basins shall be designed with an additional 6% of available
capacity to allow for sediment accumulation resulting from development and to
permit the pond to function for reasonable periods between cleanings. Basins
should be designed to collect sediment and debris in specific locations so that
removal costs are kept to a minimum.
   (R)   Detention facilities in floodplains. If detention storage is provided
within a floodplain, only the net increase in storage volume above that which
naturally existed on the floodplain shall be credited to the development. No
credit will be granted for volumes below the elevation of the regulatory flood
at the location unless compensatory storage is also provided.
   (S)   Off-site drainage provisions. When the allowable runoff is released in
an area that is susceptible to flooding, the developer may be required to
construct appropriate storm drains through such area to avert increased flood
hazard caused by the concentration of allowable runoff at one point instead of
the natural overland distribution. The requirement of off-site drains shall be
at the discretion of the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.13 CERTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   After completion of the project and before final approval and
acceptance can be made, a professionally prepared and certified “as-built” set
of plans shall be submitted to the Plan Commission for review.
   (B)   These plans shall include all pertinent data relevant to the completed
storm drainage system and shall include:
      (1)   Pipe size and pipe material;
      (2)   Invert elevations;
      (3)   Top rim elevations;
      (4)   Lengths of all pipe structures;
      (5)   Data and calculations showing detention basin storage volume; and
      (6)   A certified statement on plans stating the completed storm drainage
system substantially complies with construction plans as approved by the Plan
Commission.
   (C)   (1)   All such submitted plans shall be reviewed for compliance within
30 days after submission to the Plan Director and County Surveyor.
      (2)   If notice of noncompliance is not given within 30 days of
submission of the plans, the plans shall be construed as approved and accepted.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.14 CHANGES IN PLAN.
   If the applicant wishes to amend the site plan in any way after the drainage
plan has been approved by the Plan Commission, the applicant must inform the
County Plan Director of the mandated or proposed change. If the County Plan
Director determines the change in the building or site plan significantly
changes the drainage as proposed under the currently approved final drainage
plan, he or she may require addition information and that the change be
reviewed by the Plan Commission subject to its approval.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.15 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Sump pumps. Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge groundwaters
or other stormwaters shall be connected to the storm sewer where possible or
discharged into a designated storm drainage channel. Sump pumps installed to
receive and discharge floor drain flow or other sanitary sewage shall be
connected to the sanitary sewers. A sump pump shall be used for one function
only, either the discharge of stormwaters or the discharge of sanitary sewage.
   (B)   Down spouts. All down spouts or roof drains shall discharge onto the
ground or be connected to the storm sewer. No down spouts or roof drains shall
be connected to the sanitary sewers.
   (C)   Footing drains. Footing drains shall be connected to storm sewers
where possible or designated storm drainage channels. No footing drains or
drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
   (D)   Basement floor drains. Basement floor drains shall be connected to the
sanitary sewers.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.16 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on historical records,
engineering and scientific methods of study.
   (B)   Larger storms may occur or stormwater runoff depths may be increased
by human-made or natural causes.
   (C)   This chapter does not imply that land uses permitted will be free from
stormwater damage.
   (D)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of county or any
officer or employee thereof for any damage which may result from reliance on
this chapter or on any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.17 CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county from taking such other
lawful action as may be necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011
§ 153.18 EXEMPT PROJECTS.
   Exempted projects include single-family and two-family dwellings, building
additions and accessory structures appurtenant to either a single-family or
two-family dwelling less than 4,000 square feet in area. Any commercial,
institutional or industrial construction project, as well as any major or minor
residential subdivision which has had its drainage plan approved prior to the
effective date of this chapter are also considered exempt projects.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.19 PROJECTS SIZES AND TYPES REGULATED BY ORDINANCE.
   Any agricultural, new commercial, industrial or institutional construction
project that lies within the regulated area and has a combined impervious or
semi-impervious surface area of 4,000 square feet or greater shall be regulated
by this chapter. For example, this would include the construction of a building
(s) with 4,000 square feet of surface area, a 4,000 square foot parking area or
any combination of new development that together has a combined aggregate
impervious or semi-impervious surface area of 4,000 square feet or greater.
Furthermore, this chapter also regulates any major or minor residential
subdivision, as regulated by §
155.01.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.20 FINANCIAL GUARANTEES.
   (A)   Financial guarantees shall be a prerequisite to the Plan Commission
office action on the application for the approval of the drainage plan.
   (B)   The Plan Commission office shall approve the drainage plan only after
notice has been received and has been filed with and approved by one of the
following:
      (1)   A certification to the effect that the drainage improvements have
been graded and installed in accordance with the specifications of this
chapter;
      (2)   A performance bond is posted with the County Board of Commissioners
and it shall:
         (a)   Be in the name of the County Board of Commissioners;
         (b)   Be in the amount equal to 100% of the cost, as estimated by the
Board, of all improvements and installations as required under this chapter,
excluding, however, the cost of any said improvements and installations which
have been constructed, installed and completed in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter prior to the providing of this bond and for which
sufficient written proof of such construction, installations and completion has
been furnished to the Board;
         (c)   Be satisfactory to the County Board of Commissioners; and
         (d)   Run until and terminate 60 days after the filing with the County
Plan Director a completion affidavit obtained from the County Plan Commission’s
office.
      (3)   Cash bonds or other negotiable securities acceptable and assigned
to the County Board of Commissioners is posted in lieu of the performance bond;
or
      (4)   Any funds received from the financial guarantees required by this
chapter shall be used only for the purpose of making drainage improvements for
which said guarantees were provided, in accordance with the specifications and
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
§ 153.21 APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (A)    An application for drainage plan approval should be obtained from and
filed with the County Plan Commission’s office. The application must be
accompanied by five copies of the preliminary drainage plan, topographic and
soils maps, as well as the other maps and descriptive materials that are a part
of the informational requirements of this chapter. Upon receipt of the
application for drainage plan approval, the County Plan Director and County
Surveyor will review the proposed drainage plans to determine whether they have
been prepared in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
      (1)   If the County Plan Director and County Surveyor finds that the
application has been submitted with the correct informational requirements and
has been prepared in accordance with the terms of this chapter, the Plan
Director shall advise the applicant in writing.
      (2)   If the County Plan Director or County Surveyor finds that the
application has not been submitted with the correct informational requirements
or has not been prepared in accordance with the terms of this chapter, he or
she shall advise the applicant in writing of the items of nonconformance.
   (B)   The Plan Commission Office shall, upon the filing of an application
for drainage plan approval, review the final plat along with the accompanying
data and determine whether or not the drainage plan meets all of the minimum
requirements and standards of this chapter. The Plan Commission Office shall
then take one of the following actions on the application within 30 days after
its submission or a mutually agreed extension.
      (1)   Conditional approval. If the Plan Commission office determines that
upon the satisfactory completion of one or more specified conditions consistent
with the requirements, standards and specifications of this chapter, the Plan
Commission may give conditional approval to the drainage plan.
      (2)   Approval. The Plan Commission office shall give drainage plan
approval only after it has determined the drainage plan meets the requirements
of this chapter and that sufficient financial guarantees have been submitted in
accordance with this chapter.
      (3)   Disapproval. Should the Plan Commission office disapprove the
drainage plan, written notice of such action, together with reasons therefor,
shall be transmitted to the applicant. Such action shall also be entered on the
official records of the Commission. If disapproved, the applicant may at any
time reapply for drainage plan approval.
      (4)   Refer to County Plan Director or County Surveyor. Should the Plan
Commission have a question about a specific technical aspect of the drainage
plan, the Plan Commission may refer a question to the County Surveyor or Plan
Director for a finding.
   (C)   Upon approval of the final drainage plan, the Plan Director and County
Surveyor shall affix their signatures to the original tracing of the final
drainage plan. Final approval of the drainage plan by the Plan Commission
office shall not be construed as an acceptance of any street dedication or
approval of any building permit which requires the approval of other state or
local agencies which has jurisdiction. No building permits or improvement
location permits will be issued by the County Plan Commission or other co-
adopting localities for any developments that are regulated by this chapter
unless they receive a copy of the drainage plan signed by the Plan Commission
office, or a waiver signed by the County Plan Director, as well as the County
Surveyor.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
APPENDIX A: STORM DRAINAGE AND SEDIMENT CONTROL WAIVER

After being reviewed by the Marshall County Plan Director and the County
Surveyor, the development described below has been deemed to have no
significant drainage impact on neighboring properties, as well as county roads
and dedicated drainage ditches. This project is hereby released from the
requirement of submitting a drainage plan to the Marshall County Plan
Commission.
 
Name and Address of Property Owner
________________________________
________________________________
________________________________
 
Description of the Project
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
 
Attach site plan.
If the design of this project is changed, this waiver is voided, and the
property owner must obtain a new waiver or get approval from the Marshall
County Plan Commission.
 
DATE: ________________
Approval:         ____________________         ________________________
               Plan Director               County Surveyor
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
APPENDIX B: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL ORDINANCE

   The intent of this ordinance is the control of soil erosion and
sedimentation caused by land disturbing activities within Marshall County.
Measures taken to control erosion and sedimentation should assure that sediment
is not transported from a site by storm events or construction activities.
1. AUTHORITY
   This ordinance is adopted under the authority granted by I.C. 36-1-4-11,
I.C. 36-7-4 and all acts supplemental and mandatory thereto. This authority
provides for the administration, enforcement, and amendment of this ordinance
for controlling soil erosion within Marshall County.
2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
   A.   Soil erosion resulting from land disturbing activities causes a
significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to be transported off-site
to locations including ditches, streams, wetlands, lakes, and reservoirs.
   B.   The purpose of this ordinance is to conserve the natural resources; to
protect the quality of air and water, and to protect and promote the health,
safety, and welfare of people to the extent practicable by minimizing the
amount of sediment and other pollutants, resulting from soil erosion due to and
disturbing activities, from being transported off-site to adjacent public or
private lands including ditches, streams, lakes, wetlands, and reservoirs.
3. APPLICABILITY
   The ordinance applies to all land disturbing activities on land within the
boundaries and jurisdiction of Marshall County unless superseded by local city
or town ordinance. Agricultural Land Disturbing Activities as defined in § 5,
and Soil & Water. Conservation projects, implemented through the Marshall
County Soil and Water Conservation District and the Marshall County Surveyor’s
Office, are exempt from the requirements of this ordinance.
   This section applies to the following sites with land disturbing activities:
   A. Those requiring a minor or major subdivision plat approval or local
improvement location permit for the construction of commercial, residential,
industrial or institutional buildings on lots of approved subdivision plats;
   B. Those involving grading, removal of protective ground cover or
vegetation, excavation, land filling or other land disturbing activity
affecting a surface area of 10,000 square feet or more;
   C. Those involving excavation, filling or a combination of excavation and
filling affecting 1,000 cubic yards or more of soil, sand, gravel, stone or
other material.
   This ordinance does not preclude the applicant from acquiring any other
necessary local, state, and federal permits.
4. CONFLICTING ORDINANCES/REQUIREMENTS
   The provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed as additional requirements
to minimum standards required by the Indiana General Permit Rule for Stormwater
Runoff Associated With Construction Activity (Rule 5), 327 I.A.C. 15-5 (or most
recent revision). In case of conflicting requirements, the most restrictive
shall apply.
5. DEFINITIONS
   Administering authority means the designated unit of government given the
authority to issue permits.
   Agricultural land disturbing activities means the disturbance of land,
including the clearing of land, for the production of animal or plant life,
including forestry, pasturing of livestock, and planting, growing, cultivating,
and harvesting crops for human or livestock consumption. This also includes the
construction of farm facilities such as dwellings, barns, sheds or other
structures.
   Erosion means the detachment and movement of soil, sediment or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
   Erosion control measure means a practice or a combination of practices to
control erosion and resulting sedimentation.
   Erosion control plan means a written description of pertinent information
concerning erosion control measures designed to meet the requirements of this
ordinance.
   Land disturbing activity means any man-made change of the land surface,
including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, transporting, and
grading.
   Runoff means waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a
tributary drainage basin that exceed the infiltration capacity of the soils of
that basin, flow over the surface of the ground, or are collected in channels
or conduits.
   Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which land disturbing activity has been proposed in the permit application.
   SWCD means Soil and Water Conservation District, a subdivision of state
government charged with the responsibility of establishing programs and setting
policy to protect the natural resources with Marshall County boundaries.
6. GENERAL PRINCIPLES
The following principles apply to all land disturbing activities subject to
this ordinance.
   A.   To minimize the potential for soil erosion, development should fit the
topography and soils of the site. Areas with steep slopes where deep cuts and
fills may be required should be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours
should be followed as closely as possible.
   B.   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible.
Areas immediately adjacent to watercourses and lakes also should be left
undisturbed wherever possible.
   C.   All activities on a site should be conducted in a logical sequence so
that the smallest practical area of land will be exposed for the shortest
practical period of time during development.
   D.   Provisions should be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by
changed soil and surface conditions (impervious areas) during and after
development.
   E.   Minimize the length and steepness of slopes to reduce erosion
potential.
7. DESIGN CRITERIA, STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR EROSION CONTROL MEASURES
   All erosion control measures, including, but not limited to those required
to comply with this ordinance shall meet the design criteria, standards, and
specifications for erosion control measures similar to or the same as those
outlined in the Indiana Handbook for Erosion Control in Developing Areas
published by the State Department of Natural Resources.
8. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL REQUIREMENTS
   The following requirements shall govern erosion and sediment control
practices on all sites:
   A.   Sediment-laden water flowing from the site shall be detained by erosion
control measures appropriate to minimize sedimentation.
   B.   Water shall not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion at or
downstream of the point of discharge.
   C.   All access to building sites that cross a natural watercourse, drainage
easement, or swale/channel shall have a culvert of appropriate size.
   D.   Wastes or unused building materials, including, but not limited to,
garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials, and hazardous
substances, shall not be carried by runoff from a site. All wastes shall be
disposed of in a proper manner.
   E.   Sediment being tracked from a site onto public or private roadways
shall be minimized. This can be accomplished initially by a temporary gravel
construction entrance, in addition to a well planned layout of roads, access
drives, and parking areas.
   F.   Public or private roadways shall be kept cleared of accumulated
sediment. Bulk clearing of sediment shall not include flushing the area with
water.
   G.   All storm drain inlets shall be protected against sedimentation with
barriers meeting accepted criteria, standards, and specifications.
   H.   Runoff passing through a site from adjacent areas shall be controlled
by diverting it around disturbed areas, where practical. Diverted runoff shall
be conveyed in a manner that will not erode the channel and receiving areas.
Alternatively, the existing channel may be left undisturbed or improved to
prevent erosion or sedimentation from occurring.
   I.   Drainage ways and swales shall be designed and adequately protected so
that their final gradients and resultant velocities will not cause channel or
outlet scouring.
   J.   All disturbed ground left inactive for fourteen (14) or more days shall
be stabilized by seeding, sodding, mulching, covering, or by other equivalent
erosion control measures.
   K.   Appropriate sediment control practices shall be installed prior to any
land disturbance and thereafter whenever necessary.
   L.   During the period of construction activity at a site, erosion control
measures necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance shall be
maintained by the applicant.
9. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL ON PROJECTS THAT DISTURB LESS THAN ONE (1) ACRE
   Although individual lots within a larger development may not appear to
contribute as much sediment as the overall development, the cumulative effect
of lot development is of concern. From the time construction on an individual
lot begins, until the individual lot is stabilized, the builder must take steps
to:
   (A)   protect adjacent properties from sedimentation
   (B)   prevent mud/sediment from depositing on the street
   (C)   protect drainageways from erosion and sedimentation
   (D)   prevent sediment laden water from entering storm sewer inlets
   The standard plan includes perimeter silt fence, stabilized construction
entrance, curb inlet protection, drop inlet protection, stockpile containment,
stabilized drainage swales, downspout extensions, temporary seeding and
mulching, and permanent vegetation. Every relevant measure should be installed
at each individual lot site.
   All erosion and sediment control measures must be properly maintained
throughout construction. Temporary and permanent seeding should be watered as
needed until established. For further information on individual lot erosion and
sediment control, see the State Department of Natural Resources, Division of
Soil Conservation’s pamphlet titled “Erosion and Sediment Control for
Individual Building Sites.”
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 4-4-2011)
CHAPTER 154: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Statutory authorization
   
154.02   Findings of fact
   
154.03   Statement of purpose
   
154.04   Objectives
   
154.05   Definitions
   
154.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
154.07   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data
   
154.08   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
154.09   Compliance
   
154.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
154.11   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground elevations
   
154.12   Interpretation
   
154.13   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.25   Floodplain Administrator designation; duties; responsibilities
   
154.26   Permit procedures
   
154.27   Variance and Appeals Board
   
154.28   Variance and appeals procedures
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
154.40   General standards
   
154.41   Specific standards
   
154.42   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
154.43   Critical facilities
   
154.44   Standards for identified floodways
   
154.45   Standards for identified fringe
   
154.46   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood elevation and/or
floodways/fringes
   
154.47   Standards for flood prone areas
 
   
154.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The state legislature has, in I.C. 36-7-4, granted the power to local
government units to control land use within their jurisdictions. Therefore, the
County Commissioners does hereby adopt the following floodplain management
regulations.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to
other lands which are inadequately elevated, inadequately floodproofed or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage;
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands; and
   (F)   Make federal flood insurance available for structures and their
contents in the county by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are:
   (A)   To protect human life and health;
   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in floodplains; and
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight
areas.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A ZONE. Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding is
runoff from rainfall, snowmelt or a combination of both. In A ZONES,
floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant
threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE, Zones A1-A30,
Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM. The definitions are presented
below.
      (1)   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no base
flood elevation or depths are shown.
      (2)   ZONE AE AND A1-A30. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood elevations are
shown within these zones. (ZONE AE is on new and revised maps in place of ZONES
A1-A30.)
      (3)   ZONE AO. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.
      (4)   ZONE AH. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between one and
three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are
shown within this zone.
      (5)   ZONE AR. Areas that result from the decertification of a previously
accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of
being restored to provide base flood protection.
      (6)   ZONE A99. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of an under-
construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of special flood
hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction of a protection
system, such as dikes, dams and levees, to consider it complete for insurance
rating purposes. ZONE A99 may only be used when the flood protection system has
reached specified statutory progress toward completion. No base flood
elevations or depths are shown.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure with a floor area
400 square feet or less that is located on the same parcel of property as the
principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should constitute a minimal initial
investment, may not be used for human habitation and be designed to have
minimal flood damage potential. Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are detached
garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns and hay sheds.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is
connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls, is new construction.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the community’s
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the 1% annual chance flood.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BOUNDARY RIVER. The part of the Ohio River that forms the boundary between
Kentucky and Indiana.
   BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of a boundary river.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the regular
program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to
develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding
might be too great. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited to,
schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or
hazardous waste.
   D ZONE. Unstudied areas where flood hazards are undetermined, but flooding
is possible. Flood insurance is available in participating communities but is
not required by regulation in this zone.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a structure or any
addition to a structure;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more than
180 days;
         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences, construction
of roads or similar projects;
         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes,
dams, channel improvements and the like;
         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling
operations;
         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
         (g)   Storage of materials; or
         (h)   Any other activity that might change the direction, height or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing structures and facilities such as: painting; re-roofing; resurfacing
roads; or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation or the construction of permanent
structures.
   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter
walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls), pilings or
columns (posts and piers).
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A certified statement that verifies a structure’s
elevation information.
   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The first phase under which a community participates in
the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA)
has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic report
provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FBFM
(where applicable) and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area acknowledged by a community as being
susceptible to inundation by water from any source. (See FLOOD.)
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory flood plus two
feet at any given location in the SFHA. (See FREEBOARD.)
   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory
flood. The FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the fringe districts.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances and other applications of police power which control development in
flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in
any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS are also referred to
as floodplain regulations, floodplain ordinance, flood damage prevention
ordinance and floodplain management requirements.
   FLOODPROOFING or DRY FLOODPROOFING. A method of protecting a structure that
ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with walls that
are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy and anticipated debris impact
forces.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for
nonresidential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or above
the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional engineer or
architect.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently
carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood.
   FRINGE. The portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.
   HARDSHIP. As related to variances of this chapter, the exceptional hardship
that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The County
Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual and
peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial HARDSHIP alone is
not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps,
personal preferences or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as
a rule, qualify as an exceptional HARDSHIP. All of these problems can be
resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURES. Any structures individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Register of Historic Sites and
Structures.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially
damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to
bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local flood
damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation,
relocation, demolition or any combination thereof. All renewal and new business
flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after June 1, 1997, will
include ICC coverage.
   LETTER OF FINAL DETERMINATION (LFD). A letter issued by FEMA during the
mapping update process which establishes final elevations and provides the new
flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD initiates the six-month
adoption period. The community must adopt or amend its floodplain management
regulations during this six-month period unless the community has previously
incorporated an automatic adoption clause.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A general term used to refer to the several
types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by
letter. They include letter of map amendment (LOMA), letter of map revision
(LOMR) and letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F). The definitions are
presented below.
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment by letter to the
currently effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in
a SFHA through the submittal of property specific elevation data. A LOMA is
only issued by FEMA.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the
currently effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations and elevations.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An official revision
by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA’s determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the
BFE and excluded from the SFHA.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support or basement entryway
immediately next to the structure.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest elevation described among the following:
      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure;
      (2)   The top of the basement floor;
      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of
the structure;
      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or
pillars; and
      (5)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement,
below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure provide any
resistance to the flow of floodwaters unless:
         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic
flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters by
providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows) in a
minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has more than one enclosed area,
each shall have openings on exterior walls;
         (b)   The total net area of all openings shall be at least one square
inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; the bottom of all such
openings shall be no higher than one foot above the exterior grade or the
interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher; and
         (c)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parking of
vehicles and building access.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a
willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market
will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent certified appraisal,
replacement cost depreciated by the age of the building (actual cash value) or
adjusted assessed values.
   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to
people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of MITIGATION
is twofold: to protect people and structures; and to minimize the cost of
disaster response and recovery.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF 1929. As corrected in 1929, a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within
the floodplain.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced after the effective date of the community’s first floodplain
ordinance.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
   NON-BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of any river or stream other than
a boundary river.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88). As adopted in 1993, a
vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, canalization,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its propensity to snare
or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being
carried downstream.
   ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the
letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See REGULATORY FLOOD.
   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a community’s FEMA
map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood elevations, floodplain
boundary delineations, regulatory floodways and planimetric features. These
changes typically occur as a result of structural works or improvements,
annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas, or correction to base
flood elevations or SFHAs.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections,
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck and
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as quarters for
recreational camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community’s participation in the NFIP
where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and
higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations
determined in a FIS.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is acceptable
to and approved by the State Department of Natural Resources and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at any location is
as defined in §
154.07. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known by the term BASE FLOOD, ONE-PERCENT
ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD and 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SECTION 1316. The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq., as amended, which states that no new flood insurance
coverage shall be provided for any property that the Administrator finds has
been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other
authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations
or ordinances that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land
development or occupancy in flood prone areas.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Lands within the jurisdiction of the
county subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the county
are generally identified as such on the county’s flood insurance study of the
county and incorporated areas dated November 16, 2011, as well as any future
updates, amendments or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency with the most recent date. (These areas are shown on a FIRM as Zone A,
AE, A1-A30, AH, AR, A99 or AO.)
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred repetitive loss
or substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not include improvements of structures to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary or safety code requirements.
   SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP because
the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain management
regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation, other certification or other evidence of compliance required in this
chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
Shaded X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood). Unshaded X ZONES (C zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.
   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FIRM that reflects the severity or type
of flooding in the area.
   ZONE A. See definition for A ZONE.
   ZONE B, C AND X. Areas identified in the community as areas of moderate or
minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area. However,
buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated rainfall
coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is available in
participating communities but is not required by regulation in these zones.
(ZONE X is used on new and revised maps in place of ZONE B and ZONE C.)
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and known flood prone areas within the
jurisdiction of the county.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.
   This chapter’s protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best
available regulatory flood data is listed below.
   (A)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe limits for the
studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the county shall be as delineated on
the 1% annual chance flood profiles in the county’s flood insurance study of
the county and incorporated areas dated November 16, 2011, and the
corresponding flood insurance rate map dated November 16, 2011, as well as any
future updates, amendments or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency with the most recent date.
   (B)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe limits for each of
the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the county, delineated as an “A Zone” on
the county’s incorporated areas flood insurance rate map dated November 16,
2011, as well as any future updates, amendments or revisions, prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date, shall be
according to the best data available as provided by the State Department of
Natural Resources; provided, that the upstream drainage area from the subject
site is greater than one square mile. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, the party needs to replace existing data with better data that
meets current engineering standards. To be considered, this data must be
submitted to the State Department of Natural Resources for review and
subsequently approved.
   (C)   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of identification
on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe limits of
any watercourse in the community’s known flood prone areas shall be according
to the best data available as provided by the State Department of Natural
Resources; provided, that the upstream drainage area from the subject site is
greater than one square mile.
   (D)   Upon issuance of a letter of final determination (LFD), any more
restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall be utilized
for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing all
previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally
altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within the SFHA shall
hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.11 DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND ELEVATIONS.
   (A)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped floodplain
(SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation provided on
the profiles shall govern.
   (B)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood
elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated accordingly.
   (C)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is above the
base flood elevation and not located within the floodway, that site shall be
considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied.
The property owner shall be advised to apply for a LOMA.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.12 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.13 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any
liability on the part of the county, the State Department of Natural Resources
or the state, for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter
or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.25 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR DESIGNATION; DUTIES; RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Designation of Administrator. The County Commissioners hereby appoints
the Zoning Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this
chapter and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   Authorization and enforcement. The Floodplain Administrator and/or
designated staff is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of
this chapter. The Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations
of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.
   (C)   Duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities of the
Floodplain Administrator shall include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      (2)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and complete
substantial damage determinations;
      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the
State Department of Natural Resources for all development projects subject to
§§
154.44 and
154.46(A), and maintain a record of such authorization (either copy of actual
permit/authorization or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment);
      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have been
received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit. Copies
of such permits/authorizations are to be maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit;
      (5)   Maintain and track permit records involving additions and
improvements to residences located in the floodway;
      (6)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain Coordinator
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit copies of
such notifications to FEMA;
      (7)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local
permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, letters of map change (LOMC),
copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization and floodplain analysis and
regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal permit documents
and “as-built” elevation and floodproofing data for all buildings constructed
subject to this chapter;
      (8)   Utilize and enforce all letters of map change (LOMC) or physical
map revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA maps of the
community;
      (9)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished;
      (10)   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance;
      (11)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in
accordance with §
154.26;
      (12)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new or
substantially improved structures have been floodproofed in accordance with §
154.26; and
      (13)   Perform a minimum of three inspections to ensure that all
applicable ordinances and floodplain development requirements have been
satisfied. The first upon the establishment of the flood protection grade
reference mark at the development site; the second upon the establishment of
the structure’s footprint/establishment of the lowest floor; and the final
inspection upon completion and submission of the required finished construction
elevation certificate. Authorized county officials shall have the right to
enter and inspect properties located in the SFHA.
   (D)   Administrative procedures.
      (1)   Stop work orders.
            (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator, work on any
building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall immediately cease.
            (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the
owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work,
and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
      (2)   Revocation of permits.
         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit or approval,
issued under the provisions of this chapter, in cases where there has been any
false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application
or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit upon
determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the
structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in
conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.26 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following:
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen
fill, storage of materials or equipment; drainage facilities; and the location
of the foregoing.
   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required.
      (1)   Application stage.
         (a)   A description of the proposed development;
         (b)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately
locate property and structure(s) in relation to existing roads and streams;
         (c)   A legal description of the property site;
         (d)   A site development plan showing existing and proposed
development locations and existing and proposed land grades;
         (e)   Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD 88 or NGVD;
         (f)   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any nonresidential
structure will be floodproofed; and
         (g)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. A hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering study is required and any watercourse changes submitted
to DNR for approval and then to FEMA as a letter of map revision. (See §
154.25(C)(6) for additional information.)
      (2)   Construction stage.
         (a)   Upon establishment of the lowest floor of an elevated structure
or structure constructed on fill, it shall be the duty of the applicant to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NAVD 88 or NGVD
elevation of the lowest floor, as built. Said certification shall be prepared
by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by the same. The Floodplain Administrator
shall review the lowest floor elevation survey data submitted. The applicant
shall correct deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is
allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said
corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the
project. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the elevation certification
shall be at the applicant’s risk.
         (b)   Upon establishment of the floodproofed elevation of a
floodproofed structure, it shall be the duty of the applicant to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a floodproofing certificate. Certification shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered professional
engineer and certified by same. (The Floodplain Administrator shall review the
floodproofing certification submitted.) The applicant shall correct any
deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is allowed to
proceed. Failure to submit the floodproofing certification or failure to make
correction required shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project.
      (3)   Finished construction. Upon completion of construction, an
elevation certification (FEMA Elevation Certificate Form 81-31 or any future
updates) which depicts the “as-built” lowest floor elevation is required to be
submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project includes a
floodproofing measure, floodproofing certification (FEMA Floodproofing
Certificate Form 81-65 or any future updates) is required to be submitted by
the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.27 VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
   (A)   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board. The County Board of Zoning
Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board. The Board shall hear and decide
appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision or
determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Board may appeal such decision to the Circuit or Superior Court of the county.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.28 VARIANCE AND APPEALS PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Generally. In passing upon such applications, the Board shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in
other sections of this chapter and:
      (1)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (4)   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (5)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      (6)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (7)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (8)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (9)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
of transport of the floodwaters at the site; and
      (10)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and
bridges.
   (B)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
      (2)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to §§
154.44 and
154.46(A) may be granted.
      (3)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §§
154.44 and
154.46(A) will require a permit from the State Department of Natural Resources.
      (4)   Variances to the Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction found in §
154.41 may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot of
one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (6)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration of
any structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
      (7)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the flood protection grade and the
elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of
the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation. (See §
154.28(C).)
      (8)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or
the State Department of Natural Resources upon request. (See §
154.28(C).)
   (C)   Variance notification.
      (1)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows the lowest
floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade shall be
given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
flood protection grade will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
         (b)   Such construction below the flood protection grade increases
risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the
Floodplain Administrator in the office of the County Recorder and shall be
recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected
parcel of land.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance.
   (D)   Historic structure. Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of “historic structures” upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as an “historic structure” and the variance is the minimum to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
   (E)   Special conditions. Upon the consideration of the factors listed in §§
154.27 and
154.28 and the purposes of this chapter, the County Board of Zoning Appeals may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 154.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all SFHAs and known flood prone areas, the following provisions are
required.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces.
   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage below the FPG.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, utility meters and other service facilities shall be located at or
above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and
telephone lines, submersible pumps and other waterproofed service facilities
may be located below the FPG.
   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (G)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (H)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure
that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the
requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter.
   (J)   Parking lots, driveways and sidewalks within the SFHA shall be
constructed with permeable materials.
   (K)   Whenever any portion of the SFHA is authorized for use, the volume of
space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the BFE
shall be compensated for and balanced by an equivalent volume of excavation
taken below the BFE. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to the
volume of storage lost (replacement ratio of one to one) due to the fill or
structure.
      (1)   The excavation shall take place in the floodplain and in the same
property in which the authorized fill or structure is located.
      (2)   Under certain circumstances, the excavation may be allowed to lake
place outside of but adjacent to the floodplain provided that the excavated
volume will be below the regulatory flood elevation, will be in the same
property in which the authorized fill or structure is located, will be
accessible to the regulatory floodwater, will not be subject to ponding when
not inundated by floodwater and that it shall not be refilled.
      (3)   The excavation shall provide for true storage of floodwater but
shall not be subject to ponding when not inundated by floodwater.
      (4)   The fill or structure shall not obstruct a drainage way leading to
the floodplain.
      (5)   The grading around the excavation shall be such that the excavated
area is accessible to the regulatory floodwater.
      (6)   The fill or structure shall be of a material deemed stable enough
to remain firm and in place during periods of flooding and shall include
provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any increased runoff or
drainage resulting from its placement.
      (7)   Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and filled shall be
submitted prior to the actual start of construction or any site work; once site
work is complete, but before the actual start of construction, the applicant
shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a certified survey of the
excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and excavation comply with
this subchapter.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Building protection requirement. In addition to the requirements of §
154.40, all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood
damage below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the
following situations:
         (1)   Construction or placement of any structure having a floor area
greater than 400 square feet;
         (2)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure where the
cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the
existing structure (excluding the value of the land);
         (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure where the
costs of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the value of the
land) before damage occurred;
         (4)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site
for more than 180 days;
         (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to returning
the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage;
         (6)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss structure;
and
         (7)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure with a
previous addition or improvement constructed since the community’s first
floodplain ordinance.
   (B)   Residential structures. New construction or substantial improvement of
any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood
elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of division (D)
below.
   (C)   Nonresidential structures. New construction or substantial improvement
of any commercial, industrial or nonresidential structure (or manufactured
home) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or
above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation) or be floodproofed to
or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of division (D)
below. Structures located in all “A Zones” may be floodproofed in lieu of being
elevated if done in accordance with the following:
      (1)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account
flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures and impacts
from debris or ice. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator as set forth in §
154.25(C)(12).
      (2)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention
and without an outside source of electricity.
   (D)   Elevated structures.
      (1)   New construction or substantial improvements of elevated structures
shall have the lowest floor at or above the FPG.
      (2)   Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by foundation
and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed to
preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls. Designs must meet the following minimum criteria.
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings located in a minimum of two
exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area).
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one foot above
the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening,
whichever is higher.
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic flow of
floodwaters in both directions.
         (d)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
         (e)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
         (f)   The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be at an
elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.
         (g)   Openings are to be not less than three inches in any direction
in the plane of the wall. This requirement applies to the hole in the wall,
excluding any device that may be inserted such as typical foundation air vent
device.
         (h)   Property owners shall be required to execute a flood openings/
venting affidavit acknowledging that all openings will be maintained as flood
vents, and that the elimination or alteration of the openings in anyway will
violate the requirements of this division (D). Periodic inspections will be
conducted by the Floodplain Administrator to ensure compliance. The affidavit
shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
         (i)   Property owners shall be required to execute and record with the
structure’s deed a non-conversion agreement declaring that the area below the
lowest floor (where the interior height of the enclosure exceeds six feet)
shall not be improved, finished or otherwise converted; the community will have
the right to inspect the enclosed area. The non-conversion agreement shall be
recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
   (E)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or nonresidential
structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in accordance with the
following.
      (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep
before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with either the
standard or modified Proctor test method. The results of the test showing
compliance shall be retained in the permit file.
      (2)   The fill shall extend ten feet beyond the foundation of the
structure before sloping below the BFE.
      (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is
used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
      (5)   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be at or
above the FPG.
      (6)   Fill shall be composed of clean granular or earthen material.
   (F)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following
requirements.
      (1)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on
a site outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a
flood.
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in division (D) above.
         (c)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame
or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
      (2)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on
a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been
substantially damaged by a flood.
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the lowest floor
of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in division (D) above.
         (c)   Flexible skirling and rigid skirting not attached to the frame
or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
      (3)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:
         (a)   Be on site for less than 180 days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (defined as being on
its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and having no permanently attached
additions); or
         (c)   Meet the requirements for “manufactured homes” as stated earlier
in this section.
   (G)   Accessory structures. Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such structures must meet
the following standards:
      (1)   Shall not be used for human habitation;
      (2)   Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      (3)   Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      (4)   Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to or above the FPG; and
      (6)   Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in division (D) above.
   (H)   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. All above ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral
movement.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.42 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the SFHA and/
or limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.
   (F)   All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of SFHA
for pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency responders).
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.43 CRITICAL FACILITIES.
   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible,
located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new critical facilities
shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site. Floodproofing and
sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be
displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above
the FPG shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.44 STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   Located within SFHAs established in §
154.07 are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris and
potential projectiles and has erosion potential. If the site is in an
identified floodway, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant
to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications,
to the State Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1, a permit for
construction in a floodway from the State Department of Natural Resources is
required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any excavation,
deposit, construction or obstruction activity located in the floodway. This
includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading, clearing and
paving and the like undertaken before the actual start of construction of the
structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial additions/improvements to
existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26
allows construction of a non-substantial addition/improvement to a residence in
a non-boundary river floodway without obtaining a permit for construction in
the floodway from the State Department of Natural Resources. Please note that
if fill is needed to elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior
approval for the fill is required from the State Department of Natural
Resources.)
   (B)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until a
permit or letter of authorization (when applicable) has been issued by the
State Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in the
floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway or letter of
authorization has been issued by the State Department of Natural Resources, the
Floodplain Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit;
provided, that the provisions contained in §§
154.40 through
154.47 have been met. The floodplain development permit cannot be less
restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the State
Department of Natural Resources. However, a community’s more restrictive
regulations (if any) shall take precedence.
   (C)   No development shall be allowed that, when acting alone or in
combination with existing or future development, will adversely affect the
efficiency of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway. This adverse
effect is defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory flood of at
least 0.15 of a foot as determined by comparing the regulatory flood elevation
under the project condition to that under the natural or pre-floodway condition
as proven with hydraulic analyses.
   (D)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including
levees), the county shall submit the data and request that the Federal
Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per mapping
standard regulations found at 44 C.F.R. § 65.12.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.45 STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FRINGE.
   (A)   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit provided the
provisions contained in §§
154.40 through
154.47 have been met.
   (B)   The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any new or
substantially improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.46 STANDARDS FOR SFHAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND/OR
FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.
   (A)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile.
      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the drainage area
upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along
with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the State Department of Natural
Resources for review and comment.
      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
either a permit for construction in a floodway (including letters of
authorization) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 1%
annual chance flood elevation and the recommended flood protection grade has
been received from the State Department of Natural Resources.
      (3)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper permit
for construction in a floodway (including letters of authorization) or
floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development, a
floodplain development permit may be issued provided the conditions of the
floodplain development permit are not less restrictive than the conditions
received from the State Department of Natural Resources and the provisions
contained in §§
154.40 through
154.47 have been met.
   (B)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile.
      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the drainage area upstream
of the site is less than one square mile, the Floodplain Administrator shall
require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the limits of
the floodplain and 1% annual chance flood elevation for the site.
      (2)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
floodplain development permit; provided, that the provisions contained in §§
154.40 through
154.47 have been met.
   (C)   Total effect. The total cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and shall not increase
flood damages or potential flood damages.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.47 STANDARDS FOR FLOOD PRONE AREAS.
   All development in known flood prone areas not identified on FEMA maps, or
where no FEMA published map is available, shall meet applicable standards as
required per §§
154.40 through
154.47.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or
failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit or
conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. All
violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such in
accordance with the provisions of §
155.02.
   (B)   (1)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the
violation continues to exist.
      (2)   The County Commissioners shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the county from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)
CHAPTER 155: PLANNING, SUBDIVISION AND ZONING
Section
   
155.01   Subdivision ordinance adopted by reference
   
155.02   Zoning ordinance adopted by reference
§ 155.01 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The subdivision ordinance of the county, as amended, is hereby adopted
by reference and incorporated into this code of ordinances as fully as if set
out at length herein.
   (B)   The subdivision road and plat review ordinance of the county, as
amended, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 6-103) (Ord. passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 2009-04, passed 7-6-2009)
§ 155.02 ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The zoning ordinance of the county, as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated into this code of ordinances as fully as if set out
at length herein.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 2008-8, passed 6-2-2008; Ord. 2008-10, passed 8-
18-2008; Ord. 2008-11, passed 10-20-2008; Ord. 2009-03, passed 4-20-2009; Ord.
2009-05, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 2010-02, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 2010-03, passed
3-1-2010; Ord. 2010-04, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 2010-06, passed 6-21-2010; Ord.
2010-10, passed 8-16-2010; Ord. 2010-16, passed 12-6-2010; Ord. 2011-02, passed
3-7-2011; Ord. 2011-05, passed 5-16-2011; Ord. 2011-06, passed 5-16-2011; Ord.
2011-07, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 2011-08, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 2011-14, passed
8-15-2011; Ord. 2012-16, passed 10-15-2012; Ord. 2012-17, passed 11-19-2012;
Ord. 2013-01, passed 5-6-2013; Ord. 2013-04, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 2013-09,
passed 8-19-2013; Ord. 2013-18, passed 10-21-2013; Ord. 2014-02, passed 7-21-
2014; Ord. 2014-11, passed 12-15-2014; Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-16-2015; Ord.
2016-24, passed 11-7-2016; Ord. 2017-04, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 2017-05, passed
1-17-2017; Ord. 2017-06, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 2017-24, passed 9-18-2017; Ord.
2017-31, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2017-32, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-08,
passed 3-18-2019; Ord. 2019-17, passed 9-16-2019; Ord. 2019-18, passed 9-16-
2019; Ord. 2020-07, passed 2-17-2020; Ord. 2020-10, passed 2-17-2020; Ord.
2020-08, passed 3-2-2020; Ord. 2020-09, passed 3-2-2020; Ord. 2020-14, passed
1-19-2021; Ord. 2022-06, passed 2-21-2022; Ord. 2022-06(2), passed 6-6-2022;
Ord. 2022-06(3), passed 6-6-2022; Ord. 2023-5, passed 2-20-2023; Ord. 2023-6,
passed 2-20-2023; Ord. 2023-7, passed 2-20-2023; Ord. 2023-8, passed 2-20-2023;
Ord. 2023-9, passed 2-20-2023; Ord. 2023-26, passed 10-16-2023; Ord. 2023-27,
passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2024-13, passed 3-18-2024 ; Ord. 2025-7, passed 2-3-
2025; Ord. 2025-8, passed 2-3-2025; Ord. 2025-9, passed 2-3-2025; Ord. 2025-10,
passed 2-3-2025 )
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   STREET VACATIONS
      
II.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
III.   IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
      
IV.   COVID-19 POLICIES
TABLE I: STREET VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2014-10  10-20-2014  Vacating an unimproved section of 3B Road.
2016-08  2-15-2016   Vacating an unimproved section of Pretty Lake Road in the
                     original plat of Bleier’s Lake Front Subdivision.
                     Vacating all of an unnamed right-of-way (alley) along and
2016-13  8-1-2016    west of Lots 2, 3 and 9 in the A.W. Hendricks Addition to
                     Inwood.
2016-22  11-7-2016   Vacating all of a cul-de-sac along Lots 22, 23, 26 and 27
                     in the Venetian Village Subdivision.
2016-23  11-7-2016   Vacating all of an unnamed right-of-way (street) along
                     Lots 1, 21, 22 and 23 in the McFarlin’s Addition.
2016-28  12-19-2016  Vacating all of an unnamed right-of-way (alley) along Lots
                     10, 11 and 12 in the JD Johnson’s Addition.
2017-14  7-17-2017   Vacating all of Forest Drive.
                     Vacating the easement for ingress and egress for the
2018-10  6-18-2018   Rolling Meadow Subdivision, First Addition, also known as
                     Lot 21 of said subdivision.
2019-09  3-18-2019   Vacating a portion of Polk Street and a portion of the
                     adjacent alley.
2019-16  9-16-2019   Vacating part of Boyce Street in Tyner, Polk Township.
2020-13  8-17-2020   Vacating the alleyway between Lots 4 and 5 in Lee and
                     Dickinson Addition to Inwood, Center Township.
2021-06  3-15-2021   Vacatying the alleyway east of Lots 1, 2 and 4, west of
                     Lot 5 in OP Teegarden, Polk Township.
2021-19  12-20-2021  Vacating the alleyway west of Lots 31, 32 and 33 in OP
                     Teegarden, Polk Township.
2022-20  12-19-2022  Vacating the alleyway north and west of Lots 5 and 8 in
                     the Addition to Tyner City, Polk Township.
                     Vacating a section of a county right-of-way at the end of
2023-10  4-17-2023   East Shore Lane that runs through 2550 E. Shore Lane,
                     Culver, in Union Township.
 
TABLE II: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
                       Rezoning the following described real estate from I-2 to
2015-06    5-18-2015   T-1: Parcel #50-24-19-000-055.0 00-012; and Parcel #50-
                       24-19-000-057.0 00-012.
2017-23    9-18-2017   Rezoning the following described real estate from A-1 to
                       C-2: Parcel #50-52-28-000-023-0 02-009.
2017-29    12-4-2017   Rezoning the following described real estate from A-1 to
                       C-2: Parcel 50-52-33-000-013.00 0-009.
2018-14    8-20-2018   Rezoning the following described real estate from A-1 to
                       I-1: Parcel #50-23-13-000-021-0 00-012.
2018-21    2-18-2019   Rezoning the following described real estate from C-2 to
                       A-1: Parcel #50-54-33-000-001.0 00-005.
                       Rezoning the following described real estate from C-1 to
2019-11    6-3-2019    T-1: Parcel #50-52-95-202-166.0 00-010; Parcel #50-52-
                       95-202-162-0 00.010; Parcel #50-52-95-202-170.0 00-010;
                       and Parcel #50-52-95-202-174.0 00-010.
2019-12    6-17-2019   Rezoning the following described real estate from L-1 to
                       A-1: Parcel #50-41-07-000-238-0 00-011.
2021-07    5-17-2021   Rezoning the following described real estate from C-1 to
                       T-1: Parcel #50-52-95-204-308-0 00-010.
2021-10    9-20-2021   Rezoning the following described real estate from A-1 to
                       C-2: Parcel # 50-52-28-000-024-00 1-009.
2022-06(4) 9-19-2022   Rezoning the following described real estate from C-1 to
                       T-1: Parcel #50-52-95-202-211-0 00-010.
                       Rezoning the following described real estate from A-3 to
2023-15    9-18-2023   PUD: Parcels #50-42-97-000-061.000-009 and #50-42-97-
                       000-086.000-009.
2024-8     2-19-2024   Rezoning the following described real estate from A-1 to
                       A-3: Parcel #50-41-07-000-238-000-011.
2024-16    6-17-2024   Rezoning the following described real estate from C-1 to
                       A-1: Parcel #50-33-08-000-012-000-018.
2024-18    10-21-2024  Rezoning the following described real estate from L-1 to
                       A-1: Parcel #50-41-07-000-233-000-011.
                      
 
TABLE III: IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2019-15  9-3-2019    Establishing an Infrastructure Development Zone.
 
TABLE IV: COVID-19 POLICIES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2020-21  11-20-2020  Establishing requirement to wear face mask and other
                     workplace safety provisions during the COVID-19 pandemic.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Section Code Section
I.C. Section                   Code Section
1-1-1-5                        10.04
1-1-1-7                        10.12
1-1-1-8                        10.06
1-1-4-5                        10.05
1-1-5-1                        10.11
1-1-6-1                        10.08
3-6-6-31                       32.17
4-15-2-1 et seq.               31.02
4-15-2-36                      31.02
4-21.5-3-7                     150.07
                               30.06;
                               30.21;
5-3-1                          33.004;
                               33.028;
                               91.05
5-11-1-27(e)                   32.02
5-11-10                        32.22
5-14-1.5                       30.21;
                               31.08
                               30.05;
5-14-1.5-5                     30.21 ;
                               53.10
5-14-3-2                       31.01
5-14-3-3                       33.066
5-14-3-3(c)                    33.071
5-14-3-5                       31.01
5-14-3-5(c)                    31.01
5-14-3-8(f)                    33.065
5-22-2-30                      33.011
6-1.1-12.1                     33.028
6-1.1-12.1-3                   33.028
6-1.1-12.1-4.5                 33.028
6-1.1-12.1-5.1(b)              33.028
6-1.1-17                       30.21
6-1.1-23-9                     33.027
6-2.5                          33.026
6-2.5-1-3                      33.026
6-9-18                         33.026
6-9-18-3                       33.026
6-9-18-5                       31.10
7.1-2-2-11.5                   31.01
8-1-32.5-3                     32.01
9-18-12                        91.07
9-21-5-4                       70.04
9-21-8-1                       70.04
9-21-8-49                      70.99
9-21-9-1                       71.21
9-21-16-9                      70.99
9-22-1-11                      91.05
9-22-1-12                      91.05
9-22-1-14                      91.05
9-22-1-19                      91.05
9-22-1-21                      91.05
9-30-3                         113.05
10-14-3-22(b)(2)               70.04
10-14-3-29                     70.04
10-14-3-29.5                   70.04
11-8-8-21                      33.064
11-12-2-12                     33.040
13-21-3                        31.04
13-25-1                        33.028
14-8-3                         33.042
14-16-1-23                     71.01
14-16-1-29                     71.04
14-28-1                        154.44
14-28-1-26                     154.44
15-17-2-3                      90.02
15-20-1                        90.07
16-20-2                        31.03
16-20-1-8                      33.060
16-20-2-1 et seq.              33.060
16-41-25-9                     53.05
22-9.5-1 et seq.               92.01
22-9.5-2-2                     92.02
22-9.5-2-3                     92.02
22-9.5-2-4                     92.02
22-9.5-2-8                     92.02
22-9.5-2-9                     92.02
22-9.5-2-11                    92.02
22-9.5-2-13                    92.02
22-9.5-3                       92.03
22-9.5-3 et seq.               92.09
22-9.5-4-1                     92.02
22-9.5-4-8                     92.10
22-9.5-5                       92.02
22-9.5-5-1                     92.03
22-9.5-6                       92.02;
                               92.10
22-12 through 22-15            150.07
22-12-1-4                      150.03
22-12-1-5                      150.03
22-12-1-7                      150.03
22-12-1-14                     150.03
22-12-1-16                     150.03
22-12-1-17                     150.03
22-12-1-18                     150.03
22-12-1-22(b)(12)              150.56
22-12-1-24                     150.03
22-12-1-26                     150.03
22-12-7                        150.05
22-13-2-3(b)                   150.55
22-13-2-6                      150.04
22-13-2-7                      150.07
22-13-2-7(b)                   150.55
22-13-2-9                      150.04
22-13-2-11                     150.05
22-15-3                        150.21
22-15-4                        150.04
27-1-15.6-6(d)                 33.066
27-7-3-2                       33.066
27-7-3-6                       33.066
Article 31-16                  31.11
31-37-1-2                      31.11
32-25-2-9                      150.03
32-29-7                        33.072
32-29-7-3                      33.072
32-29-7-3(j)                   33.072
33-40-3                        31.11
33-40-7 et seq.                31.11
33-40-7-5                      31.11
34-28-5                        113.05
34-28-5-4                      70.99
Title 35                       113.99
35-31.5-2-75                   31.11
35-42-4                        31.01
35-45-4-1                      114.27
35-45-4.1-5                    114.27
35-46-3-7                      90.07
36-1 et seq.                   51.13
                               10.99;
36-1-3-8(a)(10)                33.999;
                               51.99;
                               70.99
36-1-4-11                      Ch. 153, App. B
36-1-5-4                       150.55;
                               150.56
36-1-6-2                       51.99
36-1-6-9                       150.07
36-1-8-3 et seq.               32.03
                               32.03;
36-1-8.5                       32.19;
                               33.045
36-1-8.5-1 through 36-1-8.5-12 32.03
36-1-8.5-2                     32.03
36-1-8.5-3                     32.03
36-1-8.5-4                     32.03
36-1-8.5-4.3                   32.03
36-1-8.5-4.5                   32.03
36-1-8.5-5                     32.03
36-1-8.5-7                     32.03;
                               32.19
36-1-8.5-11                    32.03;
                               32.19
36-1-8.5-12                    32.03;
                               32.19
36-2-2-2                       30.04
36-2-2-3                       30.04
36-2-2-4                       30.02
36-2-2-5                       30.04
36-2-2-8                       30.05
36-2-2.8                       33.011
36-2-2.9                       33.011
36-2-3-2                       30.20
36-2-3-3                       30.20
36-2-3-4                       30.03
36-2-3-6                       30.20
36-2-3-7                       30.21
36-2-4-2                       30.06
36-2-4-3                       30.06
36-2-4-5                       30.06
36-2-4-6                       30.06
36-2-4-7                       30.06
36-2-4-8                       30.06
36-2-4-9                       30.06
36-2-7-10(g)                   33.066
36-2-7-10.1                    33.066
36-2-7-10.1(d)                 33.066
36-2-9-18                      33.046
36-4-8                         32.22
36-7-2-3                       151.04
36-7-4                         Ch. 153, App. B;
                               154.01
36-7-8-9                       150.07
                               151.01;
                               151.02;
36-7-9 et seq.                 151.06;
                               151.10;
                               151.99
36-7-9-2                       151.07
36-7-9-4                       151.07
36-7-9-9                       151.10
36-7-9-14                      151.09
36-7-11.9                      31.07
36-7-12                        31.07
36-7-18                        31.06
36-7-18-5                      31.06
36-7-18-7                      31.06
36-8-12-2                      32.03
36-8-16                        33.075
36-8-16.7-29                   33.043
36-8-17                        150.41
36-10-3 et seq.                31.09
36-18.5-1 through 36-18.5-12   32.19
                               
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2024 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2024 Code Section
1-1-2              10.05
1-1-10             10.17
1-2-1              11.01
1-3-1              30.01
1-3-2              30.02
1-3-3              30.03
1-4-1              30.04
1-4-2              30.05
1-4-3              30.06
1-6-1              30.20
1-6-2              30.21
1-7-1              33.025
1-9-2              31.02
1-11-1             33.009
1-11-2             33.009
3-45-1             50.01
3-45-2             50.02
3-45-3             50.03
3-45-4             50.04
3-45-5             50.05
3-45-6             50.06
3-45-7             50.99
5-82-1             70.02
5-82-2             70.02
5-82-4             70.99
5-83-1             70.03
5-83-2             70.03
5-83-3             70.03;
                   70.99
5-83-4             70.03;
                   Ch. 72, Schd. III
5-83-5             70.03;
                   Ch. 72, Schd. IV
6-103              155.01
6-104-1            50.20
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.                Date Passed Code Section
1998-03                 - -         33.004
2011-09a                - -         32.15
2011-10(a)              - -         32.15
–                     10-8-1981   30.05
1984-5                  6-18-1984   Ch. 72, Schd. II
1984-7                  11-5-1984   Ch. 72, Schd. II
1985-6                  11-4-1985   33.001
1985-10                 12-16-1985  Ch. 72, Schd. II
                                    51.01—
1985-9                  1-6-1986    51.13;
                                    51.99
1986-6                  4-7-1986    33.040
1987-2                  4-6-1987    33.040
1987-3                  4-20-1987   33.044
1988-1                  4-4-1988    33.040
1989-3                  3-6-1989    33.040
1989-7                  7-5-1989    Ch. 72, Schd. II
1990-7                  3-19-1990   33.040
1990-13                 9-7-1990    33.044
1990-15                 10-15-1990  33.046
1991-1                  4-1-1991    33.040
1991-5                  6-28-1991   31.04
Council Ord. 1991-1     7-9-1991    33.075
1991-6                  7-15-1991   Ch. 73, Schd. I
Council Ord. 91-2       7-22-1991   33.026
1991-10                 10-7-1991   31.03
Council Ord. 1991-11    10-7-1991   33.026
1992-2                  12-30-1991  30.02;
                                    30.03
1992-14                 4-6-1992    33.040
92-16                   7-21-1992   31.01
1993-4                  4-5-1993    33.040
1993-1                  4-19-1993   33.044
1994-2                  2-7-1994    33.040
                                    152.01—
1994-3                  3-21-1994   152.03;
                                    152.99
1994-4                  7-5-1994    33.006
1994-14                 9-6-1994    33.006
1994-8                  11-7-1994   32.17
–                     12-5-1994   32.15
1995-3                  4-17-1995   33.040
95-10                   12-4-1995   32.15
                                    130.01—
95-9                    12-4-1995   130.04;
                                    130.99
1995-13                 12-18-1995  32.15
1995-12                 12-29-1995  31.01
Council Ord. 95-02      1-8-1996    32.15
1996-1                  3-18-1996   32.15
                                    91.25—
96-2                    5-20-1996   91.27;
                                    91.99
1996-8                  10-7-1996   33.006
1998-2                  7-6-1998    30.07
Council Ord. 1998-6     9-29-1998   32.15
1998-6                  10-5-1998   32.15
1999-4                  5-3-1999    34.01
1999-7                  11-1-1999   Ch. 72, Schd. II
Council Ord. 2000-1     1-10-2000   33.065
Council Ord. 2000-2     1-10-2000   31.07
2000-3                  2-22-2000   33.005
2005-05                 5-15-2000   31.05
                                    91.01—
2000-06                 6-5-2000    91.11;
                                    91.99
2000-7                  6-19-2000   33.044
2000-09                 7-7-2000    32.15
Council Ord. 2000-13    12-11-2000  32.15
2000-13                 12-18-2000  32.15
2000-14                 12-29-2000  32.15
Council Ord. 2000-14    1-8-2001    32.15
Council Ord. 2001-4     7-9-2001    32.15
2001-4                  7-16-2001   32.15
2001-6                  10-15-2001  33.074
Council Ord. 2001-07    11-13-2001  31.06
Council Ord. 2001-08    12-10-2001  33.028
                                    70.01;
2002-01                 2-18-2002   70.99;
                                    Ch. 72, Schd. I
                                    112.01—
2002-2                  4-1-2002    112.07;
                                    112.99
                                    114.01—
                                    114.10;
                                    114.25—
2002-03                 4-15-2002   114.34;
                                    114.45—
                                    114.47;
                                    114.99
Council Ord. 2002-05    7-8-2002    33.073
2002-7                  8-5-2002    33.006
2002-08                 8-5-2002    Ch. 72, Schd. II
Council Ord. 2003-2     2-10-2003   33.025
2003-1                  2-17-2003   Ch. 72, Schd. I
                                    150.01—
                                    150.08;
                                    150.20—
                                    150.25;
2003-03                 3-3-2003    150.40;
                                    150.41;
                                    150.55;
                                    150.56;
                                    150.99
2003-7                  6-2-2003    33.027
2003-8                  11-3-2003   150.08
Council Ord. 2003-12    12-8-2003   31.08
2004-02                 2-9-2004    33.045
2004-1                  2-16-2004   Ch. 72, Schd. I
Council Ord. 2004-08    11-8-2004   33.048
2004-10                 12-6-2004   32.15
                                    90.01—
2005-06                 4-18-2005   90.08;
                                    90.99
Council Ord. 2005-08    6-13-2005   33.063
Council Ord. 2005-11    7-11-2005   33.048
Council Ord. 2005-12    8-8-2005    33.048
2006-05                 4-3-2006    32.15
2006-09                 6-5-2006    150.08
2006-13                 9-5-2006    Ch. 72, Schd. I
2006-17                 12-18-2006  33.069
2007-01                 2-5-2007    33.070
2007-04                 2-19-2007   Ch. 72, Schd. I
Council Ord. 2007-05    3-12-2007   33.043
2007-06                 6-2-2007    33.041
                                    110.01—
2007-07                 7-2-2007    110.09;
                                    110.99
2007-08                 10-15-2007  71.01—
                                    71.05
2007-09                 10-15-2007  33.064
-                       11-5-2007   155.01;
                                    155.02
Council Ord. 2007-09    11-13-2007  33.064
2007-14(a)              12-3-2007   32.15
Council Ord. 2007-14(b) 12-10-2007  32.15
Council Ord. 2007-15    12-10-2007  33.048
Council Ord. 2008-3     2-11-2008   33.062
Council Ord. 2008-5     3-10-2008   33.042
2008-4                  3-17-2008   33.071;
                                    33.999
2008-06                 5-5-2008    33.072
Council Ord. 2008-07    5-12-2008   33.048
2008-8                  6-2-2008    155.02
2008-10                 8-18-2008   155.02
2008-11                 10-20-2008  155.02
2008-13(a)              12-1-2008   32.15
Council Ord. 2008-13(b) 12-8-2008   32.15
2009-03                 4-20-2009   155.02
2009-04                 7-6-2009    155.01
2009-05                 8-3-2009    155.02
Council Ord. 2009-06    8-10-2009   33.047
2009-09(a)              9-8-2009    32.15
2010-02                 3-1-2010    155.02
2010-03                 3-1-2010    155.02
Council Ord. 2010-5(b)  6-14-2010   32.15
2010-04                 6-21-2010   155.02
2010-06                 6-21-2010   155.02
2010-10                 8-16-2010   155.02
2010-09                 9-7-2010    Ch. 72, Schd. I
2010-11                 10-4-2010   33.003
2011-15                 12-5-2010   33.060
2010-16                 12-6-2010   155.02
2010-18(a)              12-6-2010   32.15
Council Ord. 2010-17    12-13-2010  33.026
Council Ord. 2010-18(b) 12-13-2010  32.15
2011-1(a)               1-3-2011    32.15
2011-02                 3-7-2011    155.02
                                    153.01—
2011-03                 4-4-2011    153.21;
                                    Ch. 153, App. A;
                                    Ch. 153, App. B
2011-05                 5-16-2011   155.02
2011-06                 5-16-2011   155.02
Council Ord. 2011-09(b) 6-13-2011   32.15
Council Ord. 2011-10(b) 6-13-2011   32.15
2011-07                 6-20-2011   155.02
2011-08                 6-20-2011   155.02
Council Ord. 2011-11    7-11-2011   33.048
2011-14                 8-15-2011   155.02
Council Ord. 2011-12    8-8-2011    33.048
2011-17                 12-5-2011   Ch. 72, Schd. I
2012-01                 5-21-2012   Ch. 72, Schd. I
2012-2A                 6-4-2012    32.15
Council Ord. 2012-02B   6-11-2012   32.15
Council Ord. 2012-05B   7-9-2012    32.15
2012-5A                 7-16-2012   32.15
Council Ord. 2012-07    8-13-2012   33.048
                                    71.20—
2012-04                 8-20-2012   71.26;
                                    71.99
2012-10                 9-17-2012   Ch. 72, Schd. I
2012-16                 10-15-2012  155.02
2012-17                 11-19-2012  155.02
2013-01                 5-6-2013    155.02
2013-04                 5-20-2013   155.02
2013-05                 6-17-2013   33.007
2013-06                 6-17-2013   34.01
Council Ord. 2013-05    7-8-2013    33.007
2013-09                 8-19-2013   155.02
2013-15                 10-17-2013  33.002
2013-18                 10-21-2013  155.02
                                    111.01—
2013-20                 12-2-2013   111.06;
                                    111.99
2014-02                 7-21-2014   155.02
2014-07                 8-4-2014    34.01
2014-08                 10-6-2014   Ch. 72, Schd. I
2014-09                 10-6-2014   Ch. 72, Schd. I
2014-10                 10-20-2014  TSO Table I
2014-12                 11-17-2014  33.003
2014-11                 12-15-2014  155.02
2015-01                 1-20-2015   33.003
2015-02                 3-16-2015   155.02
2015-06                 5-18-2015   TSO Table II
2015-07                 6-1-2015    32.15
2015-08(a)              6-15-2015   32.15
2015-09(a)              6-15-2015   32.15
2015-10(a)              6-15-2015   32.15
Council Ord. 2015-08(b) 7-13-2015   32.15
Council Ord. 2015-09(b) 7-13-2015   32.15
Council Ord. 2015-10(b) 7-13-2015   32.15
2015-13(a)              9-8-2015    33.040
Council Ord. 2015-18    10-12-2015  33.048
2015-20                 11-16-2015  Ch. 72, Schd. I
                                    113.01—
2015-19                 12-7-2015   113.05;
                                    113.99
2016-04                 1-4-2016    31.01
Council Ord. 2016-5     1-11-2016   33.048
2016-06                 2-1-2016    32.02
2016-08                 2-15-2016   TSO Table I
2016-9                  3-21-2016   32.15
Council Ord. 2016-9     4-11-2016   33.048
2016-10                 6-20-2016   33.048
                                    154.01—
                                    154.13;
                                    154.25—
2016-11                 6-20-2016   154.28;
                                    154.40—
                                    154.47;
                                    154.99
2016-13                 8-1-2016    TSO Table I
Council Ord. 2016-14    8-8-2016    33.048
2016-15                 9-6-2016    32.19
2016-16                 9-6-2016    Ch. 72, Schd. I
2016-17                 9-6-2016    32.15
2016-22                 11-7-2016   TSO Table I
2016-23                 11-7-2016   TSO Table I
2016-24                 11-7-2016   155.02
Council Ord. 2016-25    11-14-2016  33.048
2016-26                 11-21-2016  32.15
2016-27                 12-5-2016   33.003
2016-7                  12-19-2016  35.01
2016-28                 12-19-2016  TSO Table I
Council Ord. 2017-3     1-9-2017    33.048
2017-04                 1-17-2017   155.02
2017-05                 1-17-2017   155.02
2017-06                 1-17-2017   155.02
Council Ord. 2017-09    4-10-2017   33.048
2017-08                 4-17-2017   33.044
2017-13                 7-3-2017    33.067
2017-14                 7-17-2017   TSO Table I
2017-11                 8-7-2017    33.060
                                    52.01—
2017-12                 8-7-2017    52.07;
                                    52.99
2017-16                 8-21-2017   92.01—
                                    92.10
2017-23                 9-18-2017   TSO Table II
2017-24                 9-18-2017   155.02
2017-26                 11-6-2017   32.20
2017-27                 11-6-2017   Ch. 72, Schd. I
Council Ord. 2017-30    11-13-2017  33.048
2017-29                 12-4-2017   TSO Table II
Council Ord. 2017-33    12-11-2017  33.048
2017-31                 12-18-2017  155.02
2017-32                 12-18-2017  155.02
2018-05                 2-5-2018    32.15
Council Ord. 2018-04(1) 2-12-2018   33.048
Council Ord. 2018-04(2) 2-12-2018   33.048
Council Ord. 2018-04(3) 2-12-2018   33.048
2018-06                 3-19-2018   33.048
2018-07                 5-7-2018    33.066
2018-08                 5-7-2018    33.066
2018-09                 5-21-2018   Ch. 72, Schd. I
2018-10                 6-18-2018   TSO Table I
2018-12                 7-2-2018    33.071
Council Ord. 2018-04(4) 7-9-2018    33.048
2018-14                 8-20-2018   TSO Table II
2018-11                 9-17-2018   Ch. 72, Schd. I
2019-27                 1-6-2019    32.01
2018-23                 1-22-2019   70.05;
                                    70.99
2018-21                 2-18-2019   TSO Table II
2019-06                 2-18-2019   33.041
2019-08                 3-4-2019    70.04
2019-08                 3-18-2019   155.02
2019-09                 3-18-2019   TSO Table I
Council Ord. 2019-04(1) 4-8-2019    33.048
Council Ord. 2019-04(2) 4-8-2019    33.048
Council Ord. 2019-10    5-13-2019   32.16
2019-11                 6-3-2019    TSO Table II
2019-12                 6-17-2019   TSO Table II
2019-13                 7-1-2019    35.01;
                                    35.02
Council Ord. 2019-04(3) 8-12-2019   33.048
Council Ord. 2019-10(1) 8-12-2019   32.16
2019-15                 9-3-2019    TSO Table III
Council Ord. 2019-04(4) 9-9-2019    33.048
2019-16                 9-16-2019   TSO Table I
2019-17                 9-16-2019   155.02
2019-18                 9-16-2019   155.02
Council Ord. 2019-04(5) 10-14-2019  33.048
Council Ord. 2019-04(6) 11-13-2019  33.048
2020-05                 1-6-2020    32.21
2020-06                 1-6-2020    32.15
2020-07                 2-17-2020   155.02
2020-10                 2-17-2020   155.02
2020-08                 3-2-2020    155.02
2020-09                 3-2-2020    155.02
2020-11                 3-16-2020   31.09
Council Ord. 2020-04(1) 5-11-2020   33.048
Council Ord. 2020-04(2) 6-8-2020    33.048
Council Ord. 2020-04(3) 7-13-2020   33.048
2020-13                 8-17-2020   TSO Table I
Council Ord. 2020-04(4) 11-9-2020   33.048
Council Ord. 2020-04(5) 11-9-2020   33.048
2020-21                 11-20-2020  TSO Table IV
2020-23                 12-7-2020   32.15
2020-24                 12-7-2020   32.15
Council Ord. 2020-04(6) 12-14-2020  33.048
2020-26                 12-21-2020  32.15
2020-27                 12-31-2020  33.010
2020-14                 1-19-2021   155.02
Council Ord. 2021-04    3-8-2021    33.026
2021-06                 3-15-2021   TSO Table I
Council Ord. 2021-05(1) 4-12-2021   33.048
Council Ord. 2021-05(3) 4-12-2021   33.048
2021-05(2)              4-19-2021   33.048
2021-07                 5-17-2021   TSO Table II
2021-08                 5-17-2021   33.068
                                    151.01—
2021-09                 6-7-2021    151.10;
                                    151.99
Council Ord. 2021-05(4) 6-14-2021   33.047;
                                    33.048
Council Ord. 2021-05(5) 6-14-2021   33.048
Council Ord. 2021-05(6) 6-14-2021   33.048
Council Ord. 2021-05(7) 6-14-2021   33.048
2021-10                 9-20-2021   TSO Table II
Council Ord. 2021-05(8) 10-11-2021  33.048
2021-17                 12-6-2021   11.02
2021-18                 12-6-2021   11.03
2021-19                 12-20-2021  TSO Table I
2022-05                 2-7-2022    32.15
2022-06                 2-21-2022   155.02
Council Ord. 2022-04(1) 5-9-2022    33.048
Council Ord. 2022-07    5-9-2022    32.18
2022-06(2)              6-6-2022    155.02
2022-06(3)              6-6-2022    155.02
Council Ord. 2022-08    6-13-2022   33.008
Council Ord. 2022-04(2) 7-11-2022   33.048
Council Ord. 2022-04(3) 7-11-2022   33.048
2022-9                  7-18-2022   33.060
Council Ord. 2022-04(4) 9-12-2022   33.048
2022-06(4)              9-19-2022   TSO Table II
Council Ord. 2022-04(5) 10-10-2022  33.048
2022-10                 10-17-2022  32.22
2022-14                 10-17-2022  33.072
Council Ord. 2022-04(5) 11-14-2022  33.048
2022-17                 12-5-2022   32.15
2022-20                 12-19-2022  TSO Table I
Council Ord. 2023-04(1) 2-9-2023    33.048
2023-5                  2-20-2023   155.02
2023-6                  2-20-2023   155.02
2023-7                  2-20-2023   155.02
2023-8                  2-20-2023   155.02
2023-9                  2-20-2023   155.02
2023-10                 4-17-2023   TSO Table I
Council Ord. 2023-4B(1) 5-11-2023   32.16
Council Ord. 2023-04(2) 7-13-2023   33.048
Council Ord. 2023-16    8-10-2023   33.061
Council Ord. 2023-17    8-10-2023   33.048
2023-15                 9-18-2023   TSO Table II
2023-19                 10-16-2023  32.03
2023-26                 10-16-2023  155.02
                                    53.01—
2023-20                 11-6-2023   53.12;
                                    53.99
2023-21                 11-6-2023   32.15
2023-27                 11-6-2023   155.02
Council Ord. 2023-31    12-14-2023  33.048
Council Ord. 2023-32    12-14-2023  33.048
2023-33                 12-29-2023  32.15
Council Ord. 2024-4(1)  1-11-2024   33.048
Council Ord. 2024-4(2)  2-8-2024    33.048
2024-3                  2-19-2024   31.10
2024-8                  2-19-2024   TSO Table II
2024-9                  2-19-2024   33.001
2024-13                 3-18-2024   155.02
2024-16                 6-17-2024   TSO Table II
2014-17                 7-15-2024   33.011
2024-6                  1-16-2024   32.15
2024-14                 4-11-2024   33.048
Council Ord. 2024-4(6)  9-12-2024   33.048
2024-18                 10-21-2024  TSO Table II
2024-19                 9-16-2024   Adopting Ordinance
                                    53.01—
2024-24                 12-16-2024  53.12;
                                    53.99
2024-25                 12-2-2024   32.15
2025-7                  2-3-2025    155.02
2025-8                  2-3-2025    155.02
2025-9                  2 -3-2025   155.02
2025-10                 2-3-2025    155.02
Council Ord. 2025-5(1)  2-10-2025   33.048
Council Ord. 2025-5(2)  3-10-2025   33.048
Council Ord. 2025-12    3-10-2025   33.048
Council Ord. 2025-5(3)  4-14-2025   33.048
2025-14                 5-5-2025    33.071
2025-15                 5-5-2025    31.11
Council Ord. 2025-5(4)  6-9-2025    33.048
2025-17                 7-21-2025   32.15
                                   
 
