TOWN OF McCORDSVILLE, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 121024B, passed 2-11-2025
State legislation current through 2025 A.L.S.#1
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE 070913B
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF MCCORDSVILLE,
MCCORDSVILLE, INDIANA, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING
CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF MCCORDSVILLE DEALING WITH
SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the Town of
McCordsville are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs, and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Indiana empower and
authorize the Town of McCordsville to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
WHEREAS, the Town Council of the Town of McCordsville has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the Town of
McCordsville of a general and permanent nature and publication or such
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF McCORDSVILLE:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Town of McCordsville as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of McCordsville,
McCordsville, Indiana."
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
10.1   Title of code
10.2   Interpretation
10.3   Application to future ordinances
10.4   Construction of code
10.5   Rules of interpretation; definitions
10.6   Severability
10.7   Reference to other sections
10.8   Reference to offices; name designations
10.9   Errors and omissions
10.10   Reasonable time
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
10.12   Limitation periods
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
10.99   General penalty
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense nor shall
such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating
money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises, or granting
special rights to certain persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing
the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale
of real or personal property, granting or accepting easements, plat or
dedication of land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets
or nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Town Council and the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of
McCordsville is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF McCORDSVILLE, INDIANA ON
THIS 9th DAY OF July, 2013.
Voting Affirmative:            Voting Opposed:
Barry A. Wood /s/                                               
Barry A. Wood            Barry A. Wood
Thomas R. Strayer /s/                                            
Thomas R. Strayer            Thomas R. Strayer
Maxwell A. Meise /s/                                            
Maxwell A. Meise            Maxwell A. Meise
Brent A. Barnes /s/                                               
Brent A. Barnes            Brent A. Barnes
Lawrence J. Longman /s/                                            
Lawrence J. Longman         Lawrence J. Longman
Attest: Catherine C. Gardner /s/
   Catherine C. Gardner
   Clerk-Treasurer
This instrument was prepared by Catherine C. Gardner, Clerk-Treasurer, Town of
McCordsville, 6280 W. 800N, McCordsville, IN 46055.
I affirm, under the penalties for perjury, that I have taken reasonable care to
redact each Social Security Number in this document, unless required by law. -
Catherine C. Gardner
ORDINANCE NO. 031417B
ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
TOWN OF McCORDSVILLE, INDIANA, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2016 S-2 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of
McCordsville, Indiana, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general
and permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of
Ordinances of the Town of McCordsville, Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Indiana code; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
Town of McCordsville and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety, and general welfare of the Town of McCordsville, Indiana, that
this ordinance take effect at an early date.
   THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of the Town of McCordsville,
Indiana that:
   SECTION I
   That the 2016 S-2 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of
McCordsville, Indiana, was submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation
of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.
SECTION II
   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and
approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the Political
Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.
SECTION III
   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the
immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety, and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
SECTION IV
   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and due publication.
SECTION V
   Introduced and filed on the 14th day of March, 2017. A motion to consider on
first reading on the day of introduction was offered and sustained by a vote of
5  in favor and  0  opposed pursuant to I.C. 36-5-2-9.8.
   Duly ordained and passed this 14th day of March, 2017 by the Town Council of
the Town of McCordsville, Hancock County, Indiana, having been passed by a vote
of  5  in favor and  0  opposed.
TOWN OF McCORDSVILLE, INDIANA, BY ITS TOWN COUNCIL
Voting Affirmative:                     Voting Opposed:
/s/ Larry J. Longman                                                         
Larry J. Longman                     Larry J. Longman
/s/ Bryan T. Burney                                                         
Bryan T. Burney                     Bryan T. Burney
/s/ Thomas R. Strayer                                                         
Thomas R. Strayer                     Thomas R. Strayer
/s/ Branden W. Williams
                                                        
Branden W. Williams                  Branden W. Williams
/s/ Barry A. Wood                                                          
Barry A. Wood                     Barry A. Wood
ATTEST:
/s/ Catherine C. Gardner
Catherine C. Gardner
Clerk-Treasurer
This instrument was prepared by Gregg H. Morelock, BRAND & MORELOCK, P.O. Box
6, 6 West South Street, Greenfield, IN 46140.
I affirm, under the penalties for perjury, that I have taken reasonable care to
redact each Social Security number in this document, unless required by law.
Gregg H. Morelock
ORDINANCE NO. 041420B
ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
TOWN OF McCORDSVILLE, INDIANA, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2019 S-3 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of
McCordsville, Indiana, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general
and permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of
Ordinances of the Town of McCordsville, Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Indiana code; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
Town of McCordsville and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety, and general welfare of the Town of McCordsville, Indiana, that
this ordinance take effect at an early date.
   THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of the Town of McCordsville,
Indiana that:
SECTION I
   That the 2019 S-3 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of
McCordsville, Indiana, was submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation
of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.
   SECTION II
   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and
approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the Political
Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.
   SECTION III
   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the
immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety, and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
   SECTION IV
   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and due publication.
   SECTION V
   Introduced and filed on the 14th day of April, 2020. A motion to consider on
first reading on the day of introduction was offered and sustained by a vote of
5  in favor and  0  opposed pursuant to I.C. 36-5-2-9.8.
   Duly ordained and passed this 14th day of April, 2020 by the Town Council of
the Town of McCordsville, Hancock County, Indiana, having been passed by a vote
of  5  in favor and  0  opposed.
TOWN OF McCORDSVILLE, INDIANA, BY ITS TOWN COUNCIL
Voting Affirmative:                     Voting Opposed:
Thomas R. Strayer /s/
                                                                
Thomas R. Strayer                     Thomas R. Strayer
Larry J. Longman /s/
                                                                
Larry J. Longman                     Larry J. Longman
Gregory J. Brewer /s/
                                                                
Gregory J. Brewer                     Gregory J. Brewer
Branden D. Williams /s/
                                                                
Branden D. Williams                     Branden D. Williams
Barry A. Wood /s/
                                                                
Barry A. Wood                     Barry A. Wood
ATTEST:
Staci A. Starcher /s/
Staci A. Starcher
Clerk-Treasurer
This instrument was prepared by Gregg H. Morelock, BRAND & MORELOCK, P.O. Box
6, 6 West South Street, Greenfield, IN 46140.
I affirm, under the penalties for perjury, that I have taken reasonable care to
redact each Social Security number in this document, unless required by law.
Gregg H. Morelock
ORDINANCE NO. 030822A
ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
TOWN OF McCORDSVILLE, INDIANA, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2021 S-4 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of
McCordsville, Indiana, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general
and permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of
Ordinances of the Town of McCordsville, Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Indiana code; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
Town of McCordsville and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety, and general welfare of the Town of McCordsville, Indiana, that
this ordinance take effect at an early date.
   THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of the Town of McCordsville,
Indiana that:
   SECTION I
   That the 2021 S-4 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of
McCordsville, Indiana, was submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation
of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.
   SECTION II
   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and
approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the Political
Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.
   SECTION III
   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the
immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety, and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
   SECTION IV
   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and due publication.
   SECTION V
   Introduced and filed on the 8th day of March, 2022. A motion to consider on
first reading on the day of introduction was offered and sustained by a vote of
5  in favor and  0  opposed pursuant to I.C. 36-5-2-9.8.
   Duly ordained and passed this 8th day of March, 2022 by the Town Council of
the Town of McCordsville, Hancock County, Indiana, having been passed by a vote
of  5  in favor and  0  opposed.
TOWN OF McCORDSVILLE, INDIANA, BY ITS TOWN COUNCIL
Voting Affirmative:                     Voting Opposed:
Thomas R. Strayer /s/
                                                                
Thomas R. Strayer                     Thomas R. Strayer
Larry J. Longman /s/
                                                                 
Larry J. Longman                     Larry J. Longman
Branden D. Williams /s/
                                                                 
Branden D. Williams                     Branden D. Williams
Gregory J. Brewer /s/
                                                                 
Gregory J. Brewer                     Gregory J. Brewer
Chad Gooding /s/
                                                                 
Chad Gooding                     Chad Gooding
ATTEST:
Staci A. Starcher /s/
Staci A. Starcher
Clerk-Treasurer
I affirm, under the penalties for perjury, that I have taken reasonable care to
redact each Social Security number in this document, unless required by law.
Staci Starcher
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles,
chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the “McCordsville Town
Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified ordinances” or
“code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code, unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application
or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent
or context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in
law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town Council.
      COUNCIL. The Town Council of McCordsville, Indiana.
      COUNTY. Hancock County, Indiana.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      TOWNSHIP. The township or townships in which the town is located.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing or other modes of
representing words and letters. Where the WRITTEN signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or the person’s
mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions under state law see I.C. 1-1-4-5
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.
   (B)   (1)   Except in the case of a statute containing a nonseverability
provision, each part and application of every statute is severable. If any
provision or application of a statute is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect the remainder of the statute unless:
         (a)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with,
and so dependent upon, the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
         (b)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
      (2)   This division (B) applies to every statute, regardless of whether
enacted before or after the passage of this division (B).
   (C)   The repeal of a statute stating that the provisions of an act are
severable as provided in division (B) above does not affect the operation of
division (B) with respect to that act.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated, on the effective date of that ordinance or following the
effective date, the rights, powers, duties or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity, then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers and rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not revived unless it so expressly provided. The
repeal of any section shall not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture
or liability incurred under the section, unless the repealing section so
expressly provides. The section shall be treated as still remaining in force
for the purposes of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the
enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture or liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment, but all suits, proceedings and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect, unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (I.C. 36-5-2-2)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
            This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection
or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   (A)   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.
   (B)   This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
   (C)   In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway
rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers
shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent violations,
except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and parking.
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
   (C)   There is hereby added to this penalty the additional penalty of
attorney’s fees incurred by the town if civil action through a court of
competent jurisdiction is required in order to enforce the provisions of this
code of ordinances.
(Ord. 121206C, passed 12-12-2006)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   TOWN COUNCIL AND OFFICERS
      
31.   EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK/PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
32.   ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU; SCHEDULE OF FEES
      
33.   POLICIES, PROGRAMS AND PROCEDURES
      
34.   TAX, FUNDS AND FINANCE
      
35.   TOWN ORGANIZATIONS
CHAPTER 30: TOWN COUNCIL AND OFFICERS
Section
   
30.01   Election of Council members and other elected officers
   
30.02   Town Council meetings
§ 30.01 ELECTION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS AND OTHER ELECTED OFFICERS.
   (A)   Upon passage into publication of this section as required by law, the
election of Council members to the Town Council shall consist of two Council
members elected at-large and three Council members elected from districts as
described below.
   (B)   The two Council members to be elected at-large shall replace current
Council members, Barry Wood and Max Meise, and shall be elected during the 2014
election cycle pursuant to law.
   (C)   The three Council members to be elected from the districts set forth
below shall replace current Council members, Brent Barnes, Thomas Strayer and
Larry Longman, and shall be elected during the 2015 election cycle pursuant to
law.
   (D)   (1)   Councilmanic District No. One, as depicted on Exhibit A attached
to Ord. 102522, shall consist of all duly registered voters residing east of
the western corporate boundary line along County Road 700 West; west of the
eastern corporate boundary line which is approximately one-half mile east of
County Road 600 West; north of Broadway Street (aka Pendleton Pike) (aka State
Road 67); and south of County Road 900 North, south of West Deer Crossing
Boulevard, south of West Aspen Way, east of West Aspen Way, south of West Deer
Hill Drive, south of West Winding Bend.
      (2)   Councilmanic District No. Two, as depicted on Exhibit A attached to
Ord. 102522, shall consist of all duly registered voters residing east of the
western corporate boundary line along County Road 700 West; south of Broadway
Street (aka Pendleton Pike) (aka State Road 67); west of the eastern corporate
boundary line; and north of the southern corporate boundary line.
      (3)   Councilmanic District No. Three, as depicted on Exhibit A attached
to Ord. 102522, shall consist of all duly registered voters residing east of
the western corporate boundary line along County Road 700 West; west of the
eastern corporate boundary line; south of the northern corporate boundary line;
and north of County Road 900 North, north of West Deer Crossing Boulevard,
north of West Aspen Way, west of West Aspen Way, north of West Deer Hill Drive,
north of West Winding Bend.
(Ord. 121112A, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 102522, passed 10-25-2022)
§ 30.02 TOWN COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Town Council will hold its first meeting of 1993 at the
McCordsville Municipal Building, located at 5759 West Pendleton Pike,
McCordsville, Indiana.
   (B)   The Town Council will form their regular monthly meeting date on the
second Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. at the McCordsville Municipal
Building, located at 5759 West Pendleton Pike, McCordsville, Indiana.
   (C)   Pursuant to the Americans With Disabilities Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§
12101 et seq., any individual interested in attending the meetings as set forth
above should contact the Clerk-Treasurer, at (317) 335-2810, and advise him or
her what if any accommodation is needed to enable an interested person to
attend the meeting.
(Ord. 121292A, passed 12-12-1992)
CHAPTER 31: EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK/PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
   
31.01   Adoption of employee handbook
   
31.02   Nepotism policy; contracting with a unit by a relative policy
§ 31.01 ADOPTION OF EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK.
   The employee handbook, as adopted in Ord. 111423A, and any future amendments
thereto, is hereby adopted as the amended employee handbook and is incorporated
by reference into this code as if fully set out at length herein.
(Ord. 111423A, passed 11-14-2023; Ord. 121024A, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 31.02 NEPOTISM POLICY; CONTRACTING WITH A UNIT BY A RELATIVE POLICY.
   (A)   Nepotism.
      (1)   The town nepotism policy is hereby established effective July 1,
2012 by adopting the minimum requirements provisions of I.C. 36-1-20.2, and
including all future supplements and amendments thereto which become law from
time to time, and making them a part hereof as if fully set out herein. In
addition a copy of I.C. 36-1-20.2 in effect on July 1, 2012 is attached to Res.
2012-061212, passed June 12, 2012.
      (2)   Failure to abide by or cooperate with the implementation,
compliance and certifications connected with the nepotism policy is a violation
thereof and may result in the discipline, including termination, of an employee
or transfer from the direct line of supervision or other curative action. An
elected or appointed official of the town who fails to abide by or cooperate
with the implementation, with the compliance and with mandated certifications
of the nepotism policy may be subject to action allowed by law.
   (B)   Contracting with a unit by a relative.
      (1)   The town contracting with a unit by a relative policy is hereby
established effective July 1, 2012 by adopting the minimum requirements
provisions of I.C. 36-1-21, and including all future supplements and amendments
thereto which become law from time to time, and making them a part hereof as if
fully set out herein. In addition a copy of I.C. 36-1-21 in effect on July 1,
2012 is attached to Res. 2012-061212, passed June 12, 2012.
      (2)   Failure to abide by or cooperate with the implementation,
compliance and certifications connected with the contracting with a unit by a
relative policy is a violation thereof and may result in the discipline,
including termination, of an employee or other curative action. An elected or
appointed official of the town who fails to abide by or cooperate with the
implementation, with the compliance and with mandated certifications of the
contracting with a unit by a relative policy may be subject to action allowed
by law.
   (C)   The town finds that both I.C. 36-1-20.2 and 36-1-21 specifically allow
a unit to adopt requirements that are “more stringent or detailed” and that
more detailed are necessary.
   (D)   The town further finds that a single member of the legislative body
cannot act for the body to make work assignments, compensation, grievances,
advancement or a performance evaluation without prior authority of a majority
of the body and therefore without such authority by the majority he or she will
not be in the direct line of supervision. (See I.C. 36-4-6-11 and 36-5-2-9.4.)
   (E)   The town finds that a single member of governing bodies with authority
over employees in the town cannot act for the governing body to make work
assignments, compensation, grievances, advancement or a performance evaluation
without prior authority of a majority of the body, when a statute provides that
a majority is needed to act, and therefore, without such authority by the
majority the single member will not be in the direct line of supervision
including, but not limited to the Park Board, Plan Commission, Board of Zoning
Appeals, Economic Development Commission and Redevelopment Commission.
   (F)   All elected and appointed officials and employees of the town are
hereby directed to cooperate fully in the implementation of the policies
created by this section and demonstrating compliance with these same policies.
   (G)   (1)   The policies created by this section are hereby directed to be
implemented by any of the following actions:
         (a)   Posting a copy of Res. 2012-061212 in its entirety in at least
one of the locations in the town where it posts employer posters or other
notices to its employees;
         (b)   Providing a copy of Res. 2012-061212 to its employees and
elected and appointed officials;
         (c)   Providing or posting a notice of the adoption of Res. 2012-
061212; or
         (d)   Any other such action or actions that would communicate the
policies established hereunder to its employees and elected and appointed
officials.
      (2)   Upon the taking of any of these actions these policies are deemed
implemented by the town.
   (H)   Two copies of I.C. 36-1-20.2 and 36-1-21, and as supplemented or
amended, are on file in the office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer, for public
inspection as may be required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
(Res. 2012-061212, passed 6-12-2012)
CHAPTER 32: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU; SCHEDULE OF FEES
Section
   
32.01   Creation
   
32.02   Authorization to receive fines and penalties
   
32.03   Payment of fines and penalties
   
32.04   Schedule of penalties
   
32.05   Prosecution or dismissal
§ 32.01 CREATION.
   (A)   There shall be created an Ordinance Violations Bureau referred to as
the “McCordsville Ordinance Violations Bureau”, pursuant to I.C. 33-36-2-1 et
seq., and all acts amendatory or supplemental thereto. The Clerk-Treasurer of
the town and/or his or her appointed deputy, shall be considered the Violations
Clerk having the duties and responsibilities set forth under I.C. 33-36-2-3,
including, but not limited to, the ability to accept the following:
      (1)   Written appearances;
      (2)   Waivers of trial;
      (3)   Admissions of violations; and
      (4)   Payment of civil penalties up to $250 on ordinance violation cases.
   (B)   Admission of violation and payments of civil penalties in excess of
$250, specifically those shown in §
32.04 of this chapter must be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer’s office and not
through the Violations Bureau:
      (1)   Refusal to extinguish;
      (2)   Third violation of
Ch. 93 of this code of ordinances; and
      (3)   Fourth violation of
Ch. 93 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 081412C, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 32.02 AUTHORIZATION TO RECEIVE FINES AND PENALTIES.
   The Town Ordinance Violations Bureau created herein shall be authorized to
receive all fines and penalties set forth in the ordinances of the town for any
violation of any section of said ordinances, in addition to any violation of
the law of the state that constitutes an infraction, in addition to the
schedule of fines and penalties set forth below, which schedule shall be kept
within the office of the Clerk-Treasurer, as well as the office of the Town
Marshal/Chief of Police of the town, for inspection by the public at all
reasonable times and which must, by resolution in January of each calendar
year, be affirmed and/or modified as deemed appropriate by the Town Council.
(Ord. 081412C, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 32.03 PAYMENT OF FINES AND PENALTIES.
   All fines imposed pursuant to the schedule set forth in §
32.04 of this chapter shall be paid not sooner than 72 hours after issuance of
the citation, nor later than ten business days after the issuance of the
citation. For purposes of determining whether or not a violation is a second or
subsequent offense, only offenses which occur within the same calendar year
shall be considered.
(Ord. 081412C, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 32.04 SCHEDULE OF PENALTIES.
Ord. No. Name of Ordinance Offense Schedule Fine
Ord. No. Name of Ordinance             Offense Schedule      Fine
081412A  Parking within town limits    First offense         $25
                                       Second offense        $50
102898                                 First offense         $100
080916   Nuisance noise                Second offense        $200
121918                                 Third offense         $500
                                       Fourth offense/more   $1,000
020991C  Public streets and            First offense         $25
         thoroughfares                 Second offense        $50
                                       First offense         Written warning
111307E  Burning of rubbish prohibited Second offense        $50
                                       Refusal to extinguish $2,500
                                       First offense         $25
080911   Curfew                        Second offense        $50
                                       Third offense/more    $100
         Weapon/Firearms               First offense         $100
101204A  (Title XIII, Chapter 131, §  Second offense        $200
         131.04)                       Third offense         $500
                                       Fourth offense/more   $1,000
                                       First/second/third    $250
                                       offenses
011414A  Road weight limits            Fourth offense        $1,000
                                       Fifth offense         $2,000
                                       Sixth offense/more    $2,500
                                       First three alarms    Written warning
                                       Fourth                $10
101214B  False alarms                  Fifth                 $20
                                       Sixth                 $30
                                       Seventh               $100
                                       First offense         Written warning
101210   Animal at large               Second offense        $100
                                       Third offense         $200
                                       Fourth offense/more   $500
101210   Animal at large causing                             $500
         injury
081115   Golf carts                    Moving offense        $50
                                       Non-moving offense    $25
051215   Peddler and itinerant         First offense/more    $50
         merchants
 
(Ord. 081412C, passed 8-14-2012; Ord. 011414, passed 1-14-2014; Ord. 051215,
passed 5-12-2015; Res. 010819, passed 1-8-2019; Ord. 051419, passed 5-14-2019;
Res. 021120, passed 2-11-2020; Res. 011221, passed 1-12-2021)
§ 32.05 PROSECUTION OR DISMISSAL.
   The Chief of Police of the town, after consultation with the Town Attorney,
may determine that it is in the best interest of the town to forbear
prosecution of any ordinance violation, subject to said ordinance and/or may
direct the Town Attorney to dismiss any complaint then in existence with regard
to enforcement of any ordinance violation subject to said ordinance.
(Ord. 051413, passed 5-14-2013)
CHAPTER 33: POLICIES, PROGRAMS AND PROCEDURES
Section
General Policies, Programs and Procedures
   
33.01   Smoking in public buildings
   
33.02   Fire service and emergency medical services
   
33.03   Purchasing agency and rules
   
33.04   Internal control system
   
33.05   Materiality; reporting material items
   
33.06   Social media policy
   
33.07   Disclosure of public records
Capital Asset Policy
   
33.15   General information
   
33.16   Definition of capital assets
   
33.17   Threshold levels for capital assets
   
33.18   Valuation of capital assets
   
33.19   Asset definitions by major category
   
33.20   Depreciation methods
   
33.21   Capital asset acquisitions
   
33.22   Asset transfers and dispositions
   
33.23   Periodic inventories
   
33.24   Responsibilities of controller’s office
   
33.25   Responsibilities of department heads
Identity Theft Prevention Program
   
33.40   Short title
   
33.41   Purpose
   
33.42   Definitions
   
33.43   Findings
   
33.44   Process of establishing a covered account
   
33.45   Access to covered account information
   
33.46   Credit card payments
   
33.47   Sources and types of red flags
   
33.48   Prevention and mitigation of identity theft
   
33.49   Updating the program
   
33.50   Program administration
   
33.51   Outside service providers
   
33.52   Treatment of address discrepancies
   
33.53   Methods of confirming consumer addresses
GENERAL POLICIES, PROGRAMS AND PROCEDURES
§ 33.01 SMOKING IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 7.1-5-12-13, the Town Council, as the legislative
body of the town, hereby adopts the definition of public building and smoking
as set forth in the code, and prohibits throughout all areas of any public
building owned by the town, smoking, as defined by I.C. 7.1-5-12-3, and all
acts amendatory or supplemental thereto.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 7.1-5-12-5, the Town Manager, as the agent of the
Town Council, shall comply with I.C. 7.1-5-12-5, that requires the conspicuous
posting of signs reading “Smoking is prohibited by State Law in all public
buildings of the Town of McCordsville, Indiana” and cite as reference therein
this section/ordinance.
   (C)   Any person violating this section, and who fails to refrain from
smoking after being requested to do so, may be removed from the public
building.
(Ord. 050499, passed 6-1-1999)
§ 33.02 FIRE SERVICE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
   (A)   The cost to the town of the township providing all required
firefighting services and emergency medical services shall be that the citizens
of the town and property located within the town will be taxed at the same rate
as the citizens and property located in the township outside of the town’s
incorporated boundaries, with no additional tax required being placed against
the citizens or property for those services.
   (B)   The township agrees ten days prior to the commencement of the
aforementioned services, that the township will provide a copy of the previous
quarter’s operating expenses for the firefighting and EMS services of the
township, a complete inventory of all apparatus and equipment owned and/or
operated by the township or its representatives, that hereafter on a quarterly
basis, the township shall provide to the town quarterly statements of all
operating expenses and shall annually, on or before July 1 of each year,
provide a complete and current inventory of all apparatus and equipment owned
by the township and/or operated by the township’s representatives.
   (C)   The township agrees that the town shall have a representative to be
included in township budget discussions and determinations each year and shall
act as an ad hoc member of the budget committee for the township in addition to
which the town shall provide to the town, within five days after preparation,
all proposed budgets and completed budgets annually as approved by the Vernon
Township Board.
   (D)   The town and the township agree that the working relationship outlined
above shall continue in full force and effect until terminated in writing by
either party; however, the termination notice must be delivered to the non-
terminating party by January 1 of the year prior to the termination to allow
both entities to make the necessary budgetary adjustments.
(Ord. 052902, passed 5-29-2002)
§ 33.03 PURCHASING AGENCY AND RULES.
   (A)   Purchasing agency and purchasing agents in accordance with I.C. 5-22.
      (1)   The Town Council is hereby designated as the purchasing agency for
the town.
      (2)   The purchasing agency shall have all the powers and duties
authorized under I.C. 5-22, as may be supplemented from time to time by
ordinances adopted by the Town Council and policies adopted by the purchasing
agency.
      (3)   The purchasing agency shall act as the purchasing agency for every
agency, board, office, branch, bureau, commission, council, department or other
establishment of the town. The Town Council members, Clerk-Treasurer, Town
Manager and any department heads shall act as purchasing agents for that office
or department.
   (B)   Purchasing policies for the town. The following are the purchasing
rules for the town.
      (1)   Publication of notices.
         (a)   Invitation for bids. All notices of invitation for bids shall be
published in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in the Greenfield Daily Reporter. The
purchasing agent shall schedule the publication of notice to provide a
reasonable amount of time for preparation and submission of bids. The notice
will be published two times, at least one week apart. The second publication
must occur at least ten days prior to the date the bids will be opened.
         (b)   Request for proposals. All notices of request for proposals
shall be published in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in the Greenfield Daily
Reporter. The purchasing agent shall schedule the publication of notice to
provide a reasonable amount of time for preparation and submission of
proposals. The notice will be published two times, at least one week apart. The
second publication must occur at least seven days prior to the date the
proposals will be opened.
         (c)   Request for specifications. All notices of request for
specifications shall be published in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in the
Greenfield Daily Reporter. The purchasing agent shall schedule the publication
of notice to provide a reasonable amount of time for preparation and submission
of proposals. The notice will be published two times, at least one week apart.
The second publication must occur at least seven days prior to the date the
proposals will be opened.
         (d)   Electronic notice. Whenever a notice or other material,
including specifications, an invitation for bids, request for proposals or
request for specifications, is sent by mail, the purchasing agent may also send
the notice or other material by electronic means, provided that the
transmission of the information is at least as efficient as mailing the
information.
      (2)   Receiving offers.
         (a)   Opening of offers.
            1.   Bids received in response to an invitation for bids must be
opened publicly in the presence of at least one or more witnesses at the time
and place designated in the invitation for bids.
            2.   Proposals received in response to a request for proposals must
be opened so as to avoid disclosure of the contents to competing offerors
during the process of negotiation.
            3.   Proposals received in response to a request for specifications
may be opened as specified in the request for specifications.
         (b)   Electronic receipt of offers.
            1.   The purchasing agency may receive electronic offers in
response to an invitation to bid, request for proposals or request for
specifications.
            2.   A purchasing agency may only receive an electronic offer if:
               a.   The solicitation includes the procedure for the electronic
transmission of the offer; and
               b.   The purchasing agency receives the offer on a fax machine
or other system with a security feature that protects the contents of an
electronic offer with the same degree of protection as provided to an offer not
transmitted electronically.
         (c)   Correct and withdrawal of bids.
            1.   An offeror may correct inadvertent errors in a bid up to the
time at which bids will be opened by supplementing the erroneous bid and
submitting a revised bid. A bidder may not supplement an inadvertently
erroneous bid after the time at which the bids were opened.
            2.   A bidder may withdraw a bid containing inadvertent errors up
to the time at which bids will be opened and for a period of not more than 24
hours after the time at which bids will be opened.
         (d)   Cancellation of solicitation. When the purchasing agent makes a
written determination that it is in the town’s best interests, the purchasing
agent may cancel a solicitation or reject all offers, provided that the
solicitation included information concerning the procedure for cancellation.
      (3)   Protection of offers: status of documents as public records.
         (a)   Protection of offers prior to opening. The Clerk-Treasurer of
the town, or the purchasing agent who receives offers, shall retain all offers
received in a secure location prior to the date and time at which offers will
be opened in order to prevent disclosure of the contents prior to the opening
of the offers.
         (b)   Unobstructed evaluation of offers. After offers have been
opened, the purchasing agent shall be responsible for maintaining the offers in
a manner so as to permit evaluation of the offers by the persons responsible
for evaluating the offers.
         (c)   Public records status of bids. Bids submitted in response to an
invitation for bids must be made available for public inspection and copying
after the time of the bid opening, unless the bid opening is delayed, as
authorized in this division (B), or any other statute or ordinance.
         (d)   Register of proposals. The purchasing agent shall prepare a
register of proposals for each request for proposals issued, which shall
contain information concerning the proposals available for public inspection
and copying. Proposals may not be disclosed.
      (4)   Discussions with offerors responding to a request for proposals.
The purchasing agent may conduct discussions with parties who are submitting
proposals. Final offers may be obtained from responsible offerors who submit
proposals and are determined to be reasonably susceptible to being selected for
a contract award.
      (5)   Delay of openings of offer. When the Town Council makes a written
determination that is in the town’s best interest, offers may be opened after
the time stated in the solicitation. The date, time and place of the
rescheduled opening must be announced at the time and place of the originally
scheduled opening.
      (6)   Evidence of financial responsibility.
         (a)   Purchases less than $25,000. The purchasing agent may not
require evidence of financial responsibility when the estimated cost of a
purchase is less than $25,000.
         (b)   Purchases between $25,000 and $100,000. The solicitation may
include a requirement that an offeror provide evidence of financial
responsibility. If evidence of financial responsibility is required, the
solicitation must indicate the kind of evidence that will be acceptable. If a
bond or certified check is required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated
cost of the purchase.
         (c)   Purchases over $100,000. The solicitation shall include a
requirement that an offeror provide evidence of financial responsibility, and
must indicate the kind of evidence that will be acceptable. If a bond or
certified check is required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated cost of the
purchase.
      (7)   Use of RFP for purchases of designated types of supplies. If the
Town Council determines that it is either not practicable or not advantageous
to purchase certain types of supplies by sealed competitive bidding, they shall
authorize the appropriate purchasing agent to receive proposals.
      (8)   Modification and termination of contracts.
         (a)   Price adjustments. Any purchasing agent for the town may include
provisions to permit price adjustments in a purchase contract. The following
provisions for price adjustments may be included:
            1.   Price adjustments must be computed by agreement on a fixed
price adjustment before the beginning of the pertinent performance, or as soon
after the beginning of performance as possible;
            2.   Price adjustments must be computed by unit prices specified in
the contract or subsequently agreed upon;
            3.   Price adjustments must be computed by costs attributable to
the events or situations under the clauses with adjustment of profit or fee,
all as specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon; and
            4.   Price adjustments must be computed in some other manner as the
contacting parties may mutually agree upon.
         (b)   Adjustments in time of performance. The purchasing agent may
include provisions in a purchase contract concerning adjustments for time of
performance under the contract.
         (c)   Unilateral rights of the town. The purchasing agent may include
in a purchase contract provisions dealing with the unilateral right of the
purchasing agent, or the Town Council, to order changes in the work within the
scope of the contract or to order temporary work stoppage or delays in time of
performance.
         (d)   Quantity variations. The purchasing agent may include in a
purchase contract provisions dealing with variations between the estimated
quantities of work in a contract and the actual quantity delivered.
      (9)   Small purchases. This division (B)(9) applies to all purchases
which are defined as small purchases under I.C. 5-22-8-2.
         (a)   The purchasing agent may purchase supplies with an estimated
cost of less than $5,000 on the open market without inviting or receiving
quotes.
         (b)   In the event the purchase is between $5,000 and $25,000, the
purchasing agent making the purchase shall receive prices either by phone, in
writing or in person from at least three suppliers.
         (c)   The purchasing agent shall keep a file for purchases made under
this section with the following information:
            1.   The name, address and phone number of each supplier who
provided a price;
            2.   The price provided by each supplier;
            3.   The supplier chosen and the reason for the choice if the
supplier did not provide the lowest price; and
            4.   The reasons why less than three suppliers were not contacted.
      (10)   Purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States. Supplies
manufactured in the United States shall be specified for all town purchases,
and shall be purchased, unless the town determines that:
         (a)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in
reasonably available quantities;
         (b)   The prices of the supplies manufactured in the United States
exceeds by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable
supplies manufactured elsewhere;
         (c)   The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United States is
substantially less than the quality of comparable priced available supplies
manufactured elsewhere; or
         (d)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is
not in the public interest.
      (11)   Reverse auction procedures.
         (a)   Use of third party to conduct reverse auctions.
            1.   The purchasing agency is authorized to use a third party to
conduct reverse auction on behalf of the town for the purchase of supplies. The
purchasing agent is authorized to select the third party that will conduct the
reverse auction, who must have prior experience in conducting reverse auctions
on behalf of local governments.
            2.   The purchasing agent shall obtain a copy of the procedures
established by the third party to conduct the reverse auction on behalf of the
town and present those procedures to the Council for adoption and inclusion in
its applicable procedures prior to participating in a reverse auction conducted
by the third party.
         (b)   Transmission of notices, solicitations and specifications.
            1.   Notices. The Council shall give notice of a reverse auction
by:
               a.   Publishing notice of the invitation to bid two times, at
least one week apart, with the second publication at least seven days before
the commencement of the reverse auction in accordance with I.C. 5-22-7-5, I.C.
5-22-18 and I.C. 5-3-1;
               b.   Posting the invitation to bid on the town’s website; and
               c.   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction on
behalf of the purchasing agency, by posting or permitting to have posted, the
invitation to bid on the third party’s website. Note: posting the invitation to
bid on a website requires compliance with I.C. 5-22-3-4. Note: the Council may
also give notice of a reverse auction by electronic mail or faxes.
            2.   Solicitations and specifications. The Council shall transmit
solicitations and specifications by:
               a.   In accordance with the invitation to bid, identifying a
designated location where, during regular business hours, the invitation to bid
may be inspected and copied or copies may be obtained;
               b.   Making them available on the town’s website or providing
information on the website identifying a designated location where, during
regular business hours, the invitation to bid may be inspected and copied or
copies may be obtained; and
               c.   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction on
behalf of the purchasing agency, making them available on the third party’s
website.
            3.   Note: posting the invitation to bid on a website requires
compliance with I.C. 5-22-3-4.
         (c)   Pre-qualification of bidders.
            1.   All bidders desiring to participate in a reverse auction must
be pre-qualified, by submitting materials to ensure that they meet the
specifications identified by the buyer as to the types of supplies to be
offered for purchase, no later than 24 hours prior to the time for the
commencement of the reverse auction, as provided in the invitation to bid.
            2.   The pre-qualification process shall be used to determine
whether the bidder is responsible and responsive, as provided in the Act,
whether there is any bidding or purchasing preference or preferences applicable
to a particular bidder, and whether the bidder has submitted evidence of
financial responsibility, as required by the purchasing agency. In order to
assist the Council in pre-qualifying bidders, the bidder must submit, in
accordance with the invitation to bid, all documentation and other information
relating to the supplies being offered for purchase, except for price, and any
other information that may assist the Council in making its determination. The
documentation will include evidence of financial responsibility or a certified
check, as specified in the invitation to bid.
            3.   In determining whether a bidder is responsible, the purchasing
agent may consider the following factors:
               a.   The ability and capacity of the bidder to provide the
supplies;
               b.   The integrity, character and reputation of the bidder; and
               c.   The competency and experience of the bidder.
            4.   In determining whether a bidder is responsive, a purchasing
agent may consider the following factors:
               a.   Whether the bidder has submitted information demonstrating
that his or her offer for supplies conforms in all material respects to the
specifications;
               b.   Whether the bidder has submitted documentation that
complies specifically with the solicitation and the instructions to bidders;
and
               c.   Whether the bidder has complied with all applicable
statutes, ordinances, resolutions or rules pertaining to the award of a public
contract.
            5.   The determination that a bidder is not responsive or not
responsible must be made in writing.
            6.   Pre-qualification of bidders must be done by the purchasing
agent or an authorized representative of the purchasing agency in the presence
of one or more witnesses, and must be completed no later than 24 hours prior to
the commencement of the reverse auction bidding period.
            7.   The Council shall notify any bidder determined to be not pre-
qualified in writing, by facsimile or electronic mail (as requested by the
bidder) and shall exclude the bidder so notified from participation in the
reverse auction.
            8.   The Council’s determination that a bidder is not pre-qualified
is limited to the reverse auction for which the request for pre-qualification
was received.
         (d)   Contents of invitation to bid. The invitation to bid must
include all of the following:
            1.   A purchase description;
            2.   A statement that bids will be accepted by means of a reverse
auction process;
            3.   A description of all contractual terms and conditions that
apply to the purchase, including the requirement of a non-collusion affirmation
by the successful bidder;
            4.   The criteria that will be used by the purchasing agency to
pre-qualify bidders to determine whether a bidder is responsive and
responsible;
            5.   The information and other documentation required to be
submitted for pre-qualification, including a certified check or other evidence
of financial responsibility;
            6.   The location and manner in which bidders must submit
information for pre-qualification, the deadline for submission of the
information and the deadline by which the Council will determine whether a
bidder is pre-qualified;
            7.   The location, including any websites, at which the invitation
to bid may be inspected and copied or copies may be obtained, including, if a
third party is conducting the reverse auction, the procedures to be used by the
third party in conducting the reverse auction;
            8.   A statement as to whether a third party is conducting the
reverse auction on behalf of the town;
            9.   A statement that offers submitted by pre-qualified bidders
will only be received through the town’s secure website, or if a third party is
conducting the reverse auction on behalf of the town, through the third party’s
secure website;
            10.   The date and time at which the reverse auction bidding period
will commence and the approximate length of time for which the reverse auction
will be conducted, allowing automatic extensions based upon resulting
competitive activity;
            11.   The deadline by which pre-qualified bidders must submit an
initial price to a secure website for the purposes of establishing a bidder’s
participation and initial ranking at the commencement of the reverse auction
bidding period;
            12.   A statement explaining that the bidding period during which
the reverse auction is conducted may be extended based upon competitive
activity, at pre-determined periods determined by the purchasing agency;
            13.   A statement identifying the circumstances under which the
reverse auction may be postponed, paused, rescheduled or cancelled;
            14.   The place and approximate time at which, following the close
of the bidding period, offers will be reviewed publicly by an authorized
representative of the purchasing agency in the presence of one or more
witnesses;
            15.   A statement that the third party conducting the auction on
behalf of the town will collect a service charge from the successful bidder for
its participation in the reverse auction;
            16.   The name, address and telephone number of a representative of
the purchasing agency who can provide additional information related to the
reverse auction;
            17.   If a third party is conducting the auction on behalf of the
town, the name, address and telephone number of a representative of the third
party who can provide additional information related to the reverse auction,
including the mandatory training required of all pre-qualified bidders as a
condition of participating in the reverse auction; and
            18.   The conditions under which the invitation to bid may be
cancelled or postponed in accordance with I.C. 5-22-18-1.
         (e)   Receiving offers.
            1.   The Council shall receive offers only from bidders who have
been pre-qualified, in accordance with the invitation to bid.
            2.   If a third party conducts the reverse auction on behalf of the
town, all pre-qualified bidders must receive training provided by the third
party in order to participate in the reverse auction.
            3.   Prior to receiving electronic offers, the Council must find
that: the invitation for bid for the reverse auction indicates the procedure
for transmitting the electronic offer; and the electronic system on which the
offer is received has a security feature that protects the content of an
electronic offer with the same degree of protection as the content of an offer
that is not transmitted by electronic means.
            4.   In accordance with the invitation to bid, offers submitted by
pre-qualified bidders will only be received:
               a.   Through the town’s secure website; or
               b.   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction on
behalf of the town, through the third party’s secure website.
         (f)   Reverse auction bidding period.
            1.   For each reverse auction, the purchasing agent must establish
an initial bidding period during which bidders may submit prices for which the
supplies being offered may be purchased. The initial bidding period shall not
be less than one hour. The purchasing agent may automatically extend the
reverse auction bidding period for additional pre-determined periods based upon
competitive activity.
            2.   During the bidding period for the reverse auction, information
available for public display is limited to the ranking, price and name of
bidders of each price bid relative to all other prices bid.
            3.   The dollar amounts of the prices bid by bidders shall not be
disclosed to the bidders until the close of the bidding period.
            4.   All information received, obtained or retained during a
reverse auction remains confidential, and may not be disclosed until after the
close of the reverse auction bidding period.
         (g)   Opening offers.
            1.   In accordance with the Act, offers will be deemed to be opened
when a computer generated record of the information contained in all bids
received from pre-qualified responsive and responsible bidders is reviewed
publicly at the close of the bidding period for the reverse auction in the
presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the
invitation for bids by the purchasing agency (or an authorized representative
of the purchasing agency, including the purchasing agent).
            2.   The purchasing agency, and any of its agents or employees, are
prohibited from displaying for public viewing the amount of each initial bid
price until the close of the initial bidding period for the reverse auction.
The purchasing agency is required to protect the identity of a bidder and the
prices which have been submitted by each bidder until the initial bid has been
placed until the reverse auction begins, at which time bids will be deemed
opened.
         (h)   Contract award.
            1.   In accordance with I.C. 5-22-7-8, the purchasing agency must
award a contract for the purchase of supplies with reasonable promptness by
written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder.
            2.   If the contract is not awarded to the lowest bidder, the
purchasing agent must indicate the reasons for the award in writing.
            3.   As provided in the invitation to bid, the third party
conducting the reverse auction may impose a fee as a term of the contract for a
purchase made by means of a reverse auction.
         (i)   Purchase orders and payments.
            1.   A fully executed purchase order must be filed with Clerk-
Treasurer within 30 days after the award of a contract of a purchase of
supplies through a reverse auction, in accordance with I.C. 5-22-18-5.
            2.   Payments for supplies purchased in a reverse auction shall be
made only after receiving properly submitted claims in accordance with I.C. 5-
11-10, I.C. 36-4-8 and I.C. 36-5-4.
         (j)   Documentation. The purchasing agency shall be required to
maintain adequate documentation regarding its reverse auctions so that the
transactions may be audited as provided by law. The purchasing agency shall
maintain an indexed file of specifications prepared by or under the authority
of its purchasing agents for each reverse auction in which the purchasing
agency participates.
(Ord. 071198, passed 7-11-1998; Ord. 071198A, passed 7-11-1998; Ord. 030299A,
passed 3-2-1999; Ord. 031009B, passed 3-10-2009)
§ 33.04 INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEM.
   (A)   Mission. The town finds that its mission as related to an internal
control system is as follows:
      (1)   Provision of a democratic governmental structure at the grassroots
level;
      (2)   Provision of services as determined through the political process,
including, but not limited to police, fire, utilities, economic development,
parks, planning and zoning, building inspection, and code enforcement;
      (3)   Promotion of government efficiency, accountability, reliability and
transparency; and
      (4)   Promotion of safeguards to reduce the risk of loss due to fraud,
waste, abuse, mismanagement or errors.
   (B)   Objectives. The town finds that its interrelated and often overlapping
objectives as related to an internal control system are as follows:
      (1)   Operations objectives which involve the ways governmental services
are performed and the performance of those providing governmental services,
including by way of example, budgeting, purchasing, permitting, cash management
and planning among others.
      (2)   Reporting objectives which involve the filing of financial and non-
financial information to those inside the government and those outside of the
government, including by way of example, filing the annual report, audit and
examination cooperation, filing uniform conflict of interest forms and the
other filings with any governmental agency or official or information required
to be kept such as an OSHA log and responding to a public records request among
others.
      (3)   Compliance objectives involve the adherence to law and regulations,
including by way of example following guidance documents such as the State
Board of Accounts’ manuals, bulletins, directives and the Department of Local
Government Finance’s forms and directions and including other outside of
government trainings and documents such as IACT among others.
   (C)   Adopted standards. The town adopts and directs the minimum level of
internal control standards and internal control procedures for an internal
control system that includes the following five standards to promote government
accountability and transparency as described in the Uniform Internal Control
Standards for Indiana Political Subdivisions guidance document from the State
Board of Accounts dated September 2015 and as thereafter modified:
      (1)   Control environment.
      (2)   Risk assessment.
      (3)   Control activities.
      (4)   Information and communication.
      (5)   Monitoring.
   (D)   Adopted principles. The town adopts and directs the following
principles in explanation of the pertinent standards above be followed at all
levels of the town government:
      (1)   Control environment.
         (a)   The oversight body and management demonstrate a commitment to
integrity and ethical values.
         (b)   The oversight body oversees the town’s internal control system.
         (c)   Management establishes an organizational structure, assigns
responsibility and delegates authority to achieve the town’s objectives.
         (d)   Management demonstrates a commitment to attract, develop and
retain competent individuals.
         (e)   Management evaluates performance and holds individuals
accountable for their internal control responsibilities.
      (2)   Risk assessment.
         (a)   Management defines objectives clearly to enable the
identification of risks and defines risk tolerances.
         (b)   Management identifies, analyzes and responds to risk related to
achieving the defined objectives.
         (c)   Management considers the potential for fraud when identifying,
analyzing and responding to risks.
         (d)   Management identifies, analyzes and responds to significant
changes that could impact the internal control system.
      (3)   Control activities.
         (a)   Management designs control activities to achieve objectives and
respond to risks.
         (b)   Management designs the town’s information system and related
control activities to achieve objectives and respond to risks.
         (c)   Management implements control activities through policies.
      (4)   Information and communication.
         (a)   Management uses quality information to achieve the town’s
objectives.
         (b)   Management internally communicates the necessary quality
information to achieve the town’s objectives.
         (c)   Management externally communicates the necessary quality
information to achieve the town’s objectives.
      (5)   Monitoring.
         (a)   Management establishes and operates monitoring activities to
monitor the internal control system and evaluate the results.
         (b)   Management remediates identified internal control deficiencies
on a timely basis.
   (E)   Purpose of adoption. The town adopts the internal control standards
above so as to establish an effective internal control system for the town
through its design, implementation and operation.
   (F)   Use. The town directs that the above standards be used to design,
implement, operate and modify current operations, reporting and compliance
objectives that will safeguard the assets of the town, promote reliability,
accountability and transparency of financial and non-financial information and
to assure compliance with laws and regulations for each office, department and
personnel (as defined below) for an effective and reasonable internal control
system of the town.
   (G)   Review of system. The town authorizes the Town Council to review the
current internal control system of the town and adopt a policy for the future
internal control system to be effective after June 30, 2016 (although the State
Board of Accounts will not take audit exception as long as the minimum
standards are adopted between July 1 and the end of 2016) and perform an annual
review, or more if determined necessary for compliance with this section.
   (H)   Compliance. The personnel, whether an official or employee, of the
town whose official duties include receiving, processing, depositing,
disbursing, or otherwise having access to funds that belong to the federal
government, state government, a political subdivision, or another governmental
entity shall comply with these minimum internal control standards and
procedures and any other policy regarding standards and procedures determined
necessary by the town now and as modified in the future.
   (I)   Training. The personnel of the town whose official duties include
receiving, processing, depositing, disbursing, or otherwise having access to
funds that belong to the federal government, state government, a political
subdivision, or another governmental entity shall be trained at least once
during a calendar year and annually thereafter, unless on leave status, on the
minimum internal control standards and procedures and any other standards and
procedures determined necessary by the town and shall cooperate with the town
fiscal officer or designee so that the fiscal officer can timely certify to the
State Board of Accounts that the training was received annually by the
personnel as provided by law.
   (J)   Identified personnel. The town authorizes the Town Council to
determine the position and person who are the personnel referred to in
divisions (I) and (M) and notify such personnel.
   (K)   Coordination. The Town Council will perform all internal control
system activities in conjunction with the duly elected Clerk-Treasurer,
including creating an internal control system policy.
   (L)   Mandatory cooperation. All elected and appointed officials and
employees of the town are hereby directed to abide by and to cooperate fully in
the implementation of the internal control system of the town.
   (M)   Violation. An employee who fails to abide by or cooperate with the
implementation, compliance and certifications connected with the internal
control system commits a violation of town policy and may result in the
discipline, including termination, of the employee.
   (N)   Penalty. An elected or appointed official of the town who fails to
abide by or cooperate with the implementation and the mandated certifications
of the internal control system may be subject to any action allowed by law.
   (O)   Implementation. This section may be implemented by any and all of the
following actions or such others as authorized by this Council:
      (1)   Posting a copy of Ord. 061416 in its entirety in at least one of
the locations in the town where it posts employer posters or other notices to
its employees;
      (2)   Providing a copy of Ord. 061416 to its employees and elected and
appointed officials;
      (3)   Providing or posting a notice of the adoption of Ord. 061416; or
      (4)   Any such other action or actions that would communicate the
policies established hereunder to its employees and elected and appointed
officials.
(Ord. 061416, passed 6-14-2016)
§ 33.05 MATERIALITY; REPORTING MATERIAL ITEMS.
   (A)   All erroneous or irregular variances, losses, shortages, or thefts of
non-cash town subdivision property in excess of $750 shall be reported to the
Clerk-Treasurer or his or her designee promptly.
   (B)   It will be the policy of the Clerk-Treasurer to report to the State
Board of Accounts any erroneous or irregular variances, losses, shortages, or
thefts of cash in excess of $55.50, except for inadvertent clerical errors that
are identified timely and promptly corrected with no loss to the town.
   (C)   It will be the policy of the Clerk-Treasurer to report promptly to the
State Board of Accounts any erroneous or irregular variances, losses,
shortages, or thefts of non-cash items in excess of $750, estimated market
value, except for those resulting from inadvertent clerical errors or
misplacements that are identified timely and promptly corrected with no loss to
the town, and except for losses from genuine accidents.
   (D)   All town elected officials are asked, and all town employees and
agents are directed, to comply with this policy, and the Town Council is asked
to endorse it.
(Ord. 041216, passed 4-12-2016)
§ 33.06 SOCIAL MEDIA POLICY.
   The town hereby adopts as its social media policy, the following:
   (A)   Comments or posts made by the public to any social media page under
the control of the town, will be monitored and while they will not be removed
based on their opinion or viewpoint, the town reserves the right to remove
comments that include:
      (1)   Comments unrelated to the purpose and topical scope of the page;
      (2)   Obscenities;
      (3)   Personal identifying information or sensitive personal information;
      (4)   Incitement to imminent lawless action;
      (5)   Speech presenting a grave and imminent threat;
      (6)   Fighting words;
      (7)   True threats;
      (8)   Fraud;
      (9)   Defamation (libel/slander);
      (10)   Solicitations to commit, or speech integral to, criminal conduct;
      (11)   Information that could reasonably compromise public safety;
      (12)   Promotion or advertisement in favor of, or in opposition to a
political campaign or candidate;
      (13)   Apparent spam;
      (14)   Content posted by automatic software programs (i.e. “bots”);
      (15)   Information which may interfere or compromise current
investigations, police tactics and the safety of police staff and officers; and
      (16)   Copyrighted material (if posted without the copyright holder’s
consent).
   (B)   The town may take steps to remove a comment if it falls within one of
the foregoing categories. By posting or commenting, you agree to these terms of
use. If a social media user’s comment is removed, the moderator will notify the
user by social media messenger that the comment was removed and the reason for
its removal. You participate at your own risk, and recognize that by posting on
this page, you are personally responsible for your comments and any information
provided.
   (C)   The town disclaims liability for advertisements, videos, promoted
content, or comments posted by visitors to this page. The responsibility for
external content of comments rests solely with the organization or individuals
providing them. Any inclusion or exclusion of content or comments does not
imply endorsement or opposition by the town or any of its employees or
officers.
(Ord. 031417-A, passed 3-14-2017)
§ 33.07 DISCLOSURE OF PUBLIC RECORDS.
   The town shall comply with the requirements of the Indiana Public Access
laws in accordance with I.C. 5-14-3 et seq., now and as amended.
(Ord. 031224A, passed 4-9-2024)
CAPITAL ASSET POLICY
§ 33.15 GENERAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   The fixed asset policy is being issued effective January 1, 2005. The
new policy will be referred to as the “capital asset policy”. This policy is
being issued to document the minimum value of capital assets to be reported on
our financial reports, and to include infrastructure assets. This issuance of a
policy document is related to the implementation of a new reporting model,
Governmental Accounting Standards Board Statement 34. Statement 34 will require
the town to depreciate capital assets. The capital asset threshold will be
$5,000. An asset with a value under $5,000 will be expensed in the year of
purchase. The infrastructure portion of this policy is also effective January
1, 2005.
   (B)   Town utilities will follow this same definition of capital assets,
except any item with a unit cost of $5,000 or more shall be capitalized. Assets
that are not capitalized (items less than $5,000) are expensed in the year of
acquisition. Town utilities will follow the capitalization guidelines of the
State Board of Accounts.
   (C)   The town is, by this subchapter, establishing a capital asset policy
in order to provide a higher degree of control over its considerable investment
in capital assets, and to be able to demonstrate accountability to its various
constituencies: citizens, rate-payers, oversight bodies and regulators. All
public information pertaining to capital assets will be made available in the
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR).
   (D)   The purpose of establishing a capital policy is fivefold:
      (1)   To safeguard the investments of the citizens of the town;
      (2)   To fix responsibility for the custody of equipment;
      (3)   To provide a basis for formulating capital asset acquisition,
maintenance and retirement polices;
      (4)   To provide data for financial reporting; and
      (5)   To demonstrate appropriate stewardship responsibility for public
assets.
   (E)   This policy will only serve to classify capital assets, including
fixed and infrastructure, for accuracy in financial reporting through the State
Board of Accounts. It does not include data processing, programming
requirements or computer operations procedures.
(Ord. 020905, passed 2-9-2005)
§ 33.16 DEFINITION OF CAPITAL ASSETS.
   (A)   Capital assets include: land, land improvements, including monuments,
buildings, building improvements, construction in progress, machinery and
equipment, vehicles and infrastructure. All land will be capitalized, but not
depreciated. All items with a useful life of more than one year, and having a
unit cost of $5,000 or more, shall be capitalized (including acquisitions by
lease-purchase agreements and donated items). A capital asset meeting the
criteria will be reported and depreciated in the government-wide financial
statements.
   (B)   Assets that are not capitalized (items less than $5,000) are expensed
in the year of acquisition. An inventory will be kept on all computers and
other equipment with a capitalized cost of less than $5,000. (See § 33.22.)
   (C)   Exceptions are:
      (1)   Items costing less than the above limits which are permanently
installed as a part of the cost of original construction or installation of a
larger building or equipment unit will be included in the cost of the larger
unit;
      (2)   Modular equipment added subsequent to original equipment
construction of a larger building or equipment unit which may be put together
to form larger units costing more than the prescribed limits will be charged to
capital assets, even though the cost of individual items is less than those
units; and
      (3)   Cabinets, shelving, bookcases and similar items, added subsequent
to original construction, which are custom made for a specific place and
adaptable elsewhere, will be capitalized.
   (D)   Purchases made using grant funds must comply with grant requirements
or the above procedures, whichever are the most restrictive.
(Ord. 020905, passed 2-9-2005)
§ 33.17 THRESHOLD LEVELS FOR CAPITAL ASSETS.
   The following schedule will be followed for the different types of capital
assets other than infrastructure assets:
Type Capitalize/Depreciate
Type                     Capitalize/Depreciate
Building                 $5,000
Building improvements    $5,000
Construction in progress All/capitalize only
Land                     All/capitalize only
Land improvements        $5,000
Machinery and equipment  $5,000
Town utility assets      $5,000
Vehicle                  $5,000
 
(Ord. 020905, passed 2-9-2005)
§ 33.18 VALUATION OF CAPITAL ASSETS.
   (A)   Capital assets must be recorded at actual cost.
   (B)   Normally the cost recorded is the purchase price or construction costs
of the asset, but also included is any other reasonable and necessary costs
incurred to place the asset in its intended location and intended use.
   (C)   The costs could include the following:
      (1)   Legal and title fees, closing costs;
      (2)   Appraisal and negotiation fees, surveying fees;
      (3)   Damage payments;
      (4)   Land preparation costs, demolition costs;
      (5)   Architect, engineering and accounting fees;
      (6)   Insurance premiums during construction;
      (7)   Transportation charges; and
      (8)   Interest costs during construction.
   (D)   Donated or contributed assets should be recorded at their fair market
value on the date donated.
(Ord. 020905, passed 2-9-2005)
§ 33.19 ASSET DEFINITIONS BY MAJOR CATEGORY.
   (A)   It is important to the maintenance of accurate records that each asset
category be precisely defined, and that all persons responsible for records
maintenance be fully aware of the categorization system.
   (B)   This section further clarifies the asset definitions by major
category.
      (1)   Land. Land is defined as specified land, lots, parcels or acreage,
including rights-of-way owned by the town, its various departments, boards or
authorities, regardless of the method or date of acquisition. Easements will
not be included as the town does not own them, but as an interest in land owned
by another (i.e., property owner) that entitles its holder to a specified
limited use.
      (2)   Improvements other than buildings. Examples of town assets in this
category are walks, parking areas and drives, fencing, retaining walls, pools,
fountains, planters, underground sprinkler systems and other similar items.
Examples of town utilities assets in this category are water supply mains,
collection sewers, wells, dams, fences, intake pipes, manholes and fire
hydrants.
      (3)   Buildings.
         (a)   All structures designed and erected to house equipment services
or functions are included. This includes systems, services and fixtures within
the buildings, and attachments, such as porches, stairs, fire escapes,
canopies, areaways, lighting fixtures, flagpoles and all other units that serve
the building.
         (b)   Plumbing systems, lighting systems, heating, cooling,
ventilating and air handling systems, alarm systems, sound systems,
surveillance systems, passenger and freight elevators, escalators, built-in
casework, walk-in coolers and freezers, fixed shelving and other fixed
equipment are included with the building, if owned.
         (b)   Communication antennas and/or towers are not included as
buildings. These are parts of the equipment units that they serve.
      (4)   Equipment. Equipment includes all other types of physical property
within the scope of the fixed asset management system not previously
classified. Included within this category are office mechanical equipment,
office furniture, appliances, furnishings, machinery items, maintenance
equipment, communication equipment, police, fire, sanitation and park
department, laboratory equipment, vehicles, road equipment, aircraft, emergency
equipment, earth moving equipment, text equipment, civil defense equipment and
data processing equipment. All supplies are excluded.
      (5)   Infrastructure.
         (a)   Infrastructure assets are long-lived capital assets that
normally can be preserved for a significantly greater number of years than most
capital and that are normally stationary in nature. Examples include roads,
streetlights, traffic signals, drainage systems and water systems.
Infrastructure assets do not include buildings, drives, parking lots or any
other examples given above that are incidental to property or access to the
property above.
         (b)   Additions and improvements to infrastructure, which increase the
capacity or efficiency of the asset, will be capitalized. Maintenance/repairs
will be considered as necessary to maintain the existing asset, and therefore
not capitalized. For example, patching, resurfacing, snow removal and the like,
are considered maintenance activities, and will be expensed. Also, normal
department operating activities, such as feasibility studies and preliminary
engineering and design, will be expensed and not capitalized as an element of
the infrastructure asset.
         (c)   Alleys will not be included as part of infrastructure for the
following reason: existing improved alleys will be maintained as gravel alleys,
and the town is responsible only for the maintenance, such as patching and
repairing. Any investments to upgrade the alleys will be done by homeowner
participation. Therefore, the town will not track and value alleys, and the
patching/repairs will be expensed as they occur.
         (d)   The retroactive reporting requirements for infrastructure of
GASB 34 requires the town to report items put into service from 1980 forward,
and gives the town the option to report items put into service prior to 1980.
The town will report only on items put into service after 1980. Retroactive
reporting is not mandated until fiscal years beginning after January 1, 2006
which the town will comply with.
         (e)   At the network level, the asset will be classified as major if
the cost of the network item is at least 10% of the cost of all capital assets
in fiscal year 1999. A network will be defined as a group of similar assets
that serve a particular function or purpose for the town.
         (f)   At the subsystem level, the asset will be classified as major if
the cost of the subsystem item is at least 5% of the cost of all capital assets
in fiscal year 1999. A subsystem will be defined as a segment of a network of
assets that serve a similar function for the town.
(Ord. 020905, passed 2-9-2005)
§ 33.20 DEPRECIATION METHODS.
   (A)   The town will be depreciating capital assets by using either
composite/group method depreciation or the straight-line method.
      (1)   Salvage value will be determined on an asset-by-asset basis.
      (2)   Depreciation will be calculated at year-end.
      (3)   Land is not depreciated according to general accepted accounting
principles.
   (B)   A network of assets is composed of all assets that provide a
particular type of service for government.
      (1)   A subsystem of a network of assets is composed of all assets that
make a similar portion or segment of a network of assets.
      (2)   The following will be the breakdown of our networks and subsystems:
         (a)   Roads/streets network: subsystems: types of streets, curbs; and
         (b)   Traffic components network: subsystems: traffic signals street
lights.
      (3)   Composite/group network: composite depreciation refers to
calculating depreciation for a collection of similar assets. A single composite
rate is applied annually to the acquisition cost of the collection as a whole.
At year-end an adjustment will be made to the total cost to account for any
additions/disposals throughout the year. The accumulated depreciation
associated with it will also be adjusted. A gain or loss will never be reported
on the asset when using the composite method. A full year’s depreciation will
be taken when the asset is placed in service and no depreciation recorded in
the year it is sold or disposed of. It will group our dissimilar assets by
useful lives and our similar assets by networks. To determine the appropriate
depreciation rate for the composite group, divide one by the number of years
the assets are depreciated. For instance, a group of assets with a 25-year life
will be depreciated at 4% each year (1/65).
      (4)   Following is the list of groups it will use for depreciation:
Composite/Group Depreciation
Composite/Group Depreciation
Flood walls/gates  50 years
Street lights      35 years
Traffic signals    25 years
Roads
Asphaltic concrete 20 years
Brick or stone     50 years
Cement             10 years
Concrete           30 years
Gravel             15 years
 
      (5)   Straight-line depreciation: all assets accounted for under the
capital asset policy will be depreciated using the straight-line method of
depreciation.
         (a)   A gain or loss on disposal will be recorded.
         (b)   Following is a list of the most common useful lives:
Building components (HVAC systems, roofing)                            20 years
Buildings                                                              50 years
Computer hardware                                                      3 years
Computer software                                                      5 years
Fire trucks                                                            15 years
Grounds equipment - (mowers, tractors, attachments)                    15 years
Heavy equipment                                                        10 years
Land improvements - ground work (golf course, athletic fields,         20 years
landscaping, fencing)
Land improvements - structure (parking lots, athletic courts, swimming 20 years
pools)
Leasehold improvements - useful life of asset or lease term (whichever -
is shorter)
Office equipment                                                       5 years
Office furniture                                                       20 years
Outdoor equipment - (playground equipment, radio towers)               15 years
Vehicles                                                               5 years
 
      (6)   Town utilities’ useful lives are as follows:
         (a)   Water:
Buildings and improvements          50 years
Transmission and distribution mains 50 years
Meters/hydrants                     50 years
Pumping equipment                   50 years
Water treatment equipment           50 years
Reservoirs/tanks                    50 years
Furniture and equipment             10 years
Other equipment                     10 years
Transportation equipment            10 years
Shop and lab equipment              10 years
Computer equipment                  3 years
Communications equipment            10 years
 
         (b)   Sewer:
Buildings and improvements        50 years
Sewer lines                       50 years
Combined sewer overflow           50 years
Lift station                      50 years
Treatment plant/equipment         10 years
Office equipment                  5 years
Miscellaneous operating equipment 5 years
Vehicles                          5 years
 
(Ord. 020905, passed 2-9-2005)
§ 33.21 CAPITAL ASSET ACQUISITIONS.
   (A)   The method of acquisition is not a determining factor.
   (B)   Each department should report items acquired by:
      (1)   Regular purchases;
      (2)   Lease purchase (see division (C) below);
      (3)   Construction by town personnel;
      (4)   Construction by an outside contractor;
      (5)   Resolution/condemnation;
      (6)   Donation/contribution;
      (7)   Addition to an existing asset;
      (8)   Transfer from another department;
      (9)   Trade or barter; and
      (10)   Annexation.
   (C)   Leased equipment should be capitalized if the lease agreement meets
any one of the following criteria:
      (1)   The lease transfers ownership of the property to the lessee by the
end of the lease term;
      (2)   The lease contains a bargain purchase option;
      (3)   The lease term is equal to 75% of the estimated economic life of
the leased property; or
      (4)   The present value of the minimum lease payments at the inception of
the lease, excluding executory costs, equals at least 90% of the fair market
value of the leased property.
   (D)   Leases that do not meet any of the above criteria should be recorded
as an operating lease and reported in the notes of the financial statements.
(Ord. 020905, passed 2-9-2005)
§ 33.22 ASSET TRANSFERS AND DISPOSITIONS.
   (A)   Property should not be transferred, turned in for auction or disposed
of without prior approval of the department head. A vehicle/equipment out-
processing checklist should be sent to the Town Controller’s office in all
cases. This form is a dual-purpose form for transfer (defined as any movement
of an asset by virtue of change in location, either by account, department,
building, floor or room) or retirement (disposal) of property.
   (B)   The main points to be remembered when using this form are:
      (1)   Always provide sufficient detail to properly identify the asset,
most importantly the asset’s tag number or town ID;
      (2)   Be accurate and do not overlook any of the needed entries;
      (3)   Write legibly;
      (4)   Complete each column for every asset listed on the form;
      (5)   Enter information in correct row, depending on whether one is
transferring or deleting an asset;
      (6)   Have department head sign at the bottom of the form; and
      (7)   Return the form to the Town Controller’s office.
   (C)   If an asset is stolen, the department should notify the Safety Manager
as well as the Town Controller’s office.
(Ord. 020905, passed 2-9-2005)
§ 33.23 PERIODIC INVENTORIES.
   A physical inventory of all capital assets (any item over $5,000) will be
conducted in each department on or about December 31 of every year. The Town
Controller’s office will conduct spot checks on a random basis. Department
heads will be accountable for the capital asset inventory charged to their
departments by verifying a list of their capital assets at year-end.
(Ord. 020905, passed 2-9-2005)
§ 33.24 RESPONSIBILITIES OF CONTROLLER’S OFFICE.
   The Fiscal Officer will ensure that accounting for capital assets is being
exercised by establishing a capital asset inventory, both initially and
periodically in subsequent years. The Fiscal Officer will further ensure that
the capital asset report will be updated annually to reflect additions,
retirements and transfers and to reflect the new, annual capital asset balance
for financial reporting purposes and the annual and accumulated depreciation
calculation.
(Ord. 020905, passed 2-9-2005)
§ 33.25 RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   (A)   It is the responsibility of the department head to act as or designate
a steward for each piece of property. The steward will become the focal point
for questions regarding the availability, condition and usage of the asset, as
well as the contact during the physical inventory process.
   (B)   The steward shall be designated as the person to record the receipt of
the asset, to examine the asset to make sure that no damage was incurred during
shipment and to make sure that the asset was received in working order.
   (C)   The steward is also responsible for arranging for the necessary
preventative maintenance and any needed repairs to keep the asset in working
condition. It is necessary to have a responsible person available for questions
that arise during a physical inventory or when someone wants to borrow the
asset. The steward ensures that the asset is used for the purpose for which it
was acquired and that there is no personal or unauthorized use. In addition,
the steward should report any property damage or theft.
(Ord. 020905, passed 2-9-2005)
IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
§ 33.40 SHORT TITLE.
   This policy shall be known as the Identity Theft Prevention Program
(hereinafter “Program”).
(Ord. 041409, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 33.41 PURPOSE.
   This policy is adopted to comply with the Fair and Accurate Credit
Transactions Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1681 et seq., and federal regulations
promulgated at 16 C.F.R. § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate
identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by
responding to the red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft.
(Ord. 041409, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 33.42 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COVERED ACCOUNT.
      (1)   An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or
maintains, primarily for personal, family or household purposes, that involves
or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit
card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone
account, utility account, checking account or savings account; and
      (2)   Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers
or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or
to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from
identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation or
litigation risks.
   CREDIT. The right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt
or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and
defer payment therefor.
   CREDITOR. Any person who regularly extends, renews or continues credit; any
person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal or continuation of
credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the
decision to extend, renew or continue credit, and includes utility companies
and telecommunications companies.
   CUSTOMER. A person that has a covered account with a creditor.
   IDENTITY THEFT. A fraud committed or attempted using identifying information
of another person without authority.
   NOTICE OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCY. A notice sent to a user by a consumer
reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(l), that informs the user
of a substantial difference between the  address for the consumer that the user
provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency’s
file for the consumer.
   PERSON. A natural person, a corporation, government or governmental
subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative or association.
   PERSONAL IDENTIFYING INFORMATION. A person’s credit card account
information, debit card information bank account information and driver’s
license information, and for a natural person, includes their Social Security
number, mother’s birth name and date of birth.
   RED FLAG. A pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the
possible existence of identity theft.
   SERVICE PROVIDER. A person that provides a service directly to the city.
(Ord. 041409, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 33.43 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Town Utility Department (known hereafter as the Utility
Department) is a creditor pursuant to 16 C.F.R. § 681.2 due to its provision or
maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears.
   (B)   Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of services
include sewer utility and stormwater utility.
   (C)   The Utility Department’s previous experience with identity theft
related to covered accounts is as follows: no known incidents.
   (D)   The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing
covered account, making payments on the accounts and providing account
information, access in person or via phone or website have been identified as
potential processes in which identity theft could occur.
   (E)   The Utility Department limits access to personal identifying
information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening
or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts.
Information provided to the employees is entered directly into the Utility
Department’s computer system and is not otherwise recorded.
   (F)   The Utility Department determines that there is a low risk of identity
theft occurring in the following ways (if any):
      (1)   Use by an applicant of another person’s personal identifying
information to establish a new covered account;
      (2)   Use of a previous customer’s personal identifying information by
another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer’s
name;
      (3)   Use of another person’s credit card, bank account or other method
of payment by a customer to pay the customer’s covered account or accounts; and
      (4)   Use by a customer desiring to restore the customer’s covered
account of another person’s credit card, bank account or other method of
payment.
(Ord. 041409, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 33.44 PROCESS OF ESTABLISHING A COVERED ACCOUNT.
   As a precondition to opening a covered account, each applicant shall provide
name, address, telephone number, owner of property and occupancy date with
personal identifying information of the customer. The information shall be
entered directly into the Utility Department’s computer system and shall not
otherwise be recorded. Each account shall be assigned an account number and
personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The
Utility Department may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned
PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs.
(Ord. 041409, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 33.45 ACCESS TO COVERED ACCOUNT INFORMATION.
   (A)   Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be
limited to authorized personnel.
   (B)   The password(s) shall be changed on a regular basis by each individual
user, shall be at least eight characters in length, and shall contain letters,
numbers and symbols.
   (C)   Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to
be reported immediately to the Utility Billing Supervisor and the password
changed immediately.
   (D)   Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is
considered confidential (to the extent allowed by law) and any request or
demand for the information shall be immediately forwarded to the Utility
Billing Supervisor.
(Ord. 041409, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 33.46 CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS.
   (A)   In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet
are processed through a third party service provider, the third party service
provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention
program in place that is applicable to the payments.
   (B)   All credit card payments made over the telephone or the town’s website
shall be entered directly into the customer’s account information in the
computer database.
   (C)   Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include
only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used
for payment of the covered account.
(Ord. 041409, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 33.47 SOURCES AND TYPES OF RED FLAGS.
   (A)   All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a
covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered
account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft.
   (B)   The red flags shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies
or service providers. Examples of these alerts are:
         (a)   A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer
report;
         (b)   A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a
consumer report; and
         (c)   A notice of address discrepancy discovered through the County
Geographic Information System.
      (2)   Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include:
         (a)   Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered
or forged;
         (b)   Identification on which the photograph or physical description
is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer;
         (c)   Identification on which the information is inconsistent with
information provided by the applicant or customer;
         (d)   Identification on which the information is inconsistent with
readily accessible information that is on file, such as a signature card or a
recent check; and
         (e)   An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or
appears to have been destroyed and reassembled.
      (3)   Suspicious personal identifying information. Examples include:
         (a)   Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with
external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For
example: the address does not match any address in the consumer report;
         (b)   Personal identifying information or a phone number or address is
associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by
internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor;
         (c)   Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address,
mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or
answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity;
         (d)   The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other
applicants or customers;
         (e)   The address or telephone number provided is the same or similar
to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large
number of applicants or customers;
         (f)   The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal
identifying information on an application or in response to notification that
the application is incomplete;
         (g)   Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal
identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or
creditor; and
         (h)   The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating
information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or
consumer report.
      (4)   Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered
account. Examples include:
         (a)   Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an
account, there is a request for the addition of authorized users on the
account;
         (b)   A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly
associated with known patterns of fraud patterns, such as where the customer
fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent
payments;
         (c)   An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with
established patterns of activity on the account, such as non-payment when there
is no history of late or missed payments;
         (d)   Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as
undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with
the customer’s account;
         (e)   The Utility Department is notified that the customer is not
receiving paper account statements;
         (f)   The Utility Department is notified of unauthorized charges or
transactions in connection with a customer’s account; and
         (g)   The Utility Department is notified by a customer, law
enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a
person engaged in identity theft.
      (5)   Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable
sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered
accounts.
(Ord. 041409, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 33.48 PREVENTION AND MITIGATION OF IDENTITY THEFT.
   (A)   In the event that any employee responsible for or involved in
restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered
account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with
respect to existing covered accounts, the employee shall use his or her
discretion to determine whether the red flag or combination of red flags
suggests a threat of identity theft.
      (1)   If, in his or her discretion, the employee determines that identity
theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, the employee shall
immediately report the red flags to the Town Police Department.
      (2)   If, in his or her discretion, the employee deems that identity
theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red
flags, the employee shall convey this information to the Utility Billing
Supervisor, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action
is necessary.
      (3)   If the Utility Billing Supervisor in his or her discretion
determines that further action is necessary, one or more of the following
responses as determined to be appropriate by the Utility Billing Supervisor
shall be performed:
         (a)   Contact the customer;
         (b)   Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting
the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed
the customer’s covered account:
            1.   Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes or other
security devices that permit access to an account; or
            2.   Close the account.
         (c)   Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer
and decline to sell the customer’s account to a debt collector in the event
that the customer’s account has been accessed without authorization and the
access has caused additional charges to accrue;
         (d)   Notify law enforcement in the event that someone other than the
customer has accessed the customer’s account, causing additional charges to
accrue or accessing personal identifying information; and/or
         (e)   Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity
theft.
   (B)   In the event that an employee responsible for or involved in opening a
new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity
theft with respect to an application for a new account, the employee shall use
his or her discretion to determine whether the red flag or combination of red
flags suggests a threat of identity theft.
      (1)   If, in his or her discretion, the employee determines that identity
theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, the employee shall
immediately report the red flags to the Town Police Department.
      (2)   If, in his or her discretion, the employee deems that identity
theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red
flags, the employee shall convey this information to the Utility Billing
Supervisor, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action
is necessary.
      (3)   If the Utility Billing Supervisor in his or her discretion
determines that further action is necessary, one or more of the following
responses as determined to be appropriate by the Utility Billing Supervisor
shall be performed:
         (a)   Request additional identifying information from the applicant;
         (b)   Deny the application for the new account;
         (c)   Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; and/or
         (d)   Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity
theft.
(Ord. 041409, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 33.49 UPDATING THE PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Utility Department shall annually review and, as deemed necessary,
update the Identity Theft Prevention Program, along with any relevant red
flags, in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and
soundness of the Utility Department and its covered accounts from identity
theft.
   (B)   In so doing, the Utility Department shall consider the following
factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program:
      (1)   The Utility Department experiences with identity theft;
      (2)   Updates in methods of identity theft;
      (3)   Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent and mitigate
identity theft;
      (4)   Updates in the types of accounts that the Utility Department offers
or maintains; and
      (5)   Updates in service provider arrangements.
(Ord. 041409, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 33.50 PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Utility Billing Supervisor is responsible for oversight of the
program and for program implementation.
      (1)   The Utility Billing Supervisor is responsible for reviewing reports
prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with
recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of
the Utility Billing Supervisor, to address changing identity theft risks and to
identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts.
      (2)   Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted
to Town Manager.
   (B)   The Utility Billing Supervisor will report to Town Manager at least
annually on compliance with the red flag requirements.
   (C)   The report shall be due no later than December 31 each year and shall
address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues, including,
but not limited to:
      (1)   The effectiveness of the program policies and procedures in
addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered
accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts;
      (2)   Service provider arrangements;
      (3)   Significant incidents involving identity theft and management’s
response; and
      (4)   Recommendations for material changes to the Program.
   (D)   The Utility Billing Supervisor is responsible for providing training
to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account,
restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered
account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the Identity
Theft Prevention Program. The Utility Billing Supervisor shall exercise his or
her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary.
(Ord. 041409, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 33.51 OUTSIDE SERVICE PROVIDERS.
   In the event that the Utility Department engages a service provider to
perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the
Utility Billing Supervisor shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing
the arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that
the service provider’s activities are conducted in accordance with policies and
procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags
that may arise in the performance of the service provider’s activities, and
take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft.
(Ord. 041409, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 33.52 TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES.
   In the event that the Utility Department receives a notice of address
discrepancy, the employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the
purpose of providing the service or account sought by the consumer shall
perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be
appropriate by the employee: compare the information in the consumer report
with:
   (A)   Information the Utility Department obtains and uses to verify a
consumer’s identity in accordance with the requirements of the Customer
Information Program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1);
   (B)   Information the Utility Department maintains in its own records, such
as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account
records or tax records;
   (C)   Information the Utility Department obtains from third-party sources
that are deemed reliable by the relevant employee; and/or
   (D)   Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer.
(Ord. 041409, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 33.53 METHODS OF CONFIRMING CONSUMER ADDRESSES.
   The employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her
discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the
following methods:
   (A)   Verifying the address with the consumer;
   (B)   Reviewing the Utility Department records to verify the consumer’s
address;
   (C)   Verifying the address through third party sources; and/or
   (D)   Using other reasonable processes.
(Ord. 041409, passed 4-14-2009)
CHAPTER 34: TAX, FUNDS AND FINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Prepayment of certain expenses
   
34.02   Capital Improvement Account
   
34.03   Charges for access to public records
   
34.04   Deposit requirement for temporary signage
   
34.05   Permissible methods of payment to and from town
   
34.06   Tax abatement guidelines
   
34.07   Depository bank
   
34.08   Accounts payable in advance of formal allowance
   
34.09   Fee Schedule
General Town Funds
   
34.20   Police Equipment Fund
   
34.21   Promotion of Economic Development and Tourism Fund
   
34.22   Rainy Day Fund
   
34.23   Law Enforcement Investigation Aid Fund
   
34.24   Town Marketing Fund
   
34.25   Police Activity Fees Fund
   
34.26   Economic Development Income Tax Fund
   
34.27   Local Option Income Tax Fund
   
34.28   Consolidated Brookside Economic Development Area Fund
   
34.29   2012 Emerald Springs Bond Fund #473
   
34.30   2012 Bay Creek East Bond Fund #472
   
34.31   2012 Gateway Bond Fund #471
   
34.32   Sales Tax Fund
   
34.33   HRH Allocation Area Fund #273
   
34.34   LOIT Special Distribution Fund #257
   
34.35   Trash Collection Fund
   
34.36   HRH TIF Allocation Area Fund
   
34.37   Cathy Gardner Town Mascot Nonreverting Fund
   
34.38   Maintenance Obligation Nonreverting Fund
   
34.39   Fire Protection Territory Equipment Replacement Fund
   
34.40   ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Fund #176
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 PREPAYMENT OF CERTAIN EXPENSES.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town is hereby authorized to make claim
payments in advance of Council allowance for the following kinds of expenses:
      (1)   Property or services purchased or leased from:
         (a)   The United States government; or
         (b)   An agency or a political subdivision of the United States
government;
      (2)   License fees or permit fees;
      (3)   Insurance premiums;
      (4)   Utility payments or utility connection charges;
      (5)   Federal grant programs if:
         (a)   Advance funding is not prohibited; and
         (b)   The contracting party provides sufficient security for the
amount advanced;
      (6)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute;
      (7)   Maintenance agreements or service agreements;
      (8)   Lease agreements or rental agreements;
      (9)   Principal and interest payments on bonds and associated fees;
      (10)   Payroll and all employee funds withheld from his or her pay;
      (11)   State, federal, or county taxes;
      (12)   Expenses that must be paid because of emergency circumstances;
      (13)   Expenses described in any ordinance;
      (14)   Fuel bills;
      (15)   Any claim that will incur a late charge if its due date falls
before a scheduled Town Council meeting.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town is also hereby authorized to make
claim payments in advance of Council allowance in accordance with I.C. 5-11-10-
1.6, as amended. Those include:
      (1)   (a)   Advance payments to contractors to enable the contractors to
purchase materials needed for a public works project for the town, so long as
the amount does not exceed the lesser of the following:
            1.   Fifty percent of the entire cost of the contract.
            2.   Two million dollars.
         (b)   The solicitation for the public works contract providing for
advance payment for contractors must including the following information:
            1.   That the political subdivision will make advance payments to
contractors to enable contractors to purchase materials.
            2.   Any limitations on the amount of advance payments that will be
made.
            3.   Requirements for documentation relating to making advance
payments to contractors for materials.
            4.   Any other information about advance payment for materials the
political subdivision considers useful to contractors that make offers.
      (2)   (a)   Advance payments for goods or services before the goods are
delivered or services are completed, so long as the amount does not exceed the
lesser of the following:
            1.   Fifty percent of the entire cost of the contract.
            2.   Two million dollars.
         (b)   The Clerk-Treasurer and/or his or her designee must do all of
the following when advance payments are made:
            1.   Track prepayments by defining the prepayment on a purchase
order.
            2.   Create a prepayment invoice that is associated with the
purchase order.
            3.   Require insurance or a surety bond in the amount of the
prepayment if the amount of the prepayment is more than $150,000.
   (C)   Each payment of expenses under this section must be supported by a
fully itemized invoice or bill and certification by the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (D)   The Town Council shall review and allow the claim at its next regular
or special meeting following the preapproved payment of the expense.
(Ord. 91292, passed 9-9-1992; Ord. 091900A, passed 9-19-2000; Ord. 021324,
passed 2-13-2024)
§ 34.02 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT ACCOUNT.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer is directed to proceed forthwith, if he or she has
not already done so, to open a separate bank account for the town municipal
sewage works, to be designated the Capital Improvement Account, which account
shall be a sweep account and into which account shall be deposited all funds
received pursuant to sewer development agreements with prospective developers,
with the further provision that the funds be used solely for costs associated
with expanding the sewer treatment facilities.
   (B)   Any action taken by the Clerk-Treasurer prior to the effective date of
this section to accomplish the establishment of the aforementioned account is
hereby ratified and approved by the Town Council.
(Ord. 120500, passed 12-5-2000)
§ 34.03 CHARGES FOR ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS.
   Pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3, the Town Council hereby establishes that there
shall not be any charge for the first ten pages copied of any citizen’s request
for public records, and that for any like request in excess of ten pages, the
charge per page, including the first ten pages, shall be at $0.10 per copy.
(Ord. 050801B, passed 5-8-2001)
§ 34.04 DEPOSIT REQUIREMENT FOR TEMPORARY SIGNAGE.
   (A)   Any and all petitioners requesting a hearing before the Town Division
of the County Area Wide Board of Zoning Appeals shall post on the affected
property in a manner so as to achieve maximum visibility to the general public,
a temporary sign which shall notify the general public of the date, time,
location and subject matter of the hearing. The sign shall be posted no later
than ten days prior to the date of hearing.
   (B)   The Town Manager’s office shall provide to each petitioner a sign
sufficient to meet the requirements of division (A) above.
   (C)   Simultaneous with the distribution of the temporary notice sign as
described above by the Town Manager, the petitioner shall deposit with the Town
Clerk-Treasurer a $100 refundable deposit to ensure the temporary sign is
returned to the town in the same condition in which it is provided to each
petitioner, which deposit shall be refunded to the petitioner within ten
business days of the return of the temporary notice sign, in good condition, to
the office of the Town Manager.
(Ord. 031307, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 34.05 PERMISSIBLE METHODS OF PAYMENT TO AND FROM TOWN.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CREDIT CARD.
         (a)   Credit card;
         (b)   Debit card;
         (c)   Charge card; and/or
         (d)   Stored value card.
   (B)   Authorized financial instruments.
      (1)   Payments may be made to the municipality for any lawful purpose by
any of the following financial instruments:
         (a)   Cash;
         (b)   Check;
         (c)   Bank draft;
         (d)   Money order;
         (e)   Bank card or credit card;
         (f)   Electronic funds transfer;
         (g)   Wire funds or Automated Clearing House (ACH); or
         (h)   Any other financial instrument authorized by the fiscal body.
      (2)   Payments may be made to the municipality and its utilities for any
lawful purpose by any of the following financial instruments that the board of
the municipally owned utility authorizes for use:
         (a)   Cash;
         (b)   Check;
         (c)   Bank draft;
         (d)   Money order;
         (e)   Bank card or credit card;
         (f)   Electronic funds transfer;
         (g)   Wire funds or Automated Clearing House (ACH); or
         (h)   Any other financial instrument authorized by the fiscal body.
      (3)   If there is a charge to the municipality, or the municipally owned
utility for the use of a financial instrument, a fee may be collected equal to
the amount of the charge from the person who uses the financial instrument.
   (C)   Procedures for payments to be uniform.
      (1)   In accepting payments under the provisions of this subchapter and
I.C. 36-1-8-11, the procedure authorized for a particular type of payment shall
be uniformly applied to all payments of the same type.
      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to administer and enforce this
section and to promulgate written guidelines consistent with its purposes.
   (D)   Added authority related to acceptance of bank or credit cards.
      (1)   The municipality and its utilities may contract with any of the
following:
         (a)   A bank card or credit card vendor for acceptance of bank cards
or credit cards; and
         (b)   A third party on-line collection service for acceptance of bank
cards or credit cards.
      (2)   The municipality, its executive departments and its utilities may
pay any applicable bank card or credit card service charge associated with the
use of a bank card or credit card under an approved contractual agreement.
   (E)   Authorized financial instruments.
      (1)   Payments may be made by the municipality for any lawful purpose by
any of the following financial instruments:
         (a)   Cash;
         (b)   Check;
         (c)   Bank draft;
         (d)   Money order;
         (e)   Bank card or credit card;
         (f)   Electronic funds transfer;
         (g)   Wire funds or Automated Clearing House (ACH); or
         (h)   Any other financial instrument authorized by the fiscal body.
      (2)   Payments may be made by the municipality and its utilities for any
lawful purpose by any of the following financial instruments that the board of
the municipally owned utility authorizes for use:
         (a)   Cash;
         (b)   Check;
         (c)   Bank draft;
         (d)   Money order;
         (e)   Bank card or credit card;
         (f)   Electronic funds transfer;
         (g)   Wire funds or Automated Clearing House (ACH); or
         (h)   Any other financial instrument authorized by the fiscal body.
   (F)   Authorized financial instruments for payments by municipality.
      (1)   Payments may be made by Clerk-Treasurer for the municipality for
any lawful purpose by any of the following financial instruments:
         (a)   Warrant or negotiable order of withdrawal pursuant to the
provisions of I.C. 36-5-4 et seq., I.C. 5-11-10 et seq. and I.C. 5-13-5 et
seq.; or
         (b)   Bank card or credit card, provided that it is expressly
authorized by the Town Council, identifies the responsible officer for the
card, and expressly sets forth the approved uses for it.
      (2)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-13-5-5, transactions or payments may be made by
the Clerk-Treasurer for the municipality for any lawful purpose set forth in
this section by any of the following financial instruments:
         (a)   Electronic funds transfer; or
         (b)   Wire funds or automated clearing house (ACH).
      (3)   In making payments under division (F)(2) above, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall maintain adequate documentation of the transactions so that they may be
audited as provided by law, and the use of the instruments set forth in
division (F)(2) above shall be limited to the following purposes:
         (a)   Property or services purchased or leased from:
            1.   The United States government; or
            2.   An agency or a political subdivision of the United States
government.
         (b)   Insurance premiums;
         (c)   Utility payments or utility connection charges;
         (d)   Federal grant programs if:
            1.   Advance funding is not prohibited; and
            2.   The contracting party provides sufficient security for the
amount advanced.
         (e)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute;
         (f)   Lease agreements or rental agreement;
         (g)   Principal and interest payments on bonds;
         (h)   Payroll;
         (i)   State, federal or county taxes; and
         (j)   Lawful purposes that may be identified by the Clerk-Treasurer
and authorized in writing and not inconsistent with this section.
      (4)   In addition to making payments under divisions (F)(2) and (F)(3)
above, the Clerk- Treasurer shall maintain adequate documentation of the
transactions and those in possession of any credit card issued to the town
which documentation shall include, but not be limited to, the maintenance of a
log by the Clerk-Treasurer reflecting the time, date, credit card issuer, last
four digits of the credit card account for each credit card delivered into the
possession of a department head, and each department head shall maintain a
similar log of each individual whom he or she authorizes to possess and use the
credit card, a copy of which log shall be provided by the department head to
the Clerk-Treasurer on a monthly basis to enable the Clerk-Treasurer to be
audited as provided by law.
(Ord. 081208, passed 8-12-2008; Ord. 081109, passed 8-11-2009)
§ 34.06 TAX ABATEMENT GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) below are hereby adopted by the Town
Council as the guidelines and principles for consideration of a statutorily
compliant request for tax abatement and an application score sheet.
   (B)   Contemporaneous with the submission of a statutorily compliant request
for tax abatement, a petitioner shall submit to the Clerk-Treasurer of the town
a non-refundable application fee of $500 before any further consideration or
processing of the application will take place.
      (1)   (a)   Guidelines and principles for consideration of property tax
abatement in the town. These principles are factors and considerations for
evaluating application for economic revitalization areas and tax abatement, and
will be used in determining the length of abatement within each category.
            1.   Firms receiving tax abatement are expected to give local
construction firms and local suppliers of goods and services the opportunity to
do business whenever possible.
            2.   Firms that create a technology based product or service or use
advanced technology in manufacturing will be given a higher priority.
            3.   The number of jobs retained and/or created per dollar of
investment will be an important consideration.
            4.   The level of wages and benefits will be an important
consideration for all applications.
            5.   Projects that will require variances or special exceptions
will require additional review.
            6.   Adverse environmental impacts will negatively affect the
consideration of abatement.
            7.   Any need for additional public infrastructure or other
additional public support for the project will be considered in determining the
length of the abatement. Support of additional infrastructure will be
considered as a local incentive to the company applying.
            8.   The time period of depreciation of equipment will be
considered in the length of abatement for equipment.
            9.   Economic revitalization areas (ERAs) designated by the Town
Council for personal property will include a memorandum of understanding that
may provide for the repayment to the town of all or a portion of the tax
savings realized through the designation in the event that the ERA is
terminated because the property is removed from the town.
            10.   A limited tax abatement may be considered in a Tax Increment
Finance (TIF) District.
         (b)   Guidelines for consideration of property tax abatement in the
town.
            1.   Projects will be considered for abatement only if the proposed
new investment is at least $1,000,000 and development has not begun and/or
equipment has not been ordered.
            2.   In addition, if the applicant is not the owner, authorization
of the application must be obtained from the owner.
            3.   The length of the abatement period for real estate will be
considered by the guidelines in the categories below:
6 to 10 years Manufacturing/real estate improvement
6 to 10 years Technology based/real estate improvement
              Manufacturing equipment (tangible personal property used in the
3 to 7 years  direct production, manufacture, fabrication, assembly,
              extraction, mining, processing, refining or finishing of other
              tangible personal property)
              Research and development equipment (tangible personal property,
3 to 7 years  such as laboratory equipment, research and development equipment,
              computers and computer software, telecommunications equipment or
              testing equipment)
              Logistical distribution equipment (tangible personal property,
              such as racking equipment, scanning or coding equipment,
3 to 7 years  separators, conveyors, fork lifts or lifting equipment,
              transitional moving equipment, packaging equipment, sorting and
              picking equipment or software for technology used in logistical
              distribution)
              Information technology equipment (tangible personal property that
              consists of equipment, including software, used in the fields of
3 to 7 years  information processing, office automation, telecommunication
              facilities and networks, informatics, network administration,
              software development and fiber optics)
3 to 7 years  Office/real estate improvements
3 to 7 years  Retail/real estate improvements
 
      (2)   Industrial tax abatement application score sheet:
Industrial Tax Abatement Application Score Sheet
Company Name:                        Application Date:
Project Description:
PROJECT COMPOSITION:                                 POINTS
3 points possible - use only the applicable scenario with the
highest point value
                                                      SCORE
ACTIVITY DETAIL:
5 points possible - if more than one scenario applies, use only the scenario
with the
highest point value.
                                                            SCORE
TOTAL CAPITAL INVESTMENT:                                    POINTS
5 points possible
                                                            SCORE
         (a)   Projects score 15 or more points are those most beneficial to
the town. These projects will be considered for abatements up to seven years on
personal property and up to ten years on real estate improvements.
         (b)   Projects scoring ten points or more provide some benefit to the
town. These projects shall be considered for abatement up to three years on
personal property and up to six years on real estate improvements.
         (c)   Projects scoring less than ten points are not eligible for
abatement utilizing these criteria and scoring system.
         (d)   Before an abatement time period is approved, the applicant must
demonstrate that the depreciated life of the improvement is greater than the
abatement period.
         (e)   The applicant must also show the eventual realized tax benefit
to the community using the current tax rate.
(Ord. 071310, passed 7-13-2010)
§ 34.07 DEPOSITORY BANK.
   Ameriana Bank is hereby declared the depository bank for receipt of all town
funds, as required by state law.
(Ord. 081412D, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 34.08 ACCOUNTS PAYABLE IN ADVANCE OF FORMAL ALLOWANCE.
   (A)   Authorized expenses. The following shall constitute accounts payable
in advance of formal allowance in declared emergency situations. The Town
Council approves and authorizes payments to be made by the Clerk-Treasurer in
advance of formal allowance by the Town Council or other board or commission of
jurisdiction for the following types of expenses:
      (1)   Property or services purchased or leased from:
         (a)   The United States government;
         (b)   An agency or political subdivision of the United States
government;
         (c)   The government of the State of Indiana; or
         (d)   An agency or department or branch of the government of the State
of Indiana, including a body politic and corporate of the state;
      (2)   License fees or permit fees;
      (3)   Insurance premiums;
      (4)   Utility payments or utility connection charges;
      (5)   Federal grant programs if:
         (a)   Advance funding is not prohibited; or
         (b)   The contracting party provides sufficient security for the
amount advanced;
      (6)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute;
      (7)   Maintenance agreements or service agreements;
      (8)   Lease agreements or rental agreements;
      (9)   Principal and interest payments on bonds;
      (10)   Payroll;
      (11)   State, federal, or county taxes;
      (12)   Refunds, which are in consequence of a class or program
cancellation or for event or program deposits as may be made by the Parks and
Recreation Department;
      (13)   Vendor payments in support of recreation, or special events
programs;
      (14)   Payments from the Traffic Violation Agency Fund;
      (15)   Payments to such vendors or service providers, public or private,
which have provided services or goods to the municipality and for which a delay
of payment incurs penalties or late payment charges;
      (16)   Payments made from the Information and Communications Technology
Fund, provided such payments are lawful and made according to the purposes and
guidelines of the fund;
      (17)   Payments for the purchase of real estate; provided, that the
purchase and price has been duly authorized and approved by action of the
proper council, board or commission, and the purchase was executed in
compliance with I.C. 33-24, 36-1-10.5, 36-7, 36-9 or 36-10 and other relevant
laws;
      (18)   Expenditures for the following types of transfers or
contributions, provided, in all cases, that the transfer has been duly
authorized and approved by action of the proper council, board or commission:
         (a)   Transfers or temporary loans in consequence of cash flow needs;
         (b)   Transfer made from the Corporation General Fund to the Unsafe
Building Fund;
         (c)   Transfers or contributions of department cost shares for duly
reviewed, paid expenses incurred and posted to the following internal service/
agency funds: (1) Gasoline (payment) Fund, (2) Insurance (payment) Fund; and
the (3) Payroll Fund;
      (19)   Payments made for the purchase of road salt, or other supplies,
where a vendor requires payment to be remitted at time of delivery, provided
the proper department head determines such payment to be in the interest of
public safety;
      (20)   Payments made in consequence of or associated with a fund
development project or a promotional program related to economic development or
redevelopment, provided the project or program has been properly approved by
the appropriate board or commission;
      (21)   Payments made to employees' health savings accounts by the
municipality as employer; and
      (22)   Payments as may be identified in other sections of the
McCordsville Municipal Code.
   (B)   Voucher required. Each payment of expenses outlined in division (A) of
this section must be supported by a fully itemized accounts payable voucher.
   (C)   Other boards and commissions authorized. Unless the board having
jurisdiction over allowance of the accounts payable voucher elects otherwise,
the town fiscal officer may make payments in advance of formal allowance by the
board having jurisdiction, for those expenses outlined in division (A) of this
section, subject to the terms of this code.
   (D)   Timely review. The Town Council as town legislative body, or the board
having jurisdiction over allowance of the accounts payable voucher, shall
review and allow the payment at the body's or board's next regular or special
meeting following the preapproved payment of the expense.
(Ord. 031720, passed 3-17-2020)
§ 34.09 FEE SCHEDULE.
FEE TYPE AMOUNT
FEE TYPE                                AMOUNT
McCordsville Clerk-Treasurer
Hard copy 8.5" x 11" and 8.5" x 14"     $0.10/sheet per side
(B&W)
Hard copy 11" x 17" (B&W)               $0.20/sheet per side
Hard copy 8.5" x 11" and 8.5" x 14"     $0.25/sheet per side
(color)
Hard copy 11" x 17" (color)             $0.50/sheet per side
Duplicate permit                        $25
Returned check charge                   $30
Unpaid invoices (30+ days from pick-up) 10% of total invoice
Certified copies (I.C. 5-14-3-8)        $5
Mobile food vendors - one-year license  $25
Special events permit                   $150
Peddlers and itinerant merchants permit  
   10-day                            $50 + $10/individual using permit
   120-day                           $100 + $10/individual using permit
McCordsville Police Department
Certified copies of case/incident       $5
reports (I.C. 5-14-3-8)
Accident reports (I.C. 9-26-9-3)        $8
Body camera video (I.C. 5-14-3-8; 5-14- $150
3-2(k))
McCordsville Park Department
Town Hall park shelter                   
   Residents                         $100
   Non-residents                     $150
Town Hall community meeting room         
   Residents                         $100
   Non-residents                     $150
HOA meetings                             
   Residents                         $20
   Non-residents                     $20
BUILDING & DEMOLITION PERMITS
Single-family residence                 $650 + $0.04/sf
Two-family, row housing, apartments,    $350 + $0.10/sf/dwelling unit
and other multi- family dwellings
Addition, alteration, or remodel to a   $250 + $0.04/sf
residence
Accessory buildings, sheds, patios &    $300 (if 4 inspections)
decks                                   $225 (if 3 inspections)
(the construction is 200 sf (or more)   $150 (if 2 inspections)
and/or are attached to a permanent      $75 (if 1 inspection)
foundation
Commercial structure excluding multi-   $0.25/sf with a minimum fee of $700
family dwellings
Commercial structure alteration, or     $350 + $0.25/sf
remodel
Commercial structure addition           $0.25/sf with a minimum fee of $700
Hot tub (unless a simple plug & play    $75
which does not require a permit)
Pool (residential)                      $250
Pool (commercial)                       $375
Demolition permit (residential)         $125 for a primary structure;
                                        $75 for a secondary structure
Demolition permit (commercial)          $200 for a primary structure;
                                        $100 for a secondary structure
* The above include a certificate of occupancy and the required inspections
from the McCordsville Inspection Procedures
** Fees based on square footage will include the total square footage of the
project including: basements, garages, porches, all floors, etc.
SIGN PERMIT FEES
Temporary sign                          $105
Permanent sign                          $105 + $0.50/sf > 16 sf + $75
                                        electrical inspection
IMPROVEMENT LOCATION AND OTHER PERMITS
Improvement location permit general
fees (for all construction, additions,  $75 per inspection required & per
alterations not designed to be occupied structure
or other construction where a permit is
deemed necessary)
Telecommunication tower (new)           $705
Telecommunication tower (collocation/   $345
modification)
Parking lot (non-residential)           $330/acre
Temporary occupancy of a building or    $100
space
Temporary structure (residential)       $100
Temporary structure (commercial)        $150
Certificate of occupancy or completion
(normally covered under a BP or ILP,    $100
however if either of those are not
needed, this fee with apply)
Change of (in) use permit
(from a prior occupancy type or zoning  $150
classification)
Fence permit                            $40
Erosion control (residential)
(when construction requires erosion     $150
control measures)
Erosion control (commercial)
(when construction requires erosion     $250
control measures)
DOCUMENT & ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
Comp. Plan, Sub. Control Ord. & Zoning  $6/USB drive
Ord.
Permit re-submission (for revision),    $50
residential
Permit re-submission (for revision),    $300 + $0.04/sf
non-residential
PLANNING AND ZONING FEES
Development standards variance          $220 + $55/each additional
Major primary plat                      $550 + $20/lot
Major secondary plat                    $550 + $20/lot
Major re-plat                           $550 + $20/lot
Minor preliminary plat (1 lot           $220
subdivision)
Minor secondary plat (1 lot             $220
subdivision)
Minor re-plat                           $220
Vacation of plat/lot                    $110/lot
Vacation of right-of-way                $300
Time extension of plat                  $220
Amendment to commitments/covenants      $220
Re-plat to combine lots                 $110/lot
Rezone, all standard zoning districts   $550 + $20/acre
Rezone, residential less than 2 acres   $110/lot
Rezone, planned unit development        $2,200 + $20/acre
Planned unit development amendment      $1,100
Exception to non-conforming use         $330
regulation (BZA)
Exception to corridor overlay           $220 + $110/each additional
regulation (BZA)
Exception to subdivision control        $440 + $220/each additional
regulation (PC)
Special exception, residential          $165
Special exception, commercial/          $330
institutional/park/home occ.
Special exception, industrial/cellular  $440
facility
Special exception extension             $220
Development standard variance extension $165
Address assignment                      $60/address
Tech review increased                   $1,000
Comprehensive plan amendment            $770
Non-PUD zoning ordinance amendment      $550
Subdivision control ordinance amendment $550
RIGHT OF WAY PERMIT/PETITION FEES
Right of way miscellaneous (when not    $50
covered below)
Right of way new home
(includes sidewalk, driveway,           $175
excavation)
Right of way commercial sidewalk        $50
Residential sidewalk                    $50
Minor commercial driveway (<or = to     $50
24'width at throat)
Major commercial driveway (>24' width   $150
at throat)
Major commercial driveway w/passing     $200
blister and/ or turn lanes
Open street cuts                        $150/cut
Obstruction in ROW (trash receptacle,   $50/week
construction trailer, etc.)
Underground trenching, boring, or       $100/action
excavation
Pole lines                              $40/pole
                                        
 
 
McCordsville Engineering Department (see also adopted Sewer Fee Ordinance)
Sanitary sewer review                       $1/linear foot
Force main review                           $1/linear foot
Lift station review                         $1,300/lift station
Entrance review                             $550/entrance
Drainage review (Town Engineer or designee) $95/hour, contact Town Engineer
Sanitary sewer construction observation     $4/foot
Force main construction observation         $4/foot
Storm sewer construction observation        $1.75/foot
Entrance construction observation           $4/entrance
Lift station construction observation       $4,500/lift station
Sanitary sewer lateral inspection           $75
                                            
 
(Ord. 111423E, passed 12-12-2023; Ord. 121024B, passed 2-11-2025)
GENERAL TOWN FUNDS
§ 34.20 POLICE EQUIPMENT FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a special non-reverting fund to be known as
the Police Equipment Donation Fund. A special account is to be designated as a
Police Equipment Donation Fund.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town shall create a specifically designated
fund entitled the “Police Equipment Donation Fund”, into which all funds
donated for the purpose of purchasing police equipment shall be deposited.
   (C)   The funds deposited into the account may be used to purchase, rent or
lease equipment for any and all law enforcement purposes and/or activities.
   (D)   The generation of these funds may be created by whatever lawful means
that the Town Council and the Town Marshal deem reasonable and necessary.
   (E)   The disbursements of the monies shall be made only upon the agreement
of the Town Marshal, the Deputy Town Marshal, including a Reserve Deputy
Marshal, and the Police Commissioner or, in his or her absence, the President
or Vice President of the Town Council; however, no expenditures from this fund
may be made which would increase the town’s liability exposure or potentially
impact negatively the budget for the fiscal year in which the purchase was
made.
(Ord. 61392, passed 7-11-1992)
§ 34.21 PROMOTION OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND TOURISM FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby authorized the creation of a budget line item of the
budget of the town, to be designated as the Promotion of Economic Development
and Tourism Fund, in accordance with I.C. 36-7-2-7.
   (B)   There is hereby appropriated to the fund the amount of $1,000 for the
1997 fiscal year.
   (C)   There is authorized to be expended from the fund designated as the
Promotion of Economic Development and Tourism Fund expenses incurred by the
town which include, but are not necessarily limited to, those set forth below,
and to reimburse town officials for any of those expenses incurred in promoting
the best interest of the town:
      (1)   Food for any kind of meeting, including condiments;
      (2)   Town Hall refreshments;
      (3)   All paper goods, serving ware or other service needed for the
serving of food and/or refreshments at meetings;
      (4)   Decorations;
      (5)   Memorabilia;
      (6)   Awards;
      (7)   Beverages;
      (8)   Gifts;
      (9)   Travel and other associated expenses incurred in interviewing job
applicants;
      (10)   Travel and other associated expenses incurred in promoting
industrial, commercial and residential development;
      (11)   Travel and other associated expenses incurred in developing
relations with other units of government, business, industry and the general
public; and
      (12)   Any other expense, either civic or governmental in nature, deemed
by the Town Council to be in the best interest of the town and associated with
promotion of either tourism and/or economic development.
(Ord. 051097, passed 5-10-1997; Ord. 091305D, passed 9-13-2005)
§ 34.22 RAINY DAY FUND.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-8-5.1, there is hereby ordained the
establishment of a fund to be entitled a Rainy Day Fund.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-8-5, all unused and unencumbered balances
remaining in any fund may be transferred to the Rainy Day Fund.
   (C)   In any fiscal year, no more than 10% of the town’s annual budget
adopted under I.C. 6-1.1-17 may be transferred to the Rainy Day Fund.
(Ord. 081004A, passed 8-10-2004)
§ 34.23 LAW ENFORCEMENT INVESTIGATION AID FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a special non-reverting fund to be known
as the Law Enforcement Investigation Aid Fund. Whenever the Town Marshal and/or
his or her designees seize funds under I.C. 34-24-1-1 or 21 U.S.C. § 881, the
proceeds shall be immediately turned over to the Clerk-Treasurer for deposit
into the Law Enforcement Investigation Aid Fund.
   (B)   Disposition of proceeds forfeited property pursuant to I.C. 34-24-1-
5 shall be deposited into the general fund of the unit employing the law
enforcement officers that seized the property and excess funds, herein defined
as the Town Marshal and/or his or her designees expense for investigation,
shall be transferred to the Treasurer of the state for deposit in the common
school fund.
   (C)   In accordance with I.C. 34-24-1-9, proceeds forfeited under 18 U.S.C.
§ 981(e), 19 U.S.C. § 1616a or 21 U.S.C. § 881(e) and any related regulations
adopted by the United States Department of Justice shall be deposited into the
non-reverting fund known as the Law Enforcement Investigation Aid Fund.
   (D)   Proceeds deposited in the fund known as the Law Enforcement
Investigation Aid Fund may only be expended with the approval of the Town
Council President of the town, for the benefit of the Town Police Department,
for purposes consistent with federal laws and regulations.
(Ord. 071106B, passed 7-11-2006)
§ 34.24 TOWN MARKETING FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a special non-reverting fund to be known as
the Town Marketing Fund, and a special account therein, designated the Town
Marketing Fund Account.
   (B)   The town staff, MRDC and the Economic Development Commission of the
town, are hereby authorized to solicit contributions to the fund from members
of the general public and the corporate and business community.
   (C)   The funds or the monies within the non-reverting fund may be paid for
the following expenditures:
      (1)   Space rental;
      (2)   Catering;
      (3)   Paper goods;
      (4)   Invitations;
      (5)   Marketing materials;
      (6)   Promotional items;
      (7)   Banners and other similar materials; and
      (8)   Any other expenditure authorized by the Town Council.
(Ord. 111307F, passed 11-13-2007)
§ 34.25 POLICE ACTIVITY FEES FUND.
   (A)   All monies collected under this section will be deposited in to the
Police Activity Fees Fund. Monies in the Police Activity Fees Fund shall be
budgeted, appropriated as other town monies, but may only be budgeted,
appropriated and expended for purposes which, in the determination of the Chief
of Police and the Town Council, are reasonably related to training, vehicle
crash prevention, supplies, police equipment or to subsidize the general
operating budget of the Town Police Department.
   (B)   The following reasonable fees are established, to be paid by the
requesting party, not later than the time of delivery of each of these services
or each of these documents described.
      (1)   Each page of any document which is a public record under I.C. 5-14-
3-2 which is not exempted from disclosure shall be charged at the rate of $0.10
per page in excess of ten pages with the first ten pages to be at no charge.
      (2)   (a)   Whenever any person requests a copy of any vehicle crash
report, a fee of $5 shall be charged for each report furnished by the
Department; however, nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
Department from accepting additional monies for each report furnished by an
independent contractor of the Police Department.
         (b)   All the fees collected shall be deposited in the manner provided
by law.
      (3)   Whenever any person requests a copy of a disclosable police case
report/incident report, or supplemental report thereof, the following fee
schedule shall apply.
         (a)   Victim of domestic violence, when the report is in regards to
the abusive act: no fee.
         (b)   All other persons, not listed in division (B)(3)(a) above, shall
be charged a fee of $5.
      (4)   Pursuant to I.C. 35-47-2-3(b), the following fee schedule shall
apply for the preparation of an application for handgun license.
         (a)   From a person applying for a four-year handgun license, a $10
application fee, $5 of which shall be refunded if the license is not issued.
         (b)   From a person applying for a lifetime handgun license who does
not currently possess a valid state handgun license, a $50 application fee, $30
of which shall be refunded if the license is not issued.
         (c)   From a person applying for a lifetime license who currently
possesses a valid state handgun license, a $40 application fee, $30 of which
shall be refunded if the license is not issued.
         (d)   From a person applying for a four-year hunting and target
license, a $10 application fee, $5 of which shall be refunded if the license is
not issued.
         (e)   From a person applying for a lifetime hunting and target license
who does not currently possess a valid state hunting and target license, a $50
application fee, $30 of which shall be refunded if the license is not issued.
         (f)   From a person applying for a lifetime hunting and target license
who currently possesses a valid state hunting and target license, a $40
application fee, $30 of which shall be refunded if the license is not issued.
         (g)   From a person that is a firearms dealer, retired police officer
or a retired corrections officer, the fees shall be exempt.
      (5)   Whenever any person, not residing within the corporate limits of
the town, requests to be fingerprinted, a fee of $10 shall be charged for each
fingerprint card required. The person making the request shall provide, at his
or her expense, the fingerprint card needed to fulfill the request.
      (6)   Whenever any person, not residing within the corporate limits of
the town, requesting a vehicle identification number (VIN) inspection pursuant
to I.C. 9-17-2-12, shall be charged an inspection fee not exceeding the fee
listed in I.C. 9-24-4-2 or $5, whichever is less.
      (7)   Whenever any person, not residing within the corporate limits of
the town, requesting a hull identification number (HIN) inspection shall be
charged an inspection fee of $5.
      (8)   Whenever any person requests a copy of a disclosable video
recording, in the possession of the Town Police Department, the following
reasonable fee schedule shall apply.
         (a)   Those video recordings that are reproduced by the Town Police
Department shall have a fee of $10 per reproduction.
         (b)   Those video recordings requiring reproduction by an outside
resource/vendor shall have a fee of $2, plus the cost of the outside resource/
vendor, per reproduction.
      (9)   Whenever any person requests a copy of a disclosable audio
recording or compact disc (CD), in the possession of the Town Police
Department, the following reasonable fee schedule shall apply.
         (a)   Those audio recordings that are reproduced by the Town Police
Department shall have a fee of $10 per reproduction.
         (b)   Those audio recordings requiring reproduction by an outside
resource/vendor shall have a fee of $2, plus the cost of the outside resource/
vendor, per reproduction.
      (10)   Whenever any person requests copy(ies) of a disclosable picture
(s), in the possession of the Town Police Department, the following reasonable
fee schedule shall apply.
         (a)   The digital still photographs that are stored by the Town Police
Department shall have a fee of $10 per reproduction.
         (b)   Those digital still photographs requiring reproduction by an
outside resource/vendor shall have a fee of $2, plus the cost of the outside
resource/vendor, per reproduction.
      (11)   Whenever any person requests a limited criminal history, in
accordance with I.C. 10-13-3-27, it shall have a fee of $3 per check.
      (12)   If an individual wishes to have any records certified by the Town
Clerk-Treasurer, or any employee of the town, there shall be a $5 charge for
the certification in addition to the charges, if any, set forth in the above
divisions.
   (C)   The fees outlined in this section shall be subject to annual review by
the Town Council, and may be amended or changed by resolution with a schedule
of the fees and charges to be newly reproduced and displayed within the offices
of the Town Police Department and the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 071409, passed 7-14-2009)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 9-21-9-5 expired July 1, 2024 by P.L.198-2016, Sec. 433.
§ 34.26 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCOME TAX FUND.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town is hereby directed to create within
the funds for the town a new fund entitled the Economic Development Income Tax
Fund, into which all distributions of monies collected through CEDIT are to be
deposited and out of which all disbursements are to be made.
   (B)   Funds received by the Clerk-Treasurer and deposited into the Economic
Development Income Tax Fund may be used for the following purposes:
      (1)   For paying, notwithstanding any other law, under a written
agreement all or a part of the interest owed by a private developer or user on
a loan extended by a financial institution or other lender to the developer or
user if the proceeds of the loan are to be used to finance an economic
development project;
      (2)   For the retirement of bonds under I.C. 6-3.5-7-14 for economic
development projects;
      (3)   For leases under I.C. 6-3.5-7-21 or for leases or bonds entered
into or issued prior to the date the economic development income tax was
imposed if the purpose of the lease or bonds would have qualified as a purpose
at the time the lease was entered into or the bonds were issued;
      (4)   The construction or acquisition of, or remedial action with respect
to, a capital project for which the unit is empowered to issue general
obligation bonds or establish a fund under any statute listed in I.C. 6-1.1-
18.5-9.8;
      (5)   The retirement of bonds issued under any provision of state law for
a capital project;
      (6)   The payment of lease rentals under statute for a capital project;
      (7)   Contract payments to a non-profit corporation whose primary
corporate purpose is to assist government in planning and implementing economic
development projects;
      (8)   Operating expenses of a governmental entity that plans or
implements economic development projects;
      (9)   To the extent not otherwise allowed under I.C. 6-3.5-6-7, funding
substance removal or remedial action in a designated unit;
      (10)   Funding of a revolving fund established under I.C. 5-1-14-14;
      (11)   For any lawful purpose for which money in any of its other funds
may be used;
      (12)   For making transfers required by I.C. 36-7.5-4-2; and/or
      (13)   For a regional venture capital fund established under I.C. 6-3.5-
7-13.5 or a local venture capital fund established under I.C. 6-3.5-7-13.6.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, an ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROJECT is
deemed as any project that:
      (1)   The Town Council determines will:
         (a)   Promote significant opportunities for the gainful employment of
its citizens;
         (b)   Attract a major new business enterprise to the unit; or
         (c)   Retain or expand a significant business enterprise within the
unit; and
      (2)   Involves an expenditure for:
         (a)   The acquisition of land;
         (b)   Interests in land;
         (c)   Site improvements;
         (d)   Infrastructure improvements;
         (e)   Buildings;
         (f)   Structures;
         (g)   Rehabilitation, renovation and enlargement of buildings and
structures;
         (h)   Machinery;
         (i)   Equipment;
         (j)   Furnishings;
         (k)   Facilities;
         (l)   Administrative expenses associated with such a project,
including contract payments authorized under I.C. 6-3.5-7-13(b)(2)(D);
         (m)   Operating expenses authorized under I.C. 6-3.5-7-13.1(b)(2)(E);
or
         (n)   To the extent not otherwise allowed, substance removal or
remedial action in a designated unit; or any combination of these.
   (D)   Funds deposited into and expensed from the Economic Development Income
Tax Fund are hereby appropriated as: appropriation 218.00.123 CEDIT Revenue
Appropriation 218.01.304 Consultants Appropriation 218.01.999 Non-Appropriated
Expense.
(Ord. 041310A, passed - -2010)
Editor’s notes:
   I.C. 6-3.5-6-7 was repealed by P.L. 243-2015, Sec. 1, effective January 1,
2017.
   I.C. 6-3.5-7-13(b)(2)(D), I.C. 6-3.5-7-13.1(b)(2)(E), I.C. 6-3.5-7-13.5,
I.C. 6-3.5-7-13.6, I.C.
    6-3.5-7-14 and I.C. 6-3.5-7-21 were repealed by P.L. 243-2015, Sec. 8,
effective January 1, 2017.
§ 34.27 LOCAL OPTION INCOME TAX FUND.
   As required by I.C. 6-3.5-1.1-25, there is hereby created a Local Option
Income Tax Fund, to be known as the LOIT Fund, for purposes of receiving
distributions from the County Auditor, and out of which appropriations may be
made according to law for public safety purposes.
(Ord. 020811A, passed 2-8-2011)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 6-3.5-1.1-25 was repealed by P.L. 243-2015, Sec. 1, effective January
1, 2017.
§ 34.28 CONSOLIDATED BROOKSIDE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AREA FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a special non-reverting fund to be known as
the “Consolidated Brookside Economic Development Area Fund” and designated as
fund #271 within the books and records of the town.
   (B)   The funds or monies within said non-reverting fund may be paid for the
following expenditures:
      (1)   Pay the principal of and interest on any obligations payable solely
from allocated tax proceeds, which are incurred by the redevelopment district
for the purpose of financing or refinancing the redevelopment of the allocation
area;
      (2)   Establish, augment or restore the debt service reserve for bonds
payable solely or in part from allocated tax proceeds in the allocation area;
      (3)   Pay the principal of and interest on bonds payable from allocated
tax proceeds in the allocation area and from any special tax levied pursuant to
I.C. 36-7-14-27 and all acts amendatory or supplemental thereto;
      (4)   Pay the principal of an interest on bonds issued by the town or the
Town Redevelopment Commission to pay for local public improvements that are
physically located in or physically connected to the allocation area;
      (5)   Pay premiums on the redemption before maturity of bonds payable
solely or in part from allocated tax proceeds in the allocated area;
      (6)   Make payments on leases payable from allocated tax proceeds in the
allocation area as provided under I.C. 36-7-14-25.2 and all acts amendatory or
supplemental thereto;
      (7)   Reimburse the town and/or the Town Redevelopment Commission for
expenditures made by it for local public improvements (which include buildings,
parking facilities and other items described in I.C. 36-7-14-25.1(a) and all
acts amendatory or supplemental thereto) that are physically located in or
physically connected to the allocation area; and
      (8)   Reimburse the town and/or the Town Redevelopment Commission for
rentals paid by it for a building or parking facility that is physically
located in or physically connected to the allocation area under any lease
entered into in accordance with I.C. 36-1-10 and all acts amendatory or
supplemental thereto.
(Ord. 051413B, passed 5-14-2013)
§ 34.29 2012 EMERALD SPRINGS BOND FUND #473.
   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town is hereby directed to take all necessary
steps to create a non- reverting fund to be entitled “2012 Emerald Springs Bond
Fund #473” with the funds therein to be solely utilized for the purposes
designated.
(Ord. 081412G, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 34.30 2012 BAY CREEK EAST BOND FUND #472.
   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town is hereby directed to take all necessary
steps to create a non- reverting fund to be entitled “2012 Bay Creek East Bond
Fund #472” with the funds therein to be solely utilized for the purposes
designated.
(Ord. 081412F, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 34.31 2012 GATEWAY BOND FUND #471.
   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town is hereby directed to take all necessary
steps to create a non- reverting fund to be entitled “2012 Gateway Bond Fund
#471” with the funds therein to be solely utilized for the purposes designated.
(Ord. 081412E, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 34.32 SALES TAX FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a special nonreverting fund to be known as the
McCordsville Sales Tax Fund into which is deposited funds generated by the sale
of stickers to citizens of the town, authorizing them to have additional trash
and heavy trash picked up by the contractual provider of that service and a
special account therein designated as the McCordsville Sales Tax Fund Account
designated as account number 225.
   (B)   The funds or monies within this nonreverting fund may be paid for the
following expenditures:
      (1)   The payment of any Indiana sales tax required due to the sale of
the aforementioned stickers.
      (2)   Such other purposes and expenditures as deemed appropriate by the
Town Council to benefit the health, welfare and enhanced lifestyle of the
citizens of the town.
(Ord. 021015, passed 2-10-2015; Ord. 051215A, passed 5-12-2015)
§ 34.33 HRH ALLOCATION AREA FUND #273.
   (A)   There is hereby created a special nonreverting fund to be known as the
McCordsville HRH Allocation Area Fund composed of Parcel No. 30-01-23-801-
000.001-018 and designated as fund number 273 within the books and records of
the town.
   (B)   The funds or monies within this nonreverting fund may be paid for the
following expenditures:
      (1)   Pay the principal of and interest on any obligations payable solely
from allocated tax proceeds, which are incurred by the redevelopment district
for the purpose of financing or refinancing the redevelopment of the allocation
area.
      (2)   Establish, augment, or restore the debt service reserve for bonds
payable solely or in part from allocated tax proceeds in the allocation area.
      (3)   Pay the principal of and interest on bonds payable from allocated
tax proceeds in the allocation area and from any special tax levied pursuant to
I.C. 36-7-14-27 and all acts amendatory or supplemental thereto.
      (4)   Pay the principal of and interest on bonds issued by the town or
the Redevelopment Commission to pay for local public improvements that are
physically located in or physically connected to the allocation area.
      (5)   Pay premiums on the redemption before maturity of bonds payable
solely or in part from allocated tax proceeds in the allocated area.
      (6)   Make payments on leases payable from allocated tax proceeds in the
allocation area as provided under I.C. 36-7-14-25.2 and all acts amendatory or
supplemental thereto.
      (7)   Reimburse the town and/or the Redevelopment Commission for
expenditures made by it for local public improvements (which include buildings,
parking facilities and other items described in I.C. 36-7-14-25.1(a) and all
acts amendatory or supplemental thereto) that are physically located in or
physically connected to the allocation area.
      (8)   Reimburse the town and/or the Redevelopment Commission for rentals
paid by it for a building or parking facility that is physically located in or
physically connected to the allocation area under any lease entered into in
accordance with I.C. 36-1-10 and all acts amendatory or supplemental thereto.
(Ord. 120914A, passed 12-9-2014)
§ 34.34 LOIT SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION FUND #257.
   (A)   There is hereby created a special nonreverting fund to be known as the
McCordsville LOIT Special Distribution Fund #257 into which is to be deposited
all funds received from the Hancock County trust account distributed to Hancock
County pursuant to I.C. 6-3.6-9-17.
   (B)   From this nonreverting fund, the following expenditures may be paid:
      (1)   Engineering;
      (2)   Land acquisition;
      (3)   Construction, resurfacing, maintenance, restoration or
rehabilitation of both local and arterial road and street systems;
      (4)   The payment of principal and interest on bonds sold primarily to
finance road, street, or thoroughfare projects;
      (5)   Any local cost required to undertake a recreational or reservoir
road project under I.C. 8-23-5;
      (6)   The purchase, rental, or repair of highway equipment;
      (7)   Providing a match for a grant from the local road and bridge
matching grant fund under I.C. 8-22-3-1; or
      (8)   Deposited into the rainy day fund to be appropriated.
(Ord. 051016, passed 5-10-2016)
§ 34.35 TRASH COLLECTION FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Trash Collection Fund.
   (B)   The user fees collected in accordance with §
51.03 are to be deposited in said fund with the revenues retained, accumulated,
and used for improvements of the trash collection utility system as permitted
by I.C. 36-9-23 and as directed by the Town Council.
(Ord. 111318B, passed 11-13-2018)
§ 34.36 HRH TIF ALLOCATION AREA FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a special non-reverting fund to be known as
the HRH TIF Allocation Area Fund within the books and records of the Town of
McCordsville, Indiana.
   (B)   The funds or monies within the non-reverting fund may be paid for the
following expenditures within or benefiting the Brookside TIF District/
Brookside Economic Development Area:
      (1)   Construct or reconstruct road and street improvements, including,
but not limited to, shoulders, curbs, and bridge improvements.
      (2)   Construct or reconstruct stormwater improvements and ditch
improvements.
      (3)   Construct or reconstruct sanitary sewer infrastructure
improvements.
      (4)   Construct or reconstruct water infrastructure improvements.
      (5)   Construct or reconstruct sidewalk improvements.
      (6)   Construct or reconstruct traffic signal improvements.
      (7)   Construct or reconstruct site improvements, including landscape
buffers.
      (8)   Construct or reconstruct retention ponds, ditches, or related
requirements.
      (9)   Construct or reconstruct utility relocation.
      (10)   Construct or reconstruct multiuse pathways.
      (11)   Construct, reconstruct or acquire public park improvements and
recreational equipment.
      (12)   Construct or reconstruct transportation enhancement projects.
      (13)   Construct, reconstruct or acquire public safety equipment and
structures.
      (14)   Construct or reconstruct street lighting.
      (15)   Acquire real estate.
      (16)   Construct or reconstruct any additional capital project amended
into the Economic Development Plan for the Brookside Economic Development Area.
(Ord. 111219C, passed 11-12-2019)
§ 34.37 CATHY GARDNER TOWN MASCOT NONREVERTING FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a special nonreverting fund to be known as the
Cathy Gardner Town Mascot Nonreverting Fund, into which are to be deposited
contributions and donations from the public and such funds as the Town Council
of the Town of McCordsville, Indiana, sees fit to contribute for the ongoing
care and maintenance of the current, and any future town mascots, the fund to
be Number 276.
   (B)   The funds or monies within nonreverting fund may be expended for the
care and maintenance of the current, and any future town mascot, and for such
other purposes and expenditures as deemed appropriate by the Town Council.
(Ord. 121019C, passed 12-10-2019)
§ 34.38 MAINTENANCE OBLIGATION NONREVERTING FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Maintenance Obligation Nonreverting Fund
designated as Fund No. 277 into which are to be deposited any and all cash
maintenance payments required to satisfy a developer's maintenance bond
obligations pursuant to the Code of Ordinances of McCordsville, Indiana.
   (B)   The funds or monies within the nonreverting fund may be expended to
repair, replace, install, and maintain any and all infrastructure that requires
such services within three years of the deposit of the monies. Upon the
expiration of three years from the deposit of the monies into the nonreverting
fund, all remaining monies shall be returned to the developer or their
designated agent.
(Ord. 041420, passed 4-14-2020)
§ 34.39 FIRE PROTECTION TERRITORY EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT FUND.
   (A)   The need now exists forthe reestablishment of a Fire Protection
Territory Equipment Replacement Fund for the Vernon Township Fire Protection
Territory for all uses as set out in I.C. 36-8-19-8.5.
   (B)   The Town Council will adhere to the provisions of I.C. 36-8-14.4 and
36-8-19-18.5. The Vernon Township Fire Protection Territory Equipment
Replacement Fund will not exceed $0.0333 per $100 of assessed valuation. The
tax rate will be levied beginning with taxes due and payable in 2023 and
thereafter, continuing until reduced or rescinded.
   (C)   Vernon Township is the provider unit of the Vernon Township Fire
Protection Territory. The other participating units are the Town of Fortville
and the Town of McCordsville, both of Hancock County, as provider unit, is
authorized to reestablish this fund rate.
(Ord. 062320, passed 6-23-2020; Ord. 041222C, passed 4-12-2022)
§ 34.40 ARP CORONAVIRUS LOCAL FISCAL RECOVERY FUND #176.
   (A)   There is hereby created a special nonreverting fund to be known as the
ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Fund No. 176.
   (B)   There shall be deposited into the fund any and all monies received
from either the federal or state government pursuant to the provisions of the
American Rescue Plan Act of 2021.
   (C)   Expenditures may be made from Fund No. 176 for expenditures incurred
by the Town of McCordsville, Indiana by December 31, 2024 for any of the
following categories:
      (1)   To respond to the public health emergency with respect to the
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) or its negative economic impact, including
assistance to households, small businesses and nonprofits, or to aid the
impacted industries, such as tourism, travel, and hospitality.
      (2)   To respond to workers performing essential work during the COVID-19
public health emergency by providing premium pay to eligible workers of
McCordsville, Indiana that are performing such essential work or by providing
grants to eligible employers that have eligible workers who perform essential
work.
      (3)   For the provision of government services to the extent of the
reduction in revenue of McCordsville, Indiana due to the COVID-19 public health
emergency relative to revenues collected in the most recent full fiscal year of
McCordsville, Indiana.
      (4)   To make necessary investments in the water, sewer, or broadband
infrastructure.
(Ord. 051121, passed 5-11-2021)
CHAPTER 35: TOWN ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
35.01   Department of Economic Development; Economic Development Commission
   
35.02   Department of Parks and Recreation
   
35.03   Department of Redevelopment
   
35.04   Advisory Planning Department
   
35.05   Police Reserve Units
   
35.06   Police Pension Board
   
35.07   Police Department
   
35.08   Police Chief
   
35.09   Public Works Commission
§ 35.01 DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT; ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-12-4, the Council finds it necessary to create a
body with the powers to finance economic development or pollution control
facilities under the Act (I.C. 36-7-12-18), and hereby establishes the Town
Department of Economic Development (the “Department”).
   (B)   The Department is established to exercise the powers set forth in the
Act or otherwise granted by law.
   (C)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-12-5(d), the Department will be controlled by a
Board of three members, to be known as the “Town of McCordsville Economic
Development Commission” (the “Commission”), consisting of three members, one
member to be selected by the Town Council President, one member to be nominated
by the County Council and one member to be nominated by the Town Council, all
of which shall be appointed by the Town Council President.
(Ord. 060199, passed 6-1-1999)
§ 35.02 DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
   (A)   The Town Council, as the legislative body of the town, hereby creates
a Department of Parks and Recreation, to be established under the name and
style of the “Town of McCordsville Department of Parks and Recreation”.
   (B)   The territorial jurisdiction of the Department of Parks and Recreation
shall be coincident with the incorporated limits of the town as currently
constituted, or as they may hereafter be constituted.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   In accordance with I.C. 36-10-3-4, the Board shall consist
of five members total.
         (b)   Four members shall be appointed by the Town Council, unless
otherwise amended by state statute. The member shall be appointed on the basis
of their interest in and knowledge of parks and recreation. Not more than two
members may be affiliated with the same political party, unless the Town
Council, by a majority vote, waives this requirement due to the absence of
persons who are willing to serve on the town Board and who satisfy any or all
of the requirements.
         (c)   One member shall be designated by the governing body of the
school corporation.
         (d)   Members of the Board must be residents of the McCordsville Parks
District.
      (2)   All terms shall be for four years, or as amended by state statute.
All terms shall expire on the first Monday in January of the appropriate year.
(Ord. 120799B, passed - -1999; Ord. 010924, passed 2-13-2024)
§ 35.03 DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The Town Council now deems it to be in the best interest of the town
and its citizens to afford a maximum opportunity for rehabilitation,
redevelopment or economic development of areas by private enterprise and the
town by establishing a Department of Redevelopment.
   (B)   The Town Council establishes the Department of Redevelopment of the
town. The Department will be controlled by a Board of five members, to be known
as the “McCordsville Redevelopment Commission”.
   (C)   Pursuant to the Act, all of the territory within the corporate
boundaries of the town as existed or as amended will be a taxing district to be
known as the “Redevelopment District of McCordsville” for the purpose of
levying and collecting special benefit taxes for redevelopment purposes as
provided in the Act. The Town Council finds and determines that all of the
taxable property within this special taxing district will be considered to be
benefitted by the redevelopment projects and economic development projects
carried out under the Act to the extent of the special taxes levied under the
Act.
   (D)   The President of the Town Council shall appoint three of the five
members.
(Ord. 031104, passed 3-11-2004)
§ 35.04 ADVISORY PLANNING DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-202, the town hereby adopts the Advisory
Planning Law, being I.C. 36-7-4, and establishes the Town Planning Department,
which shall include the Town Advisory Plan Commission, the Town Board of Zoning
Appeals and the necessary administrative officers and staff to implement and
enforce the law of the state regarding land use, and all ordinances adopted by
the town in association therewith.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-207, the representation on the Town Advisory
Plan Commission is as follows:
      (1)   Three persons appointed by the Town Council, who must be elected or
appointed town officials or employees of the town; and
      (2)   Four citizen members appointed by the Town Council President, of
whom no more than two may be of the same political party.
   (C)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-216, each citizen member shall be appointed,
because of the member’s knowledge and experience in community affairs, the
member’s awareness of the social, economic, agricultural and industrial
problems of the area, and the member’s interest in the development and
integration of the area. A citizen member may not hold any other elected or
appointed office in government of the town, the county nor the state, and must
be a resident of the jurisdictional area of the Town Advisory Plan Commission.
   (D)   The term of office of a member, who is appointed from the membership
of the Town Council, shall be coextensive with the member’s term of office on
the Council. The term of all other appointed members shall be four years. A
member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualifies. A
member vacates his or her position when he or she fails to meet the residency
requirements of this section, resigns or, if he or she no longer holds the
elected office of Town Council member, or is no longer an employee of the town.
A vacancy shall be filled by the appointing authority for the balance of the
term. Notwithstanding the above, the initial appointments to the Town Advisory
Plan Commission by the Town Council President shall be for terms of one year,
two years, three years and four years, respectively, and as designated by the
Town Council President at the time of appointment with each subsequent term
thereafter to be for a period of four years. A member is eligible for
reappointment.
   (E)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-902, the membership of the Town Board of
Zoning Appeals shall consist of three citizen members, who shall be appointed
by the Town Council President, one of whom must be a member of the Town
Advisory Plan Commission, and two of whom must not be members of the Town
Advisory Plan Commission. One citizen member shall be appointed by the Town
Council, who must not be a member of the Town Advisory Plan Commission. One
member shall be appointed by the Town Advisory Plan Commission from the citizen
membership of the Town Advisory Plan Commission.
   (F)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-906, the initial term of the members of the
Town Board of Zoning Appeals shall be staggered so that one member’s term is
for one year, one member’s term is for two years, one member’s term is for
three years and two members’ terms are for four years, as so designated by the
original appointing person or entity. When an initial term of offices expires,
each new appointment is for a term of four years. Each initial term shall
expire, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-906, on the first Monday of January of the
first, second, third or fourth year respectively after the year of the member’s
appointment. A member of the Town Board of Zoning Appeals serves until his or
her successor is appointed and qualified. A member is eligible for
reappointment.
   (G)   The Town Planning Department shall be operated utilizing monies
appropriated by the Town Council.
(Ord. 110910, passed 11-9-2010)
§ 35.05 POLICE RESERVE UNITS.
   (A)   Establishing police reserve units and other matters pertaining
thereto.
      (1)   Police reserves unit established; ratification of prior actions.
There is hereby established, pursuant to I.C. 36-8-3-20, a police reserve unit
under the office of the Town Marshal. Police reserve officers shall be
volunteers, and shall be known as reserve deputy marshals. The number of
reserve deputy marshals shall not exceed ten. Pursuant to the powers of the
Town Council under I.C. 36-1-4-16, all actions heretofore taken by any officer
of the town in establishing or administering a police reserve unit, and all
actions taken by any member of the unit, are hereby fully ratified, validated
and legalized.
      (2)   Reserve deputy marshal; status; direction. Reserve deputy marshals
shall not be considered full/part-time deputy marshals, but shall have all
police powers of full/part-time deputy marshals, except as otherwise limited by
division (A)(3) below. Reserve deputy marshals shall at all times be under the
direction of the Town Marshal and members of the Town Council, and shall be
subordinate to and under the command of the Town Marshal and the Town Council,
any full/part-time deputy marshal or any other regular law enforcement officer
performing law enforcement functions within the town.
      (3)   Reserve deputy marshals, rules and procedures. The Town Marshal
shall be empowered to propose rules and regulations for the administration and
conduct of the police reserve unit and reserve deputy marshals, including
specification and/or limitation or their powers and duties, and assignment of
individual duties, subject to approval by the Town Council. The Town Marshal
may also prescribe training requirements and a reasonable probationary period
to be fulfilled before a person is appointed to full membership in the police
reserves unit; however, the following limitation applies: no reserve deputy
marshal shall exercise any law enforcement powers, nor wear a police badge or
uniform until having been duly sworn as a law enforcement officer by the Town
Marshal, Clerk-Treasurer or other official empowered to administer official
oaths.
      (4)   Compensation of reserve deputy marshals; limitation. The Town
Marshal is authorized to and shall submit to the Town Council, from time to
time, his or her proposal as to the manner of compensation, if any at all, for
reserve deputy marshals, which shall be subject to Town Council approval;
however, the Town Council shall in no event approve any form of compensation
other than that authorized by I.C. 36-8-3-20(f). Each reserve deputy marshal
shall be provided an approved uniform, which shall remain town property and
must be returned to the town upon termination. It is expressly understood that
each reserve deputy marshal serves at the pleasure of the Town Council and may
be terminated at any time for any reason by the Town Council.
   (B)   Police reserve unit clothing and equipment allowance.
      (1)   The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized to pay the sum of $250 per
year to each reserve officer on his or her anniversary date, and on that date
each year thereafter, upon certification from the Town Marshal that the reserve
officer was in good standing on the anniversary date.
      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to submit claim forms for Town
Council approval for the payment of the aforementioned sums from the budget
line item deemed appropriate by the Town Council and the Clerk-Treasurer.
      (3)   Division (A)(4) above is hereby reaffirmed in that the uniforms and
equipment purchased by reserve officers using the funds set forth above shall
remain town property and must be returned to the town upon termination or
resignation of the reserve.
(Ord. 2991D, passed 3-9-1991; Ord. 101291, passed 10-12-1991; Ord. 121397A,
passed 12-13-1997)
§ 35.06 POLICE PENSION BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment of Police Pension Board. There is hereby established the
Town of McCordsville, Indiana Police Pension Board as provided in I.C. 36-8-
8 and 36-8-6-2.
   (B)   Organization of Board.
      (1)   Board members. The Police Pension Board consists of seven members,
as follows:
         (a)   The President of the Town Council;
         (b)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer;
         (c)   The Police Chief;
         (d)   One retired member of the town's Police Department; and
         (e)   Three active members of the town's Police Department.
      (2)   Ex officio members. The Town Council President, the Clerk-
Treasurer, and the Police Chief are ex officio voting members of the Board.
      (3)   Election and terms.
         (a)   Election of Board members by Police Department members. The
Board members who are the retired Police Department member and the three active
Department members shall be elected by the Police Department members. The
initial election will be held at the police station within 30 days of the
effective date of this section. Thereafter, the elections shall occur at a
meeting of the Department members held at the police station on the second
Monday in February of each year. The initial members of the Board who are
active members of the Police Department will serve staggered terms, with one
serving a one-year term, one serving a two-year term, and one serving a three-
year term, as determined by the Board. Thereafter, these Board members are
elected for terms of three years, succeeding those Board members whose terms of
office expire on that date. These members hold their offices until their
successors are elected and qualified.
         (b)   Terms of other Board members. The terms of the President of the
Town Council, Clerk-Treasurer and Police Chief will be the same as the term of
their respective offices.
         (c)   Vacancies. If a vacancy occurs on the Board among the members
elected by the departmental members, the Police Department members shall hold a
special meeting upon the call of the Town Council President and elect a
successor for the remainder of the vacating member's term.
         (d)   Notices. Notice of a meeting at which an election will be held
by Department members must be given to all active Police Department members at
least five days before a meeting.
      (4)   Officers. The Town Council President serves as the President of the
Board, the Clerk-Treasurer serves as its Treasurer, and the Board shall elect
one member to serve as Secretary.
      (5)   Quorum. A majority of the Board's members shall constitute a quorum
for transacting business.
      (6)   Powers and duties. The Board shall have all the powers and duties
provided under Indiana Law.
      (7)   Compensation and reimbursement. The Board members shall not receive
payment for their services and shall be paid only their necessary expenses.
However, the Board members, the Secretary, and each member of the Police
Department selected by the Board shall be paid their necessary traveling
expenses from the 1977 fund when acting upon matters pertaining to the fund as
recommended by the Pension Board and approved by the Metropolitan Police
Commission.
      (8)   Bylaws and rules. The Board may make all necessary bylaws or rules
for it meetings and all matters relating to the conduct of its business, and it
shall keep and maintain records of its business.
(Ord. 050818, passed 5-8-2018; Ord. 091118, passed 9-11-2018)
§ 35.07 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners established. There is
hereby established a Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners for the Town of
McCordsville, Indiana, as provided in I.C. 36-8-9, and the Office of Town
Marshal is hereby abolished, effective January 1, 2018.
   (B)   Board Membership.
      (1)   The Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners shall consist of
three members appointed by the Town Council. The members must be of good moral
character, have no felony convictions for criminal acts, and legal residents of
the town. Not more than two members may be of the same political party, if
individuals who satisfy this requirement can be found to serve on the Board
with reasonable and diligent efforts. Members of the town's Police Department
may not be appointed to serve on the Board. A member of the Town Council may be
appointed to serve on the Board as an ex officio member, subject to the
provisions set forth herein.
      (2)   The Town Council may, by ordinance, increase the number of Board
members to five, provided that the amended ordinance and the appointment of
Board members satisfy all requirements of I.C. 36-8-9-3.1(a) and all other
applicable statutes.
      (3)   The Town Council may appoint one Town Council member to serve as an
ex officio member, who must vacate their membership upon the end of the Council
member's term or vacating of office. Said ex officio member may not receive
compensation for their service, nor are they required to post a bond.
   (C)   Term. The Board members' terms shall be three years, expiring on
January 1 of the third year after the member's appointment. However, to
establish staggered terms, one initial member shall be appointed for a one-year
term, one initial member shall be appointed for a two-year term, and one
initial member shall be appointed for a three-year term. Each member serves at
the pleasure of the Town Council and may be removed for any cause that the Town
Council considers sufficient.
   (D)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   As provided in I.C. 36-8-9-4, the Board shall have the following
powers and duties:
         (a)   Appointment of future officers. The Board shall appoint persons
to serve in the town's Police Department, subject to the qualifications for
employment determined by the Board and approved by the Town Council.
         (b)   Appointment of Police Chief. The Board shall grandfather in and
appoint the currently serving Town Marshal to the position of Police Chief.
         (c)   Future appointments of Police Chief. The Board, at such time as
necessary, shall appoint one person to serve as Police Chief.
         (d)   Appointment of future civilian employees. The Board may appoint
other employees that are necessary to carry on the work of the Police
Department.
         (e)   Recommendations for compensation. The Board may recommend and
the Town Council shall determine the compensation to be paid to members of the
Police Department.
         (f)   Safety Board. The Board constitutes the town's Safety Board for
purposes of suspension, demotion, or dismissal of any member of the Police
Department. Proceedings for the suspension, demotion, or dismissal of Police
Department members shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by I.C. 36-8-3-
4. The disciplinary provisions of I.C. 36-8-3-4.1 also apply to the Safety
Board and the Police Chief.
         (g)   Adoption of general orders and policies. The Board may make
general orders and policies for the government and discipline of the Police
Department and make special and general orders to the Department through the
Police Chief, who is the executive head of the Department.
      (2)   The Board shall have all other powers and duties as provided by
Indiana statute.
      (3)   The Board shall adopt and maintain rules governing the conduct of
its business, including, but not limited to, rules concerning its meetings, the
selection or appointment of persons to be employed as member of the Police
Department, promotions and demotions of Department members, and the discipline
or dismissal of Department members.
      (4)   Each year, the Board shall make a recommendation to the Town
Council on the proposed budget for the Police Department. Once the budget is
approved and monies appropriated to the Department, the Board has the authority
to approve disbursement of those funds, which shall include, but is not limited
to, the authority to approve contracts and purchase vehicles, equipment and
training when the amount exceeds the authority of the Department’s purchasing
agent.
   (E)   Oath and bond. Before performing any function of a Board member, each
person appointed to serve as member shall:
      (1)   Take and subscribe before the Clerk of the Hancock County Circuit
Court an oath or affirmation of office and an oath or affirmation that in each
appointment or removal made by the Board to or from the town's Police
Department, the member will not appoint or remove a member of the town's Police
Department because of the political affiliation of the person or for another
cause or reason other than that of the person's fitness to serve as a member of
the Police Department.
      (2)   Give bond in the penal sum of $5,000, payable to the State of
Indiana and conditioned upon the faithful and honest discharge of the Board
member's duties. The bond must be approved by the Town Council.
(Ord. 021318-A, passed 2-13-2018; Ord. 100824A, passed 10-8-2024)
§ 35.08 POLICE CHIEF.
   (A)   The Chief of the Police Department is the executive head of the Police
Department. All members of the Police Department, sworn and civilian, shall
serve subject to the orders of the Police Chief.
   (B)   The Police Chief shall have the powers and duties prescribed by
statute and town ordinance, including statutory disciplinary powers.
   (C)   The Police Chief shall be responsible for the keeping of the records
and the making of reports concerning the activity of the Police Department as
may be required by statute or town ordinance.
(Ord. 021318-A, passed 2-13-2018)
§ 35.09 PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSION.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created the McCordsville Public Works
Commission.
   (B)   Membership. Members of the McCordsville Public Works Commission shall
consist of the following:
      (1)   A Town Council member.
      (2)   A Town Council President appointee, who shall be a resident of the
town and have experience in the area of development, building, engineering, or
real estate.
      (3)   The Town Building Commissioner.
      (4)   A Department of Public Works, sewer or stormwater representative
holding the position of Director or Assistant Director.
      (5)   The Town Manager.
   (C)   Term. The term of each member shall be for one year unless a member
ceases to be eligible. Each member can be reappointed for successive terms. A
member can be removed from the Commission at the discretion of the Council.
   (D)   Elections. At the first meeting of the year, the Commission shall
annually elect a President and Vice President.
   (E)   Duties. The Commission shall have the following roles and
responsibilities:
      (1)   Exercise all rights and power over the drainage system within the
town’s jurisdiction in accordance with I.C. 36-9-7.
      (2)   Review and approve all contracts up to $50,000 for services and
projects related to engineering, wastewater, stormwater, and streets.
      (3)   Follow the appropriate bidding process, review bids, and make
recommendations to Council on all contracts that exceed $50,000 for services
and projects related to engineering, wastewater, stormwater, and streets.
      (4)   Approve all contracts and invoices previously approved by Council
related to capital improvement projects.
      (5)   Approve invoices already under contract and/or approved by the Town
Council related to engineering, wastewater, stormwater, and streets.
      (6)   Approve utility disconnections and the termination of service.
      (7)   Approve uncollected invoices related to engineering, wastewater,
stormwater, and streets.
      (8)   Review public complaints on infrastructure and recommend actions
thereon to the Town Council.
      (9)   Review utility rate reduction requests and make recommendation to
the Town Council.
      (10)   Review and make recommendations regarding the capital project plan
to the Town Council.
      (11)   Make recommendations regarding equipment purchases that exceed
$50,000 to the Town Council.
      (12)   Review and determine fence permit appeals.
(Ord. 061124, passed - -2024)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   TOWN STANDARDS
      
51.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
52.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
      
53.   SEWER USE AND RATES
CHAPTER 50: TOWN STANDARDS
Section
   
50.01   Adoption by reference
§ 50.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   All provisions adopted by previous ordinances pertaining to town
standards are hereby repealed and inserted in lieu thereof are the standards
set forth on Exhibit “A” attached to the ordinance codified herein and
incorporated by reference herein.
   (B)   These materials, drawings and specifications on how connections are to
be made to the sewer system, how roads are to be built and the like are
available on the Internet at http://www.mccordsville.org/egov/docs/
1259730078_715576.pdf.
(Ord. 071205A, passed 7-12-2005)
CHAPTER 51: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
51.01   Termination of water services to delinquent sewer users
   
51.02   Water utility owned and operated by the town; control
   
51.03   Trash collection fee
§ 51.01 TERMINATION OF WATER SERVICES TO DELINQUENT SEWER USERS.
   (A)   Termination of service procedures.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-9-25, the town, by and through its Town
Council, may order the termination of water service to a sewer service address
on account of non-payment of a delinquent amount, which is not less than 30
days delinquent. When so ordered, the water utility shall terminate the service
in accordance with the terms of its agreement with the town.
      (2)   The fee for terminating services shall be a minimum of $45, and
shall not exceed $490, based on the size of the water meter and as set forth in
the town’s contract with Citizens Energy Group, which shall include charges
assessed against the town by the water utility for effecting the termination.
The fee for terminating commercial and industrial services shall be determined
in an agreement between the town and the water company. These disconnect fees
shall be assessed against the customer and added to the sewer delinquent bill.
      (3)   The town may not terminate water service under this section, if the
County Health Department has found and certified to the town that the
termination of water service will endanger the health of the user and others in
the municipality.
      (4)   (a)   Prior to the termination of water service because of sewer
user fee delinquency, the town, or its designated representative, must first
give notice of the delinquency and impending termination at least 10 calendar
days prior to the proposed termination, by first class mail, addressed to the
user to whom the service is billed, which notice shall contain the following:
            1.   The delinquent amount due, together with any penalty and fees;
            2.   The date of the notice of termination;
            3.   The date on or after which termination shall be made;
            4.   Notice that water service may be disconnected if, prior to the
earliest possible date of termination given in the notice, the user does not
pay the delinquency, together with any penalty and fees, or disputes the
amount, or makes other provisions for payment pursuant to this section; and
            5.   A procedure, as provided in division (A)(4)(b) below for
resolving a disputed bill.
         (b)   The town Clerk-Treasurer shall serve as the account review
officer (ARO) to review and resolve disputes. Before the earliest possible date
of termination of water service as specified in the notice, a user may request
a hearing before the ARO to dispute the correctness of all or part of the
amount(s) shown in accordance with the provisions of this division (A). A user
shall not be entitled to dispute the correctness of all or part of an amount(s)
if all or part of the amount(s) was the subject of a previous dispute under
this division (A).
      (5)   The procedure for a hearing on a user dispute shall be as follows.
         (a)   Before the earliest possible date of termination as specified on
the notice of termination, the user shall notify the ARO in writing that he or
she requests a hearing to dispute the correctness of all or part of the amounts
shown on the notice of termination, stating as completely as possible the basis
for the dispute.
         (b)   An informal hearing before the ARO shall be held within 15 days
of the ARO’s receipt of the user’s written request for a hearing on a disputed
bill.
         (c)   At the hearing, the user shall be entitled to present all
evidence that is, in the ARO’s view, relevant and material to the dispute.
         (d)   Based on the evidence presented at the hearing, the ARO, within
ten days of the completion of the hearing, shall issue a written decision
formally resolving the dispute.
      (6)   The ARO shall be authorized to resolve any disputed sewage bill and
shall be authorized to order the termination of water service under appropriate
circumstances.
         (a)   Upon approval by the ARO, the user may enter into an agreement
to amortize the unpaid balance of his or her account over a reasonable period
of time, not to exceed six months.
         (b)   No termination shall be effected for any user complying with any
amortization agreement, provided the user also keeps current his or her account
for sewer service as charges accrue in each subsequent billing period.
         (c)   If a user fails to comply with an amortization agreement, the
ARO may terminate water service, provided written notice is given to the user
at least 48 hours prior to the termination, and the notice includes conditions
the user is required to meet to avoid termination.
      (7)   Utilization of this hearing procedure shall not relieve a user of
the obligation to timely and completely pay all other undisputed water and
sewer bills or charges. Failure to timely and completely pay all the undisputed
amounts shall subject the user to termination of service in accordance with the
provisions of this division (A).
      (8)   Until the date of the ARO’s decision, the town shall not terminate
water service of the user. If the ARO determines that the customer must pay
some or all of disputed amount(s), the Department, or ARO in his or her written
decision, shall notify the user of the following:
         (a)   The amount to be paid;
         (b)   The date on or after which services will be terminated; and
         (c)   Notice that unless the town receives complete payment of the
amount shown prior to the earliest possible date of termination given in the
notice, water service shall be terminated.
      (9)   A USER, for the purpose of this section, is defined as:
         (a)   A person who requests, either orally or in writing, water and/or
sewage service from the town or water utilities; and/or
         (b)   A person in whose name water and/or sewage service is billed for
the rendering of the service.
   (B)   Termination of services not exclusive remedy. The remedy provided
herein for the collection of delinquent sewer user charges or benefits shall
not be construed to abridge or in any manner interfere with the right and power
of the town to enforce a collection thereof by any other action or as otherwise
provided by statute.
   (C)   Procedure.
      (1)   As used in this section, the term FINAL ACCOUNT shall have the
following meaning: a closed account for which sewer service is no longer being
provided to the customer at that service location.
      (2)   The town shall prepare a annual schedule of sewer user final
accounts which it has determined to be uncollectible. The schedule shall
consist of the following:
         (a)   For bills becoming due prior to July 1, 2001, a certified list
of all sewer user final accounts for which the outstanding fees and penalties
together are $200 or less and which are at least 120 days delinquent and which
are not subject to liens under I.C. 36-9-23-31 or I.C. 36-9-25-11 and which the
town has determined to be uncollectible;
         (b)   For bills becoming due after July 1, 2001, a certified list of
all sewer user final accounts for which the fees and penalties together are
$200 or less and which are at least 120 days delinquent and which are not
subject to liens under I.C. 36-9-23-31 or I.C. 36-9-25-11 and which the town
has determined to be uncollectible;
         (c)   A statement setting forth the efforts that have been made to
collect the accounts and a statement that all those efforts have been
unsuccessful; and
         (d)   A statement, including the reasons therefor, that the town
believes it is economically not feasible to pursue collection measures on the
accounts.
      (3)   The annual schedule shall be submitted to the Town Council, which
by resolution may declare accounts listed in the schedule as uncollectible and
may authorize the town to cease further collection procedures and expense the
amounts outstanding on the accounts as bad debts.
      (4)   The annual schedule shall be prepared by the town and approved by
the resolution of the Sewer Board prior to being forwarded to the Town Council
for final approval. A sewer user account may be deemed uncollectible only if
approved by the Council and the Board.
   (D)   Conformance. The Sewer Board for the town shall enter into agreements
with all utilities providing water service to the citizens of the town in
conformance with the terms of this section.
(Ord. 071001B, passed 9-11-2001; Ord. 121316C, passed 1-10-2017; Ord. 050917B,
passed 5-9-2017)
§ 51.02 WATER UTILITY OWNED AND OPERATED BY THE TOWN; CONTROL.
   (A)   A water utility owned and operated by the town shall be constructed,
acquired or otherwise formed.
   (B)   The municipally-owned water utility shall operate under the control of
the Town Board of Works, which shall consist of the members of the Town
Council.
   (C)   After a preliminary determination of the cost to construct has been
determined, this Council will appropriate from the General Fund an amount to
pay the preliminary expenses, not to exceed 5% of the estimated cost.
(Ord. 071603, passed 8-12-2003)
§ 51.03 TRASH COLLECTION FEE.
   (A)   For the service provided by the town consisting of the collection of
trash, garbage and refuse, and off-site recycling services (i.e., “the trash
collection service”), there shall be charged to and collected from the owners
of each and every lot, parcel of real estate, or building that receives said
trash collection a service fee of $18.48 per month (the “trash collection
fee”).
   (B)   The trash collection fee shall be prepared, billed and collected by
the town in the manner provided by the Act, this section and as follows:
      (1)   The trash collection fee shall be prepared and billed monthly. For
users that do not occupy a location served by the trash utility on the first
day of the month, or the last day of the month, their charges shall be prorated
on a per diem rate calculated on the basis of 30 days per month times the
monthly rate and charge for users of the same type and category multiplied by
the number of days in the month the user occupies the premises.
      (2)   The trash collection fee may be billed to the tenant or tenants
occupying the property served only upon the written request of the property
owner and the acknowledgment of the property owner that the property owner
remains liable for any and all outstanding and unpaid charges to the address
and service may be terminated if the property owner does not pay the statement,
even if the charges were under the tenant’s name.
      (3)   The owners of properties served, which are occupied by a tenant or
tenants, shall have the right to examine the collection records of the town for
the purpose of determining whether bills have been paid by such tenant or
tenants, provided that such examination shall be made at the office at which
such records are kept and during the hours that such office is open for
business.
      (4)   All trash collection fees not paid by the 15th day of the month
following receipt (the “due date”) are hereby declared to be delinquent and a
penalty of 10% of the delinquent balance shall be added to the trash collection
fees due.
      (5)   Payments received from the sewer customer and/or storm water
customer shall be applied first to the trash collection services, second to
storm water utility fees and third to sewer utility fees.
   (C)   The user fees collected in accordance with divisions (A) and (B) of
this section are to be deposited in a Trash Collection Fund established in §
34.35, with the revenues retained, accumulated, and used for improvements of
the trash collection utility system as permitted by I.C. 36-9-23 and as
directed by the Town Council.
(Ord. 111318A, passed 11-13-2018; Ord. 111318B, passed 11-13-2018; Ord. 121918,
passed 12-19-2018; Ord. 111219, passed 12-10-2019; Ord. 110922A, passed - -
2022; Ord. 110922B, passed 12-13-2022; Ord. 111224, passed 11-12-2024)
CHAPTER 52: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Stormwater Utility user fee structure
   
52.03   Billing and collection
   
52.04   Program administration
   
52.05   Stormwater Utility Account
Stormwater Management
   
52.20   General information
   
52.21   Prohibited discharges and connections
   
52.22   Stormwater quantity management
   
52.23   Stormwater pollution prevention for construction sites
   
52.24   Stormwater quality management for post-construction
   
52.25   Permit requirements and procedures
   
52.26   Compliance and enforcement
   
52.27   Abbreviations and definitions
 
   
52.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL. The use of land or structures for agricultural purposes,
including farming, dairying, pasturage, aquaculture, agriculture, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture and animal and  poultry husbandry, and the necessary
accessory structures and uses such as tenant housing and those for the packing,
treating, or storing of produce. However, the operation of any accessory uses
shall be secondary to that of the normal AGRICULTURAL activities.
   AUTHORIZED OFFICIAL. The Public Works Commissioner for the town, or
designated town employee, Town Engineer or an agent of the town authorized in
writing by the Board to administer or enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   BOARD. The McCordsville Public Works Commission.
   CODE. The Code of Ordinances of McCordsville, Indiana.
   COMMON AREA. A parcel within a subdivision that is commonly used by one or
more tenants and maintained by a not-for-profit entity, such as a homeowners’
association.
   COMMON AREA - TYPE 1. Common area with a building such as a clubhouse, pool
house and pool.
   COMMON AREA - TYPE 2. Common area without a building, but including
amenities such as playground equipment.
   COMMON AREA - TYPE 3. Common Area without any buildings, structures or
amenities, except storm sewer improvements such as detention facilities.
   DETENTION. The temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a basin, pond or
other structure to control the peak discharge rates by holding the stormwater
for a period of time and which provides some gravity settling of particulates.
   DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Any lot or parcel of land altered from its natural state
by the construction, creation or addition of impervious area, except public
streets and highways.
   DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect entry of any solid, liquid or gaseous
matter.
   DWELLING UNIT. A group of rooms that are used or are intended to be used by
one household primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating, or as
classified by the Town Building Code.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT(ERU). The base unit for determining storm water
charges. An ERU represents the average amount of impervious area of a single-
family residential property within the town and is established as 3,000 square
feet of impervious area.
   IMPERVIOUS AREA. Any part of any developed property that has been modified
by the action of persons to reduce the land's natural ability to absorb and
hold rainfall. This includes buildings as well as any hard surface area which
either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil. By way of
example, IMPERVIOUS AREAS include, but are not limited to, roof tops, walkways,
patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving,
or gravel roads or driveways. The IMPERVIOUS AREA for any given parcel shall be
determined solely by the authorized official or his or her representative.
   LOCAL UNIT OF GOVERNMENT. Local units of government shall consist of the
town (including any of its departments), the county (including any of its
departments), Vernon Township, the Town Fire Department and the Mount Vernon
Community School Corporation, Inc.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. A lot or parcel of land on which is
situated a building containing three or more dwelling units, or on which two or
more buildings containing multiple dwelling units are situated.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. All properties not encompassed within the
definition of residential property, including, but not limited to: commercial,
industrial, retail, multi-family residential, agricultural, governmental,
institutional, schools and churches.
   NOT-FOR-PROFIT. Any entity designated as not-for-profit pursuant to the
Internal Revenue Service regulations upon receipt of documentation of said
designation by the Internal Revenue Service from the property owner.
   PARCEL. The smallest separately segregated lot, unit or plot of land having
an identified owner, boundaries and surface area which is documented for
property tax purposes by the Vernon Township or the County Assessor.
   PEAK DISCHARGE. The maximum rate of flow of water passing a given point
during or after a rainfall event.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, corporation, partnership, institution or
other entity.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. A parcel within the town on which a single building or
mobile home is situated. Said parcel may also contain accessory structure(s)
such as a yard shed or garage, as allowed by town ordinances. Each and every
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY shall be assigned one ERU.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of publicly dedicated land over which a public street,
road or alley has been or may be constructed.
   SITE OF COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY. Any area or facility used for the sale of
goods, materials or services as well as any use permitted or special exception
within the CN, CO and CR business district zoning classifications as contained
within the town’s code of ordinances.
   SITE OF INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Any area or facility used for manufacturing,
processing or raw materials storage, as defined under 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(a)(14)
of regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, as amended.
   STORMWATER. The chemical compound of hydrogen and oxygen which is produced
from atmospheric clouds as rain, snow, sleet and hail.
   STORMWATER SYSTEM. All constructed facilities, including structures and
natural watercourses under the ownership or control of the town, used for
collecting and conducting stormwater to, through and from drainage areas to the
point of final outlet, including, but not limited to, any and all of the
following: inlets, conduits and appurtenant features, creeks, channels, catch
basins, ditches, streams, streets, culverts, retention or detention basins and
pumping stations; but excluding therefrom, any part of the system of drains and
watercourses under the jurisdiction of the County Drainage Board or waters of
the state.
   STORMWATER UTILITY USER. The owner of a lot or parcel within the town.
   STORMWATER UTILITY USER FEE. A charge or user fee authorized by I.C. 8-1.5-
5 and imposed on all Stormwater Utility users.
   SURFACE WATER. Water occurring on the surface of the land, from natural
causes such as rainfall, whether falling on the land in question or flowing
onto the land in question.
   TOWN. The Town of McCordsville, Indiana
   UNDEVELOPED LOT. A residentially platted lot upon which there have been no
structures located or placed.
   UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY. Parcel which has not been altered from its natural
state by the addition of any improvements such as a building, structure or
impervious surface, change of grade or landscaping or a parcel which has been
restored to its natural state by the removal of all improvements such as
buildings, structures or impervious surfaces. For new construction, a parcel
shall be considered developed pursuant to this chapter:
      (1)   Upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon completion of
construction or final inspection if no such certificate is issued; or
      (2)   Where construction is at least 50% completed.
   UTILITY BILLING PERSONNEL. Employees of the town charged with account
establishment, creation and distribution of regular invoices, and recording of
charges and payments for each account, as well as related enforcement allowed
within this chapter.
   WOODED PROPERTY. An undeveloped property that has a “wooded” or “forested”
area which makes up at least 80% of the area of the parcel, which has been
committed to remain in its natural state. The property owner must demonstrate
the commitment to leave the WOODED PROPERTY in its natural state to the
satisfaction of the Utility billing personnel.
(Ord. 040913A, passed 4-9-2013)
§ 52.02 STORMWATER UTILITY USER FEE STRUCTURE.
   (A)   A Stormwater Utility user fee shall be imposed on all residential and
non-residential property within the town, including those classified as non-
profit or tax exempt, for services and facilities provided by the Stormwater
Utility. This user fee is deemed reasonable and is necessary to pay for the
repair, replacement, planning, improvement, operation, regulation and
maintenance of the existing and future stormwater system for the town.
   (B)   For the purposes stated herein, there is hereby assessed a Stormwater
Utility user fee to each Stormwater Utility user within the corporate limits of
the town, in an amount determined below. For purposes of imposing the
Stormwater Utility user fee, all lots and parcels within the town are
classified as either residential or non-residential.
      (1)   Residential. Each residential property is hereby assigned one ERU.
A monthly user fee for all residences within the town shall be charged in
accordance with the following.
         (a)   For any residentially platted, but undeveloped lot, the sum of
$15 per year shall be paid within the first quarter of the year. The initial
payment shall be paid in one lump sum at the time of platting by the developer
along with a list containing the lot number, address and parcel number of each
lot.
         (b)   Residences located upon agricultural property shall be charged
the sum of $7.50 per month, plus an additional charge of $3.60 per nearest
rounded whole acre per year, for each or any part of an acre that the parcel
exceeds one acre. Any partial acre of 0.49 or less shall be rounded down to the
nearest acre and any partial acre of 0.50 or greater shall be rounded up to the
nearest acre.
         (c)   Residences which exist on a single parcel larger than one acre
shall be charged the sum of $7.50 per month, plus an additional charge of $2
per nearest rounded whole acre per year, for each or any part of an acre that
the parcel exceeds one acre. Any partial acre of 0.49 or less shall be rounded
down to the nearest acre and any partial acre of 0.50 or greater shall be
rounded up to the nearest acre.
         (d)   For residents located upon multi-family residential property,
where the parcel owner is not billed for all residences combined, the sum of
$7.50 per month per address shall be charged.
         (e)   All other residences which exist on a single platted residential
lot shall be charged the sum of $7.50 per month if already a sanitary sewer
customer.
      (2)   Non-residential properties. A monthly user fee shall be charged for
each non- residential property in a manner as set forth below.
         (a)   Large non-residential properties. Large non-residential
properties constituting any property in excess of 50,000 square feet of
impervious area shall be charged a monthly rate of $45 against which a credit
of up to $15 per month may be applied if the property has a properly installed
and maintained pond or detention facility as determined by the authorized
official, in addition to the fee set forth in division (E) below. In addition
to the monthly rate set forth above, an additional amount calculated at the
rate of $0.00083 per square foot of impervious area shall be charged.
         (b)   Medium non-residential properties. Properties having an area of
25,000 square feet of impervious area to 49,999 square feet of impervious area
shall be charged a monthly rate of $30 per month against which a credit of up
to $15 per month may be applied if the property has a properly installed and
maintained pond or detention facility in addition to the fee set forth in
division (E) below. In addition to the monthly rate set forth above, an
additional amount calculated at the rate of $0.00083 per square foot of
impervious surface shall be charged.
         (c)   Small non-residential properties. Properties having an area less
than 24,999 square feet of impervious area shall be charged a fee of $15 per
month with a credit of up to $5 per month may be applied if the property has a
properly installed and maintained pond or detention facility in addition to the
fee set forth in division (E) below. In addition to the monthly rate set forth
above, an additional amount calculated at the rate of $0.00083 per square foot
of impervious surface shall be charged.
         (d)   Agriculture property. Properties actively utilized in an
agriculture endeavor as agriculture is defined above shall be charged a rate of
$3.60 per nearest rounded whole acre per year. Any partial acre of 0.49 or less
shall be rounded down to the nearest acre and any partial acre of 0.50 or
greater shall be rounded up to the nearest acre.
         (e)   Local units of governments, public schools, not-for-profit
entities. Properties used for the purposes of conducting functions of local
units of government, schools and not- for-profit entities approved by the
Internal Revenue Service as such shall be charged an amount not to exceed $250
per month regardless of the computation set forth below.
         (f)   Undeveloped property. Undeveloped properties, as defined above,
shall be charged $30 per year per address billed and paid, plus an additional
charge of $2 per nearest rounded whole acre per year. Any partial acre of 0.49
or less shall be rounded down to the nearest acre and any partial acre of 0.50
or greater shall be rounded up to the nearest acre.
         (g)   Uncharged properties. Properties used for the purpose of public
right-of- way, as defined above, shall not be charged. Wooded properties as
defined above shall not be charged. No additional charge shall be included for
the location of a utility tower on a property.
         (h)   Subdivision common areas. Common areas, as defined above, shall
be charged as listed below.
            1.   Common Areas - Type 1. Properties used for Common Area - Type
1 shall be charged as divisions (B)(2)(a), (B)(2)(b) or (B)(2)(c) above, as
appropriate for the amount of impervious area.
            2.   Common Areas - Type 2. Properties used for Common Area - Type
2 shall be charged $7.50 per month.
            3.   Common Areas - Type 3. Properties used for Common Area - Type
3 shall not be charged.
   (C)   The non-residential Stormwater Utility user fee shall be based on the
relative contribution of surface and stormwater runoff from a given parcel to
the town’s stormwater system and shall be assessed per ERU per month. Any
billings for stormwater service outside this time shall be on a per diem basis.
This Stormwater Utility user fee rate is designed to recover and be able to pay
the cost of rendering stormwater service to the users of the stormwater system,
and shall be the basis for assessment of the town’s Stormwater Utility user
fee. This rate is established so as to maintain adequate fund reserves to
provide for reasonably expected variations in the cost of providing services,
as well as variation in the demand for services. This rate shall be evaluated
annually as to its sufficiency to satisfy the needs of the Stormwater Utility.
The following methods may be used to determine the non-residential user
factors:
      (1)   Computation of the impervious area using on-site measurements of
the apparent outside boundaries in or on such developed property made by the
town or on its behalf;
      (2)   Computation of the impervious area using the dimensions which are
set forth and contained in the records of the office of the County Assessor or
Vernon Township Assessor;
      (3)   Estimation, calculation and computation of the impervious area
using aerial photography or photogrammetry, or as contained in the records of
the town or county; or
      (4)   Computation of impervious area using data provided by the owner,
tenant or developer. The authorized official may require additional information
as necessary to make the determination.
   (D)   Residential erosion control plot plan review fees. It is hereby
acknowledged that Ord. 030805, the town’s Stormwater Management Ordinance, has
heretofore been duly passed, Ch. 6, § IV, of which provides for and requires
the review of individual lots within a permitted project. The charge for review
and inspection associated with the performance of said required review and
inspection shall be $35 per lot which shall be paid at the time of the
application for a building permit pertaining to said lot.
   (E)   Non-residential stormwater management ordinance compliance/inspection
fee. It is hereby acknowledged that Ord. 030805, the town’s Stormwater
Management Ordinance, has heretofore been duly passed, Ch. 6, § II, Permit
Procedures, are set forth the requirements deemed necessary to constitute
compliance with the town’s Stormwater Management Ordinance and inspection of
approved and installed infrastructure. Pursuant to Ch. 6, § VI, of the
aforementioned ordinance, the fee for
compliance review and inspection of the subject premises shall be $100, plus
$40 for each acre or part thereof constituting the proposed site. The total
amount of said fees shall be calculated as set forth in Ch. 6, § VI(B), and
shall be payable in accordance with said provision.
   (F)   All new or transferred accounts shall be charged a one-time
administrative set-up fee of $20. The one-time administrative set up fee of $20
shall not be charged to a developer of any subdivision, but shall instead be
charged to the person or entity purchasing a lot or parcel from the developer
at the time of the sale. Furthermore an account may be reactivated by the
property owner without the payment of the one-time administrative set up fee of
$20. As an incentive to encourage use of automated services offered by the
Sewer Utility, the following credits may be applied to the set-up fee. A credit
of $10 for set-up of automatic clearing house (ACH) monthly draft and a $5
credit for set-up of electronic billing (e-billing) will be given to all
customers who complete the new customer form available on the town’s website,
by fax, by mail or by pick one up at the Utility Office. The fee shall be
billed on the first bill. The one-time administration set-up fee and the
credits shall only apply if there is not an account already setup under Ord.
021213A or future amendments thereof.
(Ord. 040913A, passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 081313A, passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 111219A,
passed 12-10-2019)
§ 52.03 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   Bills or statements for the Stormwater Utility user fee shall be
rendered monthly, in accordance with the regular Town Sewer Utility billing
cycle for all property subject to this fee. Bills shall be payable at the same
time and in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as set forth for
the Sewer Utility. Any unpaid Stormwater Utility user fees shall constitute a
lien on such property and shall be on a parity with the lien of state, county,
and municipal taxes. Such lien, when delinquent for more than 30 days, may be
foreclosed by the town in the manner provided by the laws of the state of
Indiana for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property.
   (B)   (1)   The Stormwater Utility user fee shall be prepared and billed
monthly. For users that do not occupy a location served by the Stormwater
Utility on the first day of the month or the last day of the month, their
charges shall be prorated on a per diem rate calculated on the basis of 30 days
per month times the monthly rate and charge for users of the same type and
category multiplied by the number of days in the month the user occupies the
premises.
      (2)   For properties normally receiving monthly utility bills for other
town services, the Stormwater Utility user fee shall be included in the monthly
bill rendered to the established owner/customer.
   (C)   For properties not receiving monthly utility bills for other town
services, the bill or statement for the Stormwater Utility user fee shall be
sent to the Stormwater Utility user as determined from the tax rolls.
   (D)   The owner of a property is ultimately responsible for all fees imposed
under this chapter.
   (E)   Requests for adjustment of the Stormwater Utility user fee shall be
submitted through the authorized official, who shall be given authority to
administer the procedures and standards and review
criteria for the adjustment of fees as established herein. All requests shall
be judged on the basis of category and classifications as herein defined. No
credit shall be given for the installation of facilities required by town or
county development codes or state stormwater rules other than set out in §
52.02(B)(2)(a), (B)(2)(b)and (B)(2)(c). The following procedures shall apply to
all adjustment requests of the Stormwater Utility user fee.
      (1)   Any owner who has paid his or her Stormwater Utility user fees and
who believes the ERU component of his or her Stormwater Utility user fee to be
incorrect may, subject to the limitations set forth in this chapter, submit an
adjustment request to the authorized official.
      (2)   Request for adjustment of Stormwater Utility user fees paid by an
owner making the request shall be in writing and set forth, in detail, the
grounds upon which relief is sought.
      (3)   Adjustment requests made during the first calendar year that the
Stormwater Utility user fee is imposed will be reviewed by the authorized
official within a four-month period from the date of filing of the adjustment
request. Adjustments resulting from such request shall be retroactive to the
beginning of billings, but shall not exceed one year.
      (4)   The owner requesting the adjustment may, at his or her own cost,
provide supplemental information to the authorized official including, but not
limited to, facts, opinions or professional services to substantiate his or her
case.
      (5)   Adjustments to the Stormwater Utility user fee will be made by the
Utility billing personnel upon the granting of the adjustment request in
writing, by the authorized official. Denials of adjustment requests shall be
made in writing by the authorized official.
   (F)   Upon receipt of the written denial of the adjustment request, the
owner who initially requested the adjustment may, within 30 days of receipt of
such denial, appeal to the Board for review of the denial. The Board shall
complete its review within 60 days of receipt of said request for appeal. The
Board’s determination on the appeal shall be in writing and set forth in detail
the reason for its decision. In evaluating the appeal, the Board shall be bound
by the standards and review criteria contained herein. All determinations of
the Board arising out of this section shall be final.
(Ord. 040913A, passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 111219A, passed 12-10-2019)
§ 52.04 PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Authorized Official to administer
the Stormwater Utility program.
      (2)   The Utility billing personnel shall keep an accurate record of all
persons using the services and facilities of said Stormwater Utility of the
town and make changes in accordance with the rates and charges established in
this chapter or by ordinance.
   (B)   The authorized official shall direct any new development or the
property owner of newly annexed property to establish a Stormwater Utility user
account.
   (C)   The Board or its designated agent may issue an order to any person to
immediately cease any discharge, or connection to the stormwater system,
determined by the Board to be in violation of any provision of this chapter, or
in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder.
   (D)   (1)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any
regulation or order issued hereunder shall be subject to injunctive relief if
necessary to protect the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
      (2)   A person shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation for each
and every day during any continuing violation of any provision of this chapter,
or of any regulation or permit issued hereunder.
   (E)   The Board may take all actions necessary, including the issuance of
notices of violation, the filing of court actions to require and enforce
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with any regulation or
permit issued hereunder.
(Ord. 040913A, passed 4-9-2013)
§ 52.05 STORMWATER UTILITY ACCOUNT.
   (A)   There shall be established a Stormwater Utility Account for the
deposit of all fees and charges collected by the Stormwater Utility.
   (B)   These funds shall be for the exclusive use of the town’s Stormwater
Utility including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Stormwater management services, such as studies, design, permit
review, plan preparation and development review;
      (2)   Operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the stormwater
collection, storage, conveyance or treatment infrastructure;
      (3)   Project costs related to constructing major or minor structural
improvements to the town’s stormwater related infrastructure;
      (4)   Administrative costs associated with the management of the
Stormwater Utility user fee;
      (5)   Debt service financing of the town's stormwater related capital
improvements; and
      (6)   Funding of studies such as water quantity and quality monitoring,
aerial photography and geotechnical work associated with the planning of the
stormwater related infrastructure.
(Ord. 040913A, passed 4-9-2013)
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 52.20 GENERAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Authority and title.
      (1)   This subchapter is adopted in accordance with statutory authority
granted to the town under “Home Rule” and further is required by Phase II of
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Stormwater program (40 CFR
Parts 9, 122, 123, and 124; December 8, 1999) authorized by the 1987 amendments
to the Clean Water Act, the Indiana Department of Environmental Management’s
(IDEM) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) General Permit (MS4 GP), and
the Indiana Department of Environmental Management’s Construction Stormwater
General Permit (CSGP). Based on this authority and these requirements, this
subchapter regulates:
         (a)   Discharges of prohibited non-stormwater flows into the storm
drain system.
         (b)   Stormwater drainage improvements related to development of lands
located within the corporate boundaries of the town.
         (c)   Drainage control systems installed during new construction and
grading of lots and other parcels of land.
         (d)   Stormwater, including stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and
surface runoff and drainage, associated with construction activity.
         (e)   Stormwater discharges from construction support activities
directly related to construction sites subject to this subchapter.
         (f)   Erosion and sediment control systems installed during new
construction and grading of lots and other parcels of land.
         (g)   The design, construction, and maintenance of stormwater drainage
facilities and systems.
         (h)   The design, construction, and maintenance of stormwater quality
facilities and systems.
         (i)   The design, construction, and maintenance of new dams.
         (j)   The development downstream of existing dams.
         (k)   Development within floodplains, floodways, fluvial erosion
hazard corridors, and bluff zones.
      (2)   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the Town of
McCordsville Stormwater Management Ordinance. Once adopted, this subchapter
will supersede any conflicting ordinances previously adopted by the town.
   (B)   Applicability and exemptions.
      (1)   This subchapter, which generally follows the Indiana LTAP Model
Stormwater Management Ordinance document, shall regulate all development and
redevelopment occurring within the town. No building permit shall be issued and
no land disturbance started for any construction in a development, as defined
in §
52.27, until the plans required by this subchapter for such construction have
been accepted in writing by the town. With the exception of the requirements of
§§
52.21 and
52.25(D), single-family dwelling houses and duplexes in accepted subdivisions,
new buildings (or cumulative building additions) with less than 500 square feet
of area, and land-disturbing activities affecting less than 10,000 square feet
of area shall be exempt from the requirements of this subchapter. Also exempt
from this subchapter shall be agricultural land-disturbing activities.
      (2)   In addition to the requirements of this subchapter and its
companion Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, compliance with all applicable
ordinances of the town as well as with applicable federal, State of Indiana,
and other local statutes and regulations shall also be required. Unless
otherwise stated, all other specifications referred to in this subchapter shall
be the most recent edition available. The town capital improvement projects
shall be exempt from obtaining a permit, but are expected to meet all
applicable technical requirements of this subchapter and the town Stormwater
Technical Standards Manual.
      (3)   If the project site is located within a Hancock County Regulated
Drain Watershed, the applicant will need to check with the Hancock County
Surveyor’s Office to learn if additional Surveyor’s Office requirements
specific to that regulated drain would apply to the site. In case there are
conflicts between the requirements contained in this subchapter and applicable
requirements contained in other regulatory documents referenced above, the most
restrictive shall prevail.
      (4)   Any construction project which has had its final drainage plan
accepted by the town within a two-year period prior to the effective date of
this subchapter shall be exempt from all requirements of this subchapter that
are in excess of the requirements of ordinances in effect at the time of
acceptance. Such an exemption is not applicable to the requirements detailed in
§
52.21.
      (5)   The town has the authority to modify, grant exemptions, and/or
waive any and all the requirements of this subchapter and its associated
technical standards document. A pre-submittal meeting with the town may be
requested by the applicant to discuss the applicability of various provisions
of this subchapter and its associated technical standards document with regards
to unique or unusual circumstances relating to a project. However, any initial
determination of such applicability shall not be binding on future
determinations of the town that may be based on the review of more detailed
information and plans.
   (C)   Findings. The town finds that:
      (1)   Water bodies, roadways, structures, and other property within the
town or its planning jurisdiction boundary are at times subjected to flooding;
      (2)   Flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public and is
also a danger to the natural resources of the region;
      (3)   Land development alters the hydrologic response of watersheds,
resulting in increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, increased flooding,
increased stream channel erosion, and increased sediment transport and
deposition;
      (4)   Soil erosion resulting from land disturbing activities causes a
significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to be transported off-site
and deposited in ditches, streams, wetlands, lakes, and reservoirs;
      (5)   Increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, and the sediments
and pollutants associated with stormwater runoff from future development
projects within the town will, absent reasonable regulation and control,
adversely affect the town water bodies and water resources;
      (6)   Pollutant contributions from illicit discharges within the town
will, absent reasonable regulation, monitoring, and enforcement, adversely
affect the town water bodies and water resources;
      (7)   Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, non-point source pollution, and
illicit sources of pollution can be controlled and minimized by the regulation
of stormwater management;
      (8)   Adopting the standards, criteria, and procedures contained and
referenced in this subchapter and implementing the same will address many of
the deleterious effects of stormwater runoff and illicit discharges;
      (9)   Adopting this subchapter is necessary for the preservation of the
public health, safety, and welfare, for the conservation of natural resources,
and for compliance with state and federal regulations.
   (D)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the town through the regulation
of stormwater and non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system and to
protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water
resources within the town. This subchapter establishes methods for managing the
quantity and quality of stormwater entering into the storm drain system. The
objectives of this subchapter are:
      (1)   To reduce the hazard to public health and safety caused by
excessive stormwater runoff.
      (2)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm drain
system from construction site runoff.
      (3)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm drain
system from runoff from new development and re-development.
      (4)   To prohibit illicit discharges into the storm drain system.
      (5)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
subchapter.
   (E)   Abbreviations and definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the
abbreviations and definitions provided in §
52.27 shall apply.
   (F)   Responsibility for administration. The McCordsville Public Works
Commission and/or the McCordsville Town Engineer and/or the McCordsville Public
Works Commissioner (simply referenced as the “town” throughout the rest of this
subchapter and its accompanying Technical Standards Manual) shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Any powers granted or
duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in
writing by the town to qualified persons or entities acting in the beneficial
interest of or in the employ of the town.
   (G)   Interpretation. Words and phrases in this subchapter shall be
construed according to their common and accepted meanings, except that words
and phrases defined in §
52.27 shall be construed according to the respective definitions given in that
section. Technical words and technical phrases that are not defined in this
subchapter, but which have acquired particular meanings in law or in technical
usage shall be construed according to such meanings.
   (H)   Severability. The provisions of this subchapter are hereby declared
severable, and if any court of competent jurisdiction should declare any part
or provision of this subchapter invalid or unenforceable, such invalidity or
unenforceability shall not affect any other part or provision of this
subchapter.
   (I)   Disclaimer of liability.
      (1)   The degree of protection required by this subchapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on historical records,
engineering, and scientific methods of study. Larger storms may occur or
stormwater runoff amounts may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
subchapter does not imply that land uses permitted will be free from stormwater
damage. This subchapter shall not create liability on the part of the town or
any officer, representative, or employee thereof, for any damage that may
result from reliance on this subchapter or on any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
      (2)   The words “approve” and “accept”, and their common derivations as
used in this subchapter in relation to plans, reports, calculations, and
permits shall mean that the town has reviewed the material produced and
submitted by the applicant or his or her agents for general compliance with
this subchapter and the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, and that
such compliance would qualify the applicant to receive a stormwater management
approval or permit. Such an “approval” or “acceptance” is based on the
assumption that the project engineer has followed all appropriate engineering
methods in the design. Any stormwater quantity (drainage) or water quality
problems associated with the project caused by poor construction by the
contractor and/or poor engineering design or judgment, either on-site or off-
site, are the responsibility of the developer and the project engineer.
      (3)   Consideration, design, construction, and maintenance of safety
measures for proposed or existing stormwater facilities shall be the
responsibility of the developer, applicant, and/or the property owner. The town
and its officials and representatives shall not be responsible for maintenance
nor liability for any accidents.
(Ord. 040924B, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 52.21 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Applicability and exemptions.
      (1)   This section shall apply to all discharges, including illegal
dumping, entering the storm drain system under the control of the town,
regardless of whether the discharge originates from developed or undeveloped
lands, and regardless of whether the discharge is generated from an active
construction site or a stabilized site. These discharges include flows from
direct connections to the storm drain system, illegal dumping, and contaminated
runoff.
      (2)   Stormwater runoff from agricultural, timber harvesting, and mining
activities is exempted from the requirements of this section unless determined
to contain pollutants not associated with such activities or in excess of
standard practices. Farm residences are not included in this exemption.
      (3)   Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit,
waiver (unless the waiver is solely based on point source considerations, still
allowing non-point source discharge of a pollutant), or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for the subject discharge to the storm drain system, is also exempted
from this section.
   (B)   Prohibited discharges and connections.
      (1)   No person shall discharge to a MS4 conveyance, watercourse, or
waterbody, directly or indirectly, any substance other than stormwater or an
exempted discharge. Any person discharging stormwater shall effectively
minimize pollutants from also being discharged with the stormwater, through the
use of best management practices (BMPs).
      (2)   Concrete washout material shall be properly contained within an
appropriate practice and any waste material properly disposed of.
      (3)   The town is authorized to require dischargers to implement
pollution prevention measures, utilizing BMPs necessary to prevent or reduce
the discharge of pollutants into the town’s stormwater drainage system.
   (C)   Exempted discharges and connections. Notwithstanding other
requirements in this subchapter, stormwater commingled with other discharges
either regulated by other NPDES permits or determined by the town to not be a
significant source of pollutants, including the following, are exempt from the
requirements of this section:
      (1)   Water line and hydrant flushing for maintenance.
      (2)   Irrigation water.
      (3)   Footing, foundation, and crawl space drains (uncontaminated).
      (4)   Excess storm sewer cleaning water not collected by a vacuum truck
(uncontaminated).
      (5)   Fire suppression activities.
      (6)   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater.
      (7)   Springs.
      (8)   Residential car washing.
      (9)   Non-commercial car washing by community organizations.
      (10)   External building washdown, without detergents.
      (11)   Dechlorinated/debrominated residential swimming pool discharges.
      (12)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR
35.2005(20)).
      (13)   Pavement wash waters provided spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
      (14)   Uncontaminated condensate from air conditioning units, coolers,
and other compressors, and from outside storage of refrigerated gases or
liquids.
   (D)   Storage of hazardous or toxic material. Storage or stockpiling of
hazardous or toxic material within any watercourse, or in its associated
floodway or floodplain, is strictly prohibited. Storage or stockpiling of
hazardous or toxic material, including sewage treatment plant stockpiles, on
active construction sites shall include adequate protection and/or containment
so as to prevent any such materials from entering any temporary or permanent
stormwater conveyance or watercourse.
   (E)   Private property maintenance duties. Every person owning property
through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and
maintain that part of the watercourse located within their property boundaries,
free of trash, debris, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or
significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition,
the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within
or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard
to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
   (F)   Spill reporting.
      (1)   Any discharger who accidentally discharges into a waterbody any
substance other than stormwater or an exempted discharge shall immediately
inform the town and the Hancock County Emergency Management Agency concerning
the discharge. A written report concerning the discharge shall be filed with
the town and IDEM, by the dischargers, within five days. The written report
shall specify:
         (a)   The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof;
         (b)   The date, time, and estimated volume of the discharge;
         (c)   All measures taken to clean up the accidental discharge, and all
measures proposed to be taken to prevent any recurrence;
         (d)   The name and telephone number of the person making the report,
and the name and telephone number of a person who may be contacted for
additional information on the matter.
      (2)   A properly reported accidental discharge shall be an affirmative
defense to a civil infraction proceeding brought under this subchapter against
a discharger for such discharge. It shall not, however, be a defense to a legal
action brought to obtain an injunction, to obtain recovery of costs or to
obtain other relief because of or arising out of the discharge. A discharge
shall be considered properly reported only if the discharger complies with all
the requirements of this section. This requirement does not relieve discharger
from notifying other entities as required by state or federal regulations.
   (G)   Inspections and monitoring.
      (1)   Storm drainage system. The town has the authority to periodically
inspect the portion of the storm drainage system under the town control, in an
effort to detect and eliminate illicit connections and discharges into the
system. This inspection will include a screening of discharges from outfalls
connected to the system in order to determine if prohibited flows are being
conveyed into the storm drainage system. It could also include spot testing of
waters contained in the storm drainage system itself to detect the introduction
of pollutants into the system by means other than a defined outfall, such as
dumping or contaminated sheet runoff.
      (2)   Potential polluters. If, as a result of the storm drainage system
inspection, a discharger is suspected of an illicit discharge, the town may
inspect and/or obtain stormwater samples from stormwater runoff facilities of
the subject discharger, to determine compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter. Upon request, the discharger shall allow the town’s properly-
identified representative to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all
hours necessary for the purposes of such inspection or sampling. The town or
its properly-identified representative may place on the discharger’s property
the equipment or devices used for such sampling or inspection. Identified
illicit connections or discharges shall be subject to enforcement action as
described in §
52.26.
      (3)   New development and re-development. Following the final completion
of construction and the receipt of as-built drawings by the town, the town has
the authority to inspect new development and re-development sites to verify
that all on-site stormwater conveyances and connections to the storm drainage
system are in compliance with this section.
(Ord. 040924B, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 52.22 STORMWATER QUANTITY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Applicability and exemptions. The storage and controlled release of
excess stormwater runoff shall be required for all new business, institutional
developments, commercial and industrial developments, residential subdivisions,
planned development, rural estate subdivisions, and any redevelopment or other
new construction located within the town. The town, after thorough
investigation and evaluation, may waive the requirement of controlled runoff
for minor subdivisions. Additional potential exemptions regarding the detention
requirements are provided under division (B) below.
   (B)   Policy on stormwater quantity management.
      (1)   It is recognized that most streams and drainage channels serving
the town do not have sufficient capacity to receive and convey stormwater
runoff resulting from continued urbanization. Accordingly, the storage and
controlled release of excess stormwater runoff as well as compensation for loss
of floodplain storage shall be required for all developments and redevelopments
(as defined in §
52.27) located within the town. Release rate requirements, downstream
restriction considerations, acceptable outlet, adjoining property impact
considerations, policy on dams and levees, policy on fluvial erosion hazard
corridors, and compensatory floodplain storage rates are detailed in the town’s
Stormwater Technical Standards.
      (2)   Due to unknowns regarding the future development patterns and the
associated proposed stormwater quantity management systems within a watershed,
it is the policy of the town to discourage direct release of runoff from a new
development or redevelopment without providing detention. However, in rare
circumstances, where a comprehensive watershed-wide hydrologic study or
watershed plan of a major stream (not a “beat the peak” analysis) adopted by
the town substantiates the benefits of (or allows for) direct release for a
proposed development located adjacent to a major stream, the detention
requirements set in this subchapter may be waived. Other special circumstances
when such a waiver may be considered by town.
   (C)   Calculations and design standards and specifications. The calculation
methods as well as the type, sizing, and placement of all stormwater facilities
shall meet the design criteria, standards, and specifications outlined in the
town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual. The methods and procedures in the
Stormwater Technical Standards Manual are consistent with the policy stated
above.
   (D)   Drainage easement requirements. All stormwater systems, including
detention or retention basins, conveyance systems, structures and
appurtenances, located outside of the right-of-way shall be placed within a
drainage easement. There shall be no trees or shrubs planted, nor any
structures or fences erected in any drainage easement, unless otherwise
accepted by the town. Additional easement requirements along stormwater
conveyance systems are contained in the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards
Manual. All drainage improvements performed relative to the conveyance of
stormwater runoff and the perpetual maintenance thereof, within the latter
easements, shall be the responsibility of the owner or homeowner association.
   (E)   Placement of utilities. No utility company may disturb existing storm
drainage facilities without the consent of the town staff, whose decision may
be appealed to the Public Works Commission. All existing drainage facilities
shall have senior rights and damage to the facilities shall result in penalties
as prescribed in §
52.99.
   (F)   Structures near county regulated drains. For regulated drains not
located in platted subdivisions, unless otherwise accepted by the Hancock
County Drainage Board, no permanent structure (including fences) shall be
erected within 75 feet measured at right angles from a) the existing top edge
of each bank of a regulated open drain, as determined by the Hancock County
Drainage Board; or b) the center line of a piped regulated drain. The Indiana
Drainage Code may be consulted for further details.
   (G)   Inspection, maintenance, record keeping, and reporting.
      (1)   After the approval of the stormwater management permit by the town
and the commencement of construction activities, the town has the authority to
conduct inspections of the work being done to ensure full compliance with the
provisions of this section, the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, Design
and Construction Standards, and the terms and conditions of the approved
permit.
      (2)   The town also has the authority to perform long-term, post-
construction inspection of all public or privately owned stormwater quantity
facilities. The inspection will cover physical conditions, available storage
capacity, and the operational condition of key facility elements. Stormwater
quantity facilities shall be maintained in good condition, in accordance with
the designed and approved performance specifications for the facilities, in
addition to any prescribed operation and maintenance procedures, and shall not
be subsequently altered, revised or replaced except as approved by the town. If
deficiencies are found during the inspection, the owner of the facility will be
notified by the t and will be required to take all necessary measures to
correct such deficiencies. If the owner fails to correct the deficiencies
within the allowed time period, as specified in the notification letter, the
town will undertake the work and collect from the owner using lien rights if
necessary.
      (3)   Assignment of responsibility for maintaining facilities serving
more than one lot or holding shall be documented by appropriate covenants to
property deeds, unless responsibility is formally accepted by a public body,
and determined before the final stormwater permit is approved.
      (4)   Stormwater conveyance facilities may be donated to the town or
other unit of government designated by the town, for ownership and permanent
maintenance providing the town or other governmental unit is willing to accept
responsibility.
(Ord. 040924B, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 52.23 STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION FOR CONSTRUCTION SITES.
   (A)   Applicability and exemptions.
      (1)   The town will require a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP), which includes erosion and sediment control measures and materials
handling procedures, to be submitted as part of a project’s construction plans
and specifications. Any project located within the corporate boundaries of the
town that includes clearing, grading, excavation or other land disturbing
activities resulting in the disturbance of 10,000 square feet or more of total
land area is subject to the requirements of this section. This includes both
new development and re-development. This section also applies to disturbances
of land that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the
larger common plan will ultimately disturb 10,000 square feet or more of total
land area. Section
52.23(C) provides guidelines for calculating land disturbance. Projects meeting
the coverage requirements of IDEM’s CSGP shall also be in compliance with the
requirements contained in that permit.
      (2)   The requirements under this section do not apply to the following
activities, provided other applicable state permits contain provisions
requiring immediate implementation of soil erosion and sediment control
measures:
         (a)   Landfills that have been issued a certification of closure under
329 I.A.C. 10.
         (b)   Coal mining activities permitted under I.C. 14-34.
         (c)   Municipal solid waste landfills that are accepting waste
pursuant to a permit issued by the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management under 329 I.A.C. 10 that contains equivalent stormwater
requirements, including the expansion of landfill boundaries and construction
of new cells either within or outside the original solid waste permit boundary.
      (3)   For an individual lot where land disturbance is expected to be one
acre or more, the individual lot owner shall complete their own notice of
intent letter, apply for a stormwater permit from the town, and ensure that a
sufficient construction and stormwater pollution prevention plan is completed
and submitted in accordance with §
52.25, regardless of whether the individual lot is part of a larger permitted
project site. For an individual lot where land disturbance is 10,000 square
feet or more but less than one acre, an individual lot plot plan permit
application is required prior to receiving a building permit. Details of the
permitting process are contained in §
52.25.
      (4)   An individual lot located within a larger permitted project site,
is considered part of the larger permitted project site, and the individual lot
operator shall comply with the terms and conditions of the stormwater permit
approved for the larger project site. The stormwater permit application for the
larger project site shall include detailed erosion and sediment control
measures for individual lots. In addition, the builders of these individual
lots are required to submit an individual lot plot plan permit application
along with a SWPPP for that individual lot prior to receiving a building
permit. Details of the permitting process for individual lots and parcels are
contained in §
52.25 (D) and additional requirements for individual lots may be found in the
town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
      (5)   It will be the responsibility of the project site owner to complete
a stormwater permit application and ensure that a sufficient construction plan
is completed and submitted to the town in accordance with §
52.25. It will be the responsibility of the project site owner to ensure
compliance with this subchapter during the construction activity and
implementation of the construction plan, and to notify the town upon completion
of the project and stabilization of the site, requesting a termination
inspection to be performed by the town. However, all persons engaging in
construction and land disturbing activities on a permitted project site meeting
the applicability requirements shall comply with the requirements of this
section and this subchapter.
   (B)   Policy on stormwater pollution prevention.
      (1)   Effective stormwater pollution prevention on construction sites is
dependent on a combination of preventing movement of soil from its original
position (erosion control), intercepting displaced soil prior to entering a
waterbody (sediment control), and proper on-site materials handling.
For land disturbance of one acre or more, the developer shall submit to the
town, a SWPPP with detailed erosion and sediment control plans as well as a
narrative describing materials handling and storage, and construction
sequencing. The SWPPP and the project management log shall be retained for at
least three years from the date the project permit is terminated. For land
disturbances totaling 10,000 square feet or more but less than one acre,
appropriate erosion and sediment control measures that are consistent with the
town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual shall be designed and shown on the
plans.
      (2)   The required IDEM general and implementation requirements that
apply to all land disturbing activities are contained in the town’s Stormwater
Technical Standards Manual.
   (C)   Calculations and design standards and specifications.
      (1)   In calculating the total area of land disturbance, for the purposes
of determining applicability of this section to a project, the following
guidelines should be used:
         (a)   Off-site construction activities that provide services (for
example, road extensions, sewer, water, offsite stockpiles, and other
utilities) to a land disturbing project site, shall be considered as a part of
the total land disturbance calculation for the project site, when the activity
is under the control of the project site owner.
         (b)   To determine if multi-lot project sites are regulated by this
section, the area of land disturbance shall be calculated by adding the total
area of land disturbance for improvements, such as, roads, utilities, or common
areas, and the expected total disturbance on each individual lot, as determined
by the following:
            1.   For a single-family residential project site where the lots
are one-half acre or more, one-half acre of land disturbance shall be used as
the expected lot disturbance.
            2.   For a single-family residential project site where the lots
are less than one-half acre in size, the total lot shall be calculated as being
disturbed.
            3.   To calculate lot disturbance on all other types of project
sites, such as industrial and commercial projects project sites, a minimum of
one acre of land disturbance shall be used as the expected lot disturbance,
unless the lots are less than one acre in size, in which case the total lot
shall be calculated as being disturbed.
      (2)   The calculation methods as well as the type, sizing, and placement
of all stormwater pollution prevention measures for construction sites shall
meet the design criteria, standards, and specifications outlined in the Indiana
Stormwater Quality Manual, the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual,
and the product guidance/specifications of the manufacturer. The methods and
procedures included in these two references are in keeping with the above-
stated policy and meet the requirements of the IDEM’s CSGP. A copy of the
Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual may be obtained online through IDEM.
      (3)   The design requirements that would apply to all land-disturbing
activities and shall be considered in the selection, design, and implementation
of all stormwater quality and management measures contained in the SWPPP are
contained in the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
   (D)   Inspection, maintenance, record keeping, and reporting.
      (1)   Following approval of the stormwater management permit or
individual lot plot plan permit by the town and commencement of construction
activities, the town has the authority to conduct inspections of the site to
ensure full compliance with the provisions of this section, the approved
stormwater pollution prevention plan, the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual,
and the terms and conditions of the approved permit.
      (2)   A self-monitoring program (SMP) shall be implemented by the project
site owner to ensure the stormwater pollution prevention plan is working
effectively. A trained individual, acceptable to the town, shall monitor and
manage project construction and stormwater activities. Details regarding the
required monitoring activities are contained in the town’s Stormwater Technical
Standards Manual.
      (3)   The stormwater pollution prevention plan shall serve as a guideline
for stormwater quality but should not be interpreted to be the only basis for
implementation of stormwater quality measures for a project site. The project
site owner is responsible for implementing, in accordance with this section,
all measures necessary to adequately prevent polluted stormwater runoff.
Recommendations by the trained individual for modified stormwater quality
measures should be implemented.
      (4)   A project management log shall be maintained at the project site or
in the possession of on-site individuals associated with the management and
operations of the construction activities. Details regarding requirements
related to the project management log are contained in the town’s Stormwater
Technical Standards Manual.
(Ord. 040924B, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 52.24 STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT FOR POST-CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Applicability and exemptions.
      (1)   In addition to the requirements of §
52.23, the stormwater pollution prevention plan, which is to be submitted to
the town as part of the stormwater management permit application, shall also
include post-construction stormwater quality measures. These measures are
incorporated as a permanent feature into the site plan and are left in place
following completion of construction activities to continuously treat
stormwater runoff from the stabilized site. Any project located within the
corporate boundaries of the town that includes clearing, grading, excavation,
and other land disturbing activities, resulting in the disturbance of 10,000
square feet or more of total land area is subject to the requirements of this
section. This includes both new development and re-development, and
disturbances of land less than 10,000 square feet of total land area that are
part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan
will ultimately disturb 10,000 square feet or more of total land area. In
addition, regardless of the amount of disturbance, the town reserves the right
to require pre-treatment BMPs for proposed hot spot developments in accordance
with provisions contained in the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
      (2)   The requirements under this section do not apply to the following
activities: construction activities associated with a single-family residential
dwelling disturbing less than one acre, when the dwelling is not part of a
larger common plan of development or sale; or individual building lots within a
larger permitted project.
      (3)   The requirements under this section do not apply to the following
activities, provided other applicable state permits contain provisions
requiring immediate implementation of soil erosion control measures:
         (a)   Landfills that have been issued a certification of closure under
329 I.A.C. 10.
         (b)   Coal mining activities permitted under I.C. 14-34.
         (c)   Municipal solid waste landfills that are accepting waste
pursuant to a permit issued by the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management under 329 I.A.C. 10 that contain equivalent stormwater requirements,
including the expansion of landfill boundaries and construction of new cells
either within or outside the original solid waste permit boundary.
      (4)   It will be the responsibility of the project site owner to complete
a stormwater permit application and ensure that a sufficient construction plan
is completed and submitted to the town in accordance with §
52.25. It will be the responsibility of the project site owner to ensure proper
construction and installation of all stormwater BMPs (especially, the
protection of post-stormwater BMPs during construction phase) in compliance
with this subchapter and with the approved stormwater management permit, and to
notify the town upon completion of the project and stabilization of the site,
requesting a termination inspection to be performed by the town. However, all
eventual property owners of stormwater quality facilities meeting the
applicability requirements shall comply with the requirements of this section
and this subchapter.
   (B)   Policy on stormwater quality management.
      (1)   It is recognized that developed areas, as compared to undeveloped
areas, generally have increased imperviousness, decreased infiltration rates,
increased runoff rates, and increased concentrations of pollutants such as
fertilizers, herbicides, greases, oil, salts and other pollutants. As new
development and redevelopment continues within the corporate boundaries of the
town, measures shall be taken to intercept and filter pollutants from
stormwater runoff prior to reaching regional creeks, streams, and rivers.
Through the use of appropriate best management practices (BMPs) to treat the
water quality volume (WQv) or the water quality flow (Qwq), stormwater runoff
will be filtered and harmful amounts of sediment, nutrients, and contaminants
will be removed.
      (2)   It is also recognized that another major source of pollution in
many Indiana streams, including those within the corporate boundaries of the
town, is the streambank erosion associated with urbanizing watersheds. Stream
channels develop their shape in response to the volume and rate of runoff that
they receive from their contributing watersheds. Research has shown that in
hydrologically stable watersheds, the stream flow responsible for most of the
shaping of the channel (called the BANKFULL FLOW) occurs between every one to
two years. When land is developed, the volume and rate of runoff from that land
increases for these comparatively small flooding events that are not normally
addressed by the detention practices and the stream channel will adapt by
changing its shape. As the stream channel works to reach a new stable shape,
excess erosion occurs. As new development and re-development continues within
the corporate boundaries of the town, measures shall be taken to minimize the
impact of such development or redevelopment on streambank erosion. Through the
use of appropriate best management practices (BMPs) to retain and/or detain and
slowly release the channel protection volume (CPv), the volume and rate of
runoff for channel forming flows will be reduced in an attempt to minimize
increased streambank erosion in the receiving streams and channels.
      (3)   The project site owner shall submit to the town a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) that shows placement of appropriate BMP(s)
from a pre-approved list of BMPs specified in the town’s Stormwater Technical
Standards Manual. The SWPPP submittal shall include an Operation and
Maintenance Manual for all post-construction BMP(s) included in the project and
a notarized maintenance agreement, consistent with the sample agreement
provided in the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, providing for the
long-term maintenance of those BMPs, both of which shall be recorded with the
deed for the property on which the project is located. The noted BMP(s) shall
be designed, constructed, and maintained according to guidelines provided or
referenced in the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual. Practices other
than those specified in the preapproved list may be utilized. However, the
burden of proof, as to whether the performance and ease of maintenance of such
practices will be according to guidelines provided in the town’s Stormwater
Technical Standards Manual, would be placed with the applicant. Details
regarding the procedures and criteria for consideration of acceptance of such
BMPs are provided in the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
      (4)   Gasoline outlets and refueling areas shall install appropriate
practices (as noted under “Hot Spots” provision in the Technical Standards) to
reduce lead, copper, zinc, and polyaromatic hydrocarbons in stormwater runoff.
These requirements will apply to all new facilities and existing facilities
that replace their tanks, regardless of the size of the facility.
      (5)   Discharges from new development and redevelopment sites will not be
allowed directly into karst features without pre-treatment.
   (C)   Calculations and design standards and specifications.
      (1)   Calculation of land disturbance should follow the guidelines
discussed in §
52.22(C).
      (2)   The calculation methods as well as the type, sizing, and placement
of all stormwater quality management measures, or BMPs shall meet the design
criteria, standards, and specifications outlined in the town’s Stormwater
Technical Standards Manual. The methods and procedures included in the
referenced Standards is in keeping with the above stated policy and meet or
exceed the requirements of IDEM’s MS4 GP.
   (D)   Easement requirements. All stormwater quality management systems,
including detention or retention basins, filter strips, pocket wetlands, in-
line filters, infiltration systems, conveyance systems, structures and
appurtenances located outside of the right-of-way shall be incorporated into
permanent easements. For the purposes of monitoring, inspection, and general
maintenance activities, adequate easement width, as detailed in the town’s
Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, beyond the actual footprint of the
stormwater quality management facility as well as a 20-foot wide access
easement from a public right-of-way to each BMP shall be provided.
   (E)   Inspection, maintenance, record keeping, and reporting.
      (1)   After the approval of the stormwater management permit by the town
and the commencement of construction activities, the town has the authority to
conduct inspections of the work being done to ensure full compliance with the
provisions of this section, the approved stormwater pollution prevention plan,
the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, and the terms and conditions
of the approved permit.
      (2)   Stormwater quality facilities shall be maintained in good
condition, in accordance with the operation and maintenance procedures and
schedules listed in the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, in
addition to the designed and approved performance specifications for the
facilities and shall not be subsequently altered, revised, or replaced except
as approved by the town.
      (3)   Details regarding the required stormwater BMP maintenance
agreement, O&M Maintenance Manual, and a maintenance escrow account and their
transfer to other parties or subsequent owners prior to release of the
maintenance bond discussed in §
52.25 is provided in the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
      (4)   The town also has the authority to perform long-term, post-
construction inspection of all public or privately owned stormwater quality
facilities. The inspection will cover physical conditions, available water
quality storage capacity and the operational condition of key facility
elements. Noted deficiencies and required corrective action will be included in
an inspection report.
(Ord. 040924B, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 52.25 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Conceptual drainage plan review. In order to gain an understanding of
the drainage requirements for a specific project, a developer may submit
conceptual drainage plans and calculations for review by the town. The
direction provided by the town during such a review is based on preliminary
data and shall not be construed as an acceptance or binding on either party.
The following is a general listing of minimum data requirements for the review
of conceptual drainage plans:
      (1)   Two complete sets of conceptual plans showing general project
layout, including existing and proposed drainage systems (plan sheets shall be
larger than 11 inches by 17 inches, but not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches).
      (2)   General description of the existing and proposed drainage systems
in narrative form.
      (3)   Map showing on-site 100-year floodplain and floodway (please note
if none exists).
      (4)   Map showing all wetlands, lakes, and ponds on or adjacent to the
site.
      (5)   Watershed boundaries with USGS contours or best information
possible.
      (6)   Two copies of drainage calculations detailing existing and proposed
discharges from the site.
      (7)   Existing watercourse or regulated drains.
   (B)   Permit procedures. This section applies to all development, or re-
development of land, that results in land disturbance of one acre or more.
Individual lots with land disturbance less than one acre shall refer to §§
52.23 and
52.24 and division (D) below for plan review requirements and procedures.
Figure 1 is a flowchart summarizing the plan review/permit approval/project
termination compliance process for land disturbance of one acre or more and can
be found at the end of this section.
      (1)   General procedures.
         (a)   The project site owner shall submit an application for a
stormwater management permit to the town. The application will include a
completed application checklist, construction plan sheets, a stormwater
drainage technical report, a stormwater pollution prevention plan, and any
other necessary support information. Specific information to be included in the
application can be found in division (C) below. A full PDF copy of the
application shall be submitted to the town. The town may, at its discretion,
require one or more copies be submitted to other entities deemed appropriate by
the town. Additionally, a digital copy of the construction plans is required in
a format accepted by the town.
         (b)   After the town’s receipt of the application, the applicant will
be notified as to whether their application was complete or insufficient. The
applicant will be asked for additional information if the application is
insufficient. If the application is complete, it will be reviewed in detail by
the town and/or its plan review consultant(s). Once all comments have been
received and review completed, the town will either approve the project,
request modifications or deny the project. If the applicant does not agree with
or accept the review findings and wishes to seek an appeal, the town will place
the project on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Public
Works Commission, provided the agenda for the meeting has not yet been
advertised or published. If time for notification does not allow, the project
shall be placed on the following regularly scheduled meeting of the Public
Works Commission. If the project must go through a scheduled meeting, the town
will furnish the applicant a complete list of comments and objections to the
plans and accompanying data prior to the scheduled meeting. After the scheduled
meeting, the town will either issue a permit, request modifications to the
construction plans, or deny the project.
         (c)   Any person to which this subchapter applies may request a
variance from the provisions of this subchapter in writing and mailed certified
mail return receipt requested to the Public Works Commission c/o McCordsville
Town Hall, McCordsville, Indiana. The request shall identify the provision(s)
of the subchapter from which the applicant requests the variance and a detailed
statement as to the basis for the request. Written notice of the date, time and
location at which the variance request will be considered by the Public Works
Commission shall be mailed to the applicant by the Board. At the date, time and
location or any other date, time or location as established by the Public Works
Commission, the variance may be considered whereupon a decision to deny, grant
or grant in part the variance being requested, will be made. The Public Works
Commission may consider the recommendations and comments of the Town Engineer
and/or the Public Works Commissioner as well as the comments of the applicant
or any other person(s) having knowledge of information pertinent to the
variance request. The Public Works Commission may grant, in whole or in part, a
variance from the terms of this subchapter only upon finding that the following
requirements have been satisfied:
            1.   The application of this subchapter’s provisions will present
or cause practical difficulties for a development or development site;
provided, however, that practical difficulties shall not include the need for
the site owner to incur additional reasonable expenses in order to comply with
this subchapter; and
            2.   The granting of the relief requested will not substantially
prevent the goals and purposes of this subchapter, nor result in less effective
management of stormwater runoff.
         (d)   The project site owner shall notify the town and IDEM before
beginning construction. Notification to the town shall be in the form of an
email while the notification to IDEM shall be in the form of an online IDEM NOI
submittal. Once a permit has been issued and the pending construction
notifications submitted to the town and IDEM before the beginning of
construction, construction may commence 48 hours after the NOI is submitted to
IDEM. Once construction starts, the project owner shall monitor construction
activities and inspect all stormwater pollution prevention measures in
compliance with this subchapter and the terms and conditions of the approved
permit.
         (e)   Upon completion of construction activities, a certification of
completion and compliance and as-built plans shall be submitted to the town.
Once the construction site has been stabilized and all temporary erosion and
sediment control measures have been removed, a notification shall be sent to
the town, requesting a termination inspection. The town, or its representative,
shall inspect the construction site to verify that the completed project is
fully stabilized and meets the requirements of this subchapter and its
Technical Standards and that the terms and conditions of the permit. Once the
applicant receives a signed copy of the termination inspection checklist
confirming compliance, they shall forward a copy to IDEM along with the
required IDEM NOT form. Permits issued by the town under this scenario will
expire five years from the date of issuance. If construction is not completed
within five years, an updated permit application shall be submitted to the
town, and an updated NOI shall be resubmitted to IDEM at least 90 days prior to
expiration.
      (2)   SWPPP review time limits. Pursuant to I.C. 13-18-27, an MS4-
designated entity or other review authority such as SWCD shall make a
preliminary determination as to whether the construction plan associated with
SWPPP is substantially complete before the end of the tenth working day (for
sites with less than five acres of land disturbance) after the day on which the
SWPPP is submitted to the review authority or the fourteenth working day (for
sites with five acres or larger of land disturbance) after the day on which the
SWPPP is submitted to the review authority. Note that the above time limits
only apply to the preliminary determination regarding the adequacy of the SWPPP
portion of the overall stormwater permit submittal and does not affect any
official or non-official permit review timelines set by the entity for other
aspects of the stormwater permit application.
   (C)   Information requirements.
      (1)   Specific projects or activities may be exempt from all or part of
the informational requirements listed below. Exemptions are detailed in the
“Applicability and Exemptions” provisions of §§
52.21 through
52.24. If a project or activity is exempt from any or all requirements of this
subchapter, an application should be filed listing the exemption criteria met,
in lieu of the information requirements listed below. This level of detailed
information is not required from individual lots, disturbing less than one acre
of land, developed within a larger permitted project site. Review and
acceptance of such lots is covered under division (D) below.
      (2)   The different elements of a permit submittal include an application
checklist, construction plans, a stormwater drainage technical report, a
stormwater pollution prevention plan for active construction sites, a post-
construction stormwater pollution prevention plan, and any other necessary
supporting information. All plans, reports, calculations, and narratives shall
be signed and sealed by a professional engineer or a licensed surveyor,
registered in the State of Indiana who also meets the definition of a trained
individual found in §
52.27.
         (a)   Application checklist. As part of the town’s stormwater
management permit application package, the application checklist provided in
the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual shall be completed by the
applicant and provided along with other required supporting material.
         (b)   Construction plans. Construction plan sheets (larger than 11
inches by 17 inches, but not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches in size) and an
accompanying narrative report shall describe and depict the existing and
proposed conditions. Note that in order to gain an understanding of and to
evaluate the relationship between the proposed improvements for a specific
project section/phase and the proposed improvements for an overall multi-
section (phased) project, the detailed information requested herein for the
first section/phase being permitted shall be accompanied by an overall project
plan that includes the location, dimensions, and supporting analyses of all
detention/retention facilities, primary conveyance facilities, and outlet
conditions. Construction plans shall include items listed in the application
checklist provided in the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
         (c)   Stormwater drainage technical report. A written stormwater
drainage technical report shall contain a discussion of the steps taken in the
design of the stormwater drainage system. Note that in order to gain an
understanding of and to evaluate the relationship between the proposed
improvements for a specific project section/phase and the proposed improvements
for an overall multi-section (phased) project, the detailed information
requested herein for the first section/phase being permitted shall be
accompanied by an overall project plan that includes the location, dimensions,
and supporting analyses of all detention/retention facilities, primary
conveyance facilities, and outlet conditions. The technical report needs to
include items listed in the application checklist provided in the town’s
Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
         (d)   Stormwater pollution prevention plan for construction sites. For
sites with total disturbance of one acre or more, a stormwater pollution
prevention plan associated with construction activities shall be designed to,
at least, meet the requirements of this subchapter. The SWPPP and construction
plans shall include the items listed in the application checklist provided in
the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual. For land disturbances
totaling 10,000 square feet or more of land area but less than one acre,
appropriate erosion and sediment control measures that are consistent with the
town’s Technical Standards shall be designed and shown on the plans.
         (e)   Post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan. For
sites with total land disturbance of 10,000 square feet or more of total land
area, a post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan shall be
designed to, at least, meet the requirements of this subchapter and shall
include the information provided in the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards
Manual. The post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan shall
include items listed in the application checklist provided in the town’s
Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
   (D)   Review of individual lots.
      (1)   For all individual lots disturbing 10,000 square feet or more but
less than one acre, a formal review and issuance of an individual lot plot plan
permit will be required before a building permit can be issued. Similarly, for
individual lots disturbing less than 10,000 square feet of total land area,
developed within a larger permitted project, a formal review and issuance of an
individual lot plot plan permit will be required before a building permit can
be issued. All stormwater management measures necessary to comply with this
subchapter shall be implemented in accordance with permitted plan for the
larger project.
      (2)   The following information shall be submitted to the town, for
review and acceptance, by the individual lot operator, whether owning the
property or acting as the agent of the property owner, as part of a request for
review and issuance of an individual lot plot plan permit that shall be
obtained prior to the issuance of a building permit.
         (a)   A site layout for the subject lot and all adjacent lots showing
building pad location, dimensions, and elevations, and the drainage patterns
and swales.
         (b)   Erosion and sediment control plan that, at a minimum, includes
the following measures:
            1.   Installation and maintenance of a stable construction site
access.
            2.   Installation and maintenance of appropriate perimeter erosion
and sediment control measures prior to land disturbance.
            3.   Minimization of sediment discharge and tracking from the lot.
            4.   Clean-up of sediment that is either tracked or washed onto
roads. Bulk clearing of sediment shall not include flushing the area with
water. Cleared sediment shall be redistributed or disposed of in a manner that
is in compliance with all applicable statutes and rules.
            5.   Implementation of concrete or cementitious wash water
practices that securely contain and allow for the proper disposal of concrete
or cementitious wash water.
            6.   Adjacent lots disturbed by an individual lot operator shall be
repaired and stabilized with temporary or permanent surface stabilization.
            7.   Self-monitoring program including plan and procedures.
         (c)   Certification of compliance stating that the individual lot plan
is consistent with the stormwater management permit, as approved by the town,
for the larger project (if the individual lot is part of a larger permitted
project).
         (d)   Name, address, telephone number, and list of qualifications of
the trained individual in charge of the mandatory stormwater pollution
prevention self-monitoring program for the project site.
      (3)   The individual lot operator is responsible for installation and
maintenance of all erosion and sediment control measures until the site is
stabilized.
   (E)   Changes to plans. Any changes or deviations in the detailed plans and
specifications after approval of the applicable stormwater management permit
shall be filed with, and accepted by, the town prior to the land development
involving the change. Copies of the changes, if accepted, shall be attached to
the original plans and specifications.
   (F)   Fee structure.
      (1)   Fee amount. As a condition of the submittal and the review of
development plans by the town, the applicant shall agree to pay the town the
applicable fee, as set by the town with respect to the review of all drainage
submittals, preliminary plans, final plans, construction plans and accompanying
information and data, as well as prepaid inspection fees.
      (2)   Time of payment.
         (a)   After the meeting at which the town is scheduled to consider
acceptance of the applicant’s final stormwater management plan, the town will
furnish a written statement to the applicant specifying the total amount due
the town in connection with the review of the applicant’s submittals, plans and
accompanying information and data, including the amount required to be paid by
applicant for review and pre-paid inspection fees.
         (b)   As a condition of acceptance of final drainage plans by the
town, applicant shall pay to the town the sum set forth in the statement. The
town may issue such a billing statement before the project advances to the
final acceptance stage, and such payment is due by applicant upon receipt of
the billing statement regardless of whether the project is advanced to the
final acceptance stage.
         (c)   The town shall have the right to not accept the drainage
improvements or to not approve the advancement of any project for which the
applicable fees have not been paid.
      (3)   Method of payment. Fees shall be paid by one of the following
methods:
         (a)   Certified check.
         (b)   Cashier’s check.
         (c)   Money order.
         (d)   Credit card (if accepted).
      (4)   Refund of payment. Fees are refundable only if the town determines
that compliance by the development or project to this subchapter is not
necessary.
      (5)   Fee schedule. Stormwater permit application and inspection fees
will be in accordance with the fee schedule set by the town as a separate
ordinance or resolution.
   (G)   Required assurances. This section shall apply to all projects whether
the stormwater management system or portions thereof will be dedicated to the
town or retained privately. As a condition of approval and issuance of the
permit, the town shall require the applicant to provide assurance in form of a
performance bond when the stormwater management plan has been accepted and
before construction begins. The assurance will guarantee a good faith execution
of the stormwater drainage plan, the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the
stormwater quality management plan, and any permit conditions. The assurance
shall be for an amount equal to 125% of the total costs of all stormwater
management measures for the entire project. The above-mentioned costs shall be
based on an estimate as prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor. The
costs shall be for the installation and ongoing monitoring and maintenance of
erosion control measures and the construction and ongoing monitoring and
maintenance of storm drainage infrastructure, detention/retention facilities,
and stormwater quality BMPs, as regulated under this subchapter, until the
construction is completed, the site is stabilized, and as-built plans are
accepted by the town. Assurances shall be for a minimum of $5,000. All other
performance bonds, maintenance bonds or other assurances required by the town
in accordance with any and all other ordinances shall also apply and so be
required. Local governmental jurisdictions may require additional performance
and/or maintenance assurances. The intent of this assurance is not only to
complete the installation of storm drain infrastructure for the project, but
also to assure that adequate stormwater pollution prevention measures are
properly installed and maintained. If adequate assurances are set aside by the
project site owner for the overall project, proof of total assurance can be
submitted in place of an individual stormwater assurance.
   (H)   Terms and conditions of permits.
      (1)   (a)   In granting a stormwater management permit, the town may
impose such terms and conditions as are reasonably necessary to meet the
purposes of this subchapter. The project site owner shall ensure compliance
with such terms and conditions. Non-compliance with the terms and conditions of
permits will be subject to enforcement as described in §
52.26.
         (b)   The project site owner shall inform all general contractor,
construction management firms, grading or excavating contractors, utility
contractors, and the contractors that have primary oversight on individual
building lots of the terms and conditions of the stormwater management permit
and the schedule for proposed implementation.
         (c)   In the event that a project site is determined to impact or
discharge to a sensitive area or is located in an impact drainage area, the
town may require more stringent stormwater quantity and quality measures than
detailed in this subchapter or in the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual.
      (2)   Determination of sensitive areas. Sensitive areas include highly
erodible soils, wetlands, karst areas, threatened or endangered species
habitat, outstanding waters, impaired waters, recreational waters, and surface
drinking water sources. Any discharge from a stormwater practice that is a
Class V injection well shall meet the Indiana groundwater quality standards and
registered with the U.S. EPA as required by the IDEM. If wetlands are suspected
on a site, a wetland delineation shall be completed by the applicant in
accordance with the methodology established by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE). The need for the applicant to check for the presence of threatened or
endangered species habitat will be determined on a case-by-case basis. Special
terms and conditions for development determined to impact or discharge to any
sensitive area shall be included in the stormwater management permit.
      (3)   (a)   Determination of impact drainage areas. The following areas
shall be designated as impact drainage areas, unless good reason for not
including them is presented to the town.
            1.   A floodway or floodplain as designated by the most updated
FEMA Code dealing with floodplain regulation and/or by the best available data
through IDNR.
            2.   Land within 25 feet of each bank of any ditch within the
town’s system.
            3.   Land within 15 feet of the centerline of any stormwater
infrastructure or enclosed conduit within the town’s system.
            4.   Land within 75 feet of each bank of a county open regulated
drain.
            5.   Land within 50 feet of a natural drainageway.
            6.   Land within 75 feet of the centerline of any tiled regulated
drain.
            7.   Land within the fluvial erosion hazard (FEH) corridor.
            8.   Land within the expected breach inundation zone of an existing
or proposed new dam, and areas protected from flooding by a levee.
            9.   Areas with specific maximum allowable release rates based on
detailed watershed studies.
         (b)   The town is authorized, but is not required, to classify certain
geographical areas as impact drainage areas. In determining impact drainage
areas, the town may consider such factors as topography, soil type, capacity of
existing drains, and distance from adequate drainage facility.
         (c)   Land that does not have an adequate outlet, taking into
consideration the capacity and depth of the outlet, may be designated as an
impact drainage area by the town. Special terms and conditions for development
within any impact drainage area shall be included in the stormwater management
permit.
         (d)   A list of watersheds with specific maximum allowable release
rates are contained in the town’s Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
      (4)   Determination of designated drainage areas served by regional
facilities. The town is authorized, but is not required, to classify certain
geographical areas as designated drainage areas that are or will be served by
regional facilities, such as a regional pond. In such cases, an infrastructure
development fee (IDF) rate may be established for the designated drainage area.
The basis for determining such a fee for a proposed development or re-
development within a designated drainage area will be as detailed in the town’s
Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.
   (I)   Certification of as-built plans. This section shall apply to all
projects whether the stormwater management system or portions thereof will be
dedicated to the town or retained privately. After completion of construction
of the project and before the release of required performance assurances
referenced in division (G) above, a professionally prepared and certified “as-
built” set of plans (record drawings) shall be submitted to the town for
review. These as-built plans/record drawings shall be prepared and certified by
the engineer of record, i.e., the company/engineer who originally prepared the
construction plans. Additionally, a digital copy of the “as-built” plans
(record drawings) as well as finalized digital versions of all analyses,
models, manuals, and reports that are consistent with the as-built conditions
is required in a format acceptable to the town. These plans shall include all
pertinent data relevant to the completed storm drainage system and stormwater
management facilities, and shall include:
      (1)   Pipe size and pipe material.
      (2)   Invert elevations.
      (3)   Top rim elevations.
      (4)   Elevation of the emergency overflow (spillway) for ponds.
      (5)   Grades along the emergency flood routing path(s).
      (6)   Pipe structure lengths.
      (7)   BMP types, dimensions, and boundaries/easements.
      (8)   “As-planted” plans for BMPs, as applicable.
      (9)   Data and calculations showing detention basin storage volume.
      (10)   Data and calculations showing BMP treatment capacity.
      (11)   Certified statement on plans stating the completed storm drainage
system and stormwater management facilities substantially comply with
construction plans and the stormwater management permit as approved by the
town. (See certificate in the Stormwater Technical Standards Manual.)
   (J)   Post-project verifications.
      (1)   To verify that all stormwater infrastructure is functioning
properly, visual recordings (via closed circuit television) of such
infrastructure, including all subsurface drains, shall be required twice, once
following the completion of installation of the stormwater management system
and submittal of as-builts, and the second time before release of maintenance
bonds. These visual recordings will be scheduled by the town and paid for by
the developer. Notices shall be provided to the town within 72 hours following
the completion of installation and again at least 60 days prior to the
expiration date of the maintenance bond so that the noted recordings may be
scheduled. Reports summarizing the results of the noted visual recordings shall
be reviewed and accepted by the town before the plat is recommended for
recording and again before the maintenance bond shall be recommended to be
released.
      (2)   Additional requirements for transfer of any applicable stormwater
BMP maintenance agreement, O&M Maintenance Manual, and maintenance escrow
accounts to subsequent owners prior to release of the maintenance bond is
discussed in §
52.24.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1201.png]
 
   Figure 1: Permit Approval and Project Termination Sign-off Process
(Ord. 040924B, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 52.26 COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Compliance with this subchapter. To secure compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter, violations thereof shall be subject to the
enforcement provisions set forth under division (B) below. Additionally,
compliance with all applicable ordinances of the town as well as with
applicable State of Indiana statutes and regulations shall also be required.
Unless otherwise stated, all other specifications referred to in this
subchapter shall be the most recent edition available.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         COMPLIANCE. The act of correcting a violation or violations within the
time frame specified by the town.
         OFFENSE. Both a violation and a failure of compliance on a particular
project constitute an OFFENSE. If there are multiple violations or multiple
failures of compliance on the same project, each shall be considered a SEPARATE
OFFENSE as further stated in divisions (B)(3) below.
         VIOLATION. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of
this subchapter, the requirements of an approved stormwater management design
plan or permit, and/or the requirements of a recorded stormwater maintenance
agreement may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section
and in §
52.99(B). Any such action or inaction is deemed to be a public nuisance and may
be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief, in addition to and separate
from the imposition of any of the enforcement actions described below and in §
52.99(B).
      (2)   Warning notice. When the town finds that any person has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, or any order issued
hereunder, the town may serve upon that person a written warning notice,
specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting
the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution
whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of
the matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieves the alleged
violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of
the warning notice. Nothing in this division (A)(2) shall limit the authority
of the town to take any action, including emergency action or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a warning notice.
   (B)   Enforcement of this subchapter.
      (1)   Notice of violation/citation.
         (a)   If the town determines that an applicant or other responsible
person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an
approved stormwater management design plan, a recorded stormwater management
maintenance agreement, or the provisions of this subchapter, it may issue a
written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person and
the owner of the property. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by
this subchapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of
violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of
the activity being conducted on the site.
         (b)   The notice of violation can be in the form of a citation ticket
and/or a written letter that would contain detailed inspection findings,
conclusions of law, disposition of warning or fines assessed, stipulated
remedial actions as discussed with the responsible party representative,
reasonable deadlines for those remedial actions, and the date of re-inspection.
      (2)   Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties,
and remedies authorized by this subchapter, the town may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, public education, and the like.
      (3)   Stop work order.
         (a)   In addition to the penalties listed in §
52.99 (B), if land disturbance activities are conducted contrary to the
provisions of this subchapter or accepted final stormwater management plans,
the town may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person
engaged in the doing or causing of such work to be done, and any such persons
shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the town to proceed with the
work. Note that per I.C. 13-18-27-18, if the town has made a conclusive
favorable determination concerning a construction plan (including SWPPP) and
work on the construction project has begun, the town may not order work on the
construction project to stop on the grounds that the erosion and sediment
control measures included in the construction plan are not adequate unless the
project site owner is notified in writing of the inadequacies that the town
perceives in the erosion and sediment control measures and the perceived
inadequacies are not resolved within 72 hours after the project site owner
receives the written notice. However, this limitation does not prohibit the
town from ordering work on a construction project to stop immediately if the
project site owner is creating a public health hazard or a safety hazard.
         (b)   A stop work order will be posted on the site by the town and it
is unlawful for any person to remove the notice or continue any work on the
site without permission from the town. The town may also undertake or cause to
be undertaken, any necessary or advisable protective measures to prevent
violations of this subchapter or to avoid or reduce the effects of
noncompliance herewith. The cost of any such protective measures shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the work is being done
and the responsibility of any person carrying out or participating in the work.
         (c)   The town may bring an action under I.C. 34-28-5-1(b), to be read
together with I.C. 34-6-2-86(1)(B) and 13-21-3-12(a)(4), to enforce a stop work
order against any person who neglects or fails to comply with a stop work
order.
         (d)   For construction projects that are operating under a SWPPP
approved by the town, if a stop work order is issued on the grounds that the
erosion and sediment control measures included in the construction plan are not
adequate, the project site owner shall be notified in writing of the
inadequacies in the erosion and sediment control measures and the project site
owner has 72 hours after receiving written notice to resolve the identified
inadequacies before the stop work order can take effect.
         (e)   The 72-hour period to resolve identified inadequacies on a
construction project does not apply if the stop work order is issued to a
construction project where the project site owner is creating a public health
hazard or safety hazard.
      (4)   Withhold certificate of occupancy. The town may refuse to issue a
certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or
being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person
has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has
otherwise satisfied the requirements of this subchapter as determined by the
town.
      (5)   Suspension, revocation, or modification of permits. The town may
suspend, revoke, or modify any existing permit that the violator may also have
been previously granted. A suspended, revoked, or modified permit may be
reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the
remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured
the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon
such conditions as the town may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other
responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such
violations.
      (6)   Suspension of access to the stormwater drainage system.
         (a)   Emergency cease and desist orders.
            1.   When the town finds that any person has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this subchapter, or any order issued hereunder, or
that the person’s past violations are likely to recur, and that the person’s
violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an actual or threatened
discharge to the MS4 or Waters of the United States which reasonably appears to
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or to the environment, the town may issue an order to the violator
directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing
the violator to immediately comply with all ordinance requirements and take
such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations
and/or terminating the discharge.
            2.   Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under
this division (B)(6)(a) shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its
endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger’s failure to immediately
comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the town may commence court action
against such person under I.C. 34-28-5-1(b), to be read together with I.C. 34-
6-2-86(1)(B) and 13-21-3-12(a)(4), to enforce a stop work order.
            3.   The town may allow the person to recommence its discharge when
it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the town that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated
against the discharger under this subchapter. A person that is responsible, in
whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall
submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful
discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the town
within five days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency
cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the violator.
         (b)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations.
The town may, without prior notice, suspend stormwater drainage system
discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons,
or to the stormwater drainage system or waters of the state if the violator
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the town may
take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
stormwater drainage system or waters of the state, or to minimize danger to
persons.
         (c)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the stormwater drainage system in violation of this subchapter
may have their stormwater drainage system access terminated if such termination
would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The town will notify a violator of
the proposed termination of its stormwater drainage system access. The violator
may petition the town for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an
offense if the person reinstates stormwater drainage system access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the town.
   (C)   Cost of abatement of the violation.
      (1)   In addition to any other remedies, should any owner fail to comply
with the provisions of this subchapter, the town may, after giving notice and
opportunity for compliance, have the necessary work done, and the owner shall
be required to promptly reimburse the town for all costs of such work.
      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking such
other lawful action as may be necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. All
costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
Costs include, but are not limited to, repairs to the stormwater drainage
system made necessary by the violation, as well as those penalties levied by
the EPA or IDEM for violation of the town’s NPDES permit, administrative costs,
attorney fees, court costs, and other costs and expenses associated with the
enforcement of this subchapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
      (3)   If the amount due for abatement of the violation is not paid within
a timely manner as determined by the decision of the town or by the expiration
of the time in which to file an appeal, the town may commence a court action to
recover the costs assessed under I.C. 34-28-5-1(b), to be read together with
I.C. 34-6-2-86(1)(B) and 13-21-3-12(a)(4).
   (D)   Appeals.
      (1)   Appeal of notice of violation. Any person to whom any provision of
this subchapter has been applied may appeal in writing, not later than 30 days
after the action or decision being appealed from, to the Public Works
Commission the action or decision whereby any such provision was so applied.
Such appeal shall identify the matter being appealed, and the basis for the
appeal. The Public Works Commission shall consider the appeal and make a
decision whereby it affirms, rejects or modifies the action being appealed. In
considering any such appeal, the Public Works Commission may consider the
recommendations of the town staff and the comments of other persons having
knowledge of the matter. In considering any such appeal, the Public Works
Commission may grant a variance from the terms of this subchapter to provide
relief, in whole or in part, from the action being appealed, but only upon
finding that the following requirements are satisfied:
         (a)   The application of this subchapter’s provisions being appealed
will present or cause practical difficulties for a development or development
site; provided, however, that practical difficulties shall not include the need
for the developer to incur additional reasonable expenses in order to comply
with this subchapter; and
         (b)   The granting of the relief requested will not substantially
prevent the goals and purposes of this subchapter, nor result in less effective
management of stormwater runoff.
         (c)   Any person who has appealed a violation to the Public Works
Commission may appeal an adverse decision of the Board to the Hancock County
Court within 60 days of the Board’s order, all pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-9(e) and
(f).
      (2)   Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been
corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation,
or, in the event of an appeal, within five days of the decision of the Public
Works Commission upholding the decision of the town, then representatives of
the town shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to
take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property, including the commencing of a court action under I.C. 34-28-5-1(b),
to be read together with I.C. 34-6-2-86(1)(B) and 13-21-3-12(a)(4), to enforce
the order of the Public Works Commission.
(Ord. 040924B, passed 5-14-2024)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 34-6-2-86(1)(B) was repealed by P.L.186-2025, Sec. 175; P.L.186-2025,
Sec. 273.
§ 52.27 ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Abbreviations. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following
abbreviations shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BMP   Best management practice
COE   United States Army Corps of Engineers
CWA   Clean Water Act
EPA   Environmental Protection Agency
IDEM  Indiana Department of Environmental Management
MS4   Municipal separate storm sewer system
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
POTW  Publicly owned treatment works
SWCD  Soil and Water Conservation District
SWPPP Stormwater pollution prevention plan
 
   (B)   Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Design, construction, and maintenance
practices and criteria for stormwater facilities that minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, prevent erosion, and capture pollutants.
      CAPACITY (OF A STORM DRAINAGE FACILITY). The maximum flow that can be
conveyed or stored by a storm drainage facility without causing damage to
public or private property.
      CHANNEL. A portion of a natural or artificial watercourse which
periodically or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting
link between two bodies of water. It has a defined bed and banks which serve to
confine the water.
      COMPLIANCE. The act of correcting a violation or violations within the
time frame specified by the town.
      CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Land disturbing activities, and land disturbing
activities associated with the construction of infrastructure and structures.
This term does not include routine ditch or road maintenance or minor
landscaping projects.
      CONSTRUCTION SITE ACCESS. A stabilized stone surface at all points of
ingress or egress to a project site, for the purpose of capturing and detaining
sediment carried by tires of vehicles or other equipment entering or exiting
the project site.
      CONSTRUCTION SUPPORT ACTIVITIES. Include but are not limited to the
following: concrete or asphalt batch plants, equipment staging yards, material
storage areas, excavated material disposal areas, borrow areas. Such activities
must not support multiple, unrelated projects, be a commercial/industrial
operation, or continue to operate beyond the completion of the construction
activity for the project it supports.
      CONTIGUOUS. Adjoining or in actual contact with.
      CONTOUR. An imaginary line on the surface of the earth connecting points
of the same elevation.
      CONTRACTOR or SUBCONTRACTOR. An individual or company hired by the
project site or individual lot owner, their agent, or the individual lot
operator to perform services on the project site.
      CONVEYANCE. Any structural method for transferring stormwater between at
least two points. The term includes piping, ditches, swales, curbs, gutters,
catch basins, channels, storm drains, and roadways.
      DETENTION. Managing stormwater runoff by temporary holding and controlled
release.
      DETENTION BASIN. A facility constructed or modified to restrict the flow
of stormwater to a prescribed maximum rate, and to detain concurrently the
excess waters that accumulate behind the outlet.
      DEVELOPER. Any person financially responsible for construction activity,
or an owner of property who sells or leases, or offers for sale or lease, any
lots in a subdivision.
      DEVELOPMENT.
         (a)   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
including but not limited to:
            1.   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a building or
any addition to a building;
            2.   Construction of flood control structures such as levees,
dikes, dams or channel improvements;
            3.   Construction or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
            4.   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more
than 180 days;
            5.   Installing utilities, erection of walls, construction of
roads, or similar projects;
            6.   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling
operations;
            7.   Storage of materials; or
            8.   Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
         (b)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the maintenance
of existing buildings and facilities such as painting, re-roofing, resurfacing
roads, or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent
buildings.
      DISCHARGE. In the context of water quantity provisions, usually the rate
of water flow, i.e., a volume of fluid passing a point per unit time commonly
expressed as cubic feet per second, cubic meters per second, gallons per
minute, or millions of gallons per day. In the context of water quality
provisions, the DISCHARGE means any addition of liquids or solids to a water
body or a flow conveyance facility.
      DISPOSAL. The discharge, deposit, injection, spilling, leaking, or
placing of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or on any land or water so
that the solid waste or hazardous waste, or any constituent of the waste, may
enter the environment, be emitted into the air, or be discharged into any
waters, including groundwater.
      DITCH. A man-made, open watercourse in or into which excess surface water
or groundwater drained from land, stormwater runoff, or floodwaters flow either
continuously or intermittently.
      DRAIN. A buried slotted or perforated pipe or other conduit (subsurface
drain) or a ditch (open drain) for carrying off surplus groundwater or surface
water.
      DRAINAGE. The removal of excess surface water or groundwater from land by
means of ditches or subsurface drains. Also see NATURAL DRAINAGE.
      DRAINAGE AREA. The area draining into a stream at a given point. It may
be of different sizes for surface runoff, subsurface flow and base flow, but
generally the surface runoff area is considered as the DRAINAGE AREA.
      DURATION. The time period of a rainfall event.
      ENVIRONMENT. The sum total of all the external conditions that may act
upon a living organism or community to influence its development or existence.
      EROSION. The wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice,
gravity, or other geological agents. The following terms are used to describe
different types of water erosion:
         (a)   ACCELERATED EROSION. Erosion much more rapid than normal or
geologic erosion, primarily as a result of the activities of man.
         (b)   CHANNEL EROSION. An erosion process whereby the volume and
velocity of flow wears away the bed and/or banks of a well-defined channel.
         (c)   GULLY EROSION. An erosion process whereby runoff water
accumulates in narrow channels and, over relatively short periods, removes the
soil to considerable depths, ranging from one to two feet to as much as 75 to
100 feet.
         (d)   RILL EROSION. An erosion process in which numerous small
channels only several inches deep are formed; occurs mainly on recently
disturbed and exposed soils (see RILL).
         (e)   SHEET EROSION. The gradual removal of a fairly uniform layer of
soil from the land surface by runoff water.
         (f)   SPLASH EROSION. The spattering of small soil particles caused by
the impact of raindrops on wet soils; the loosened and spattered particles may
or may not be subsequently removed by surface runoff.
      EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL. A practice, or a combination of practices,
to minimize sedimentation by first reducing or eliminating erosion at the
source and then as necessary, trapping sediment to prevent it from being
discharged from or within a project site.
      FILTER STRIP. Usually a long, relatively narrow area (usually, 20 to 75
feet wide) of undisturbed or planted vegetation used near disturbed or
impervious surfaces to filter stormwater pollutants for the protection of
watercourses, reservoirs, or adjacent properties.
      FLOOD (or FLOOD WATERS). A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual
and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
      FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining the channel which
have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory or 100-year flood. Any
normally dry land area that is susceptible to being inundated by water from any
natural source. The FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the floodway
fringe districts.
      FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently
carry and discharge the peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream.
      FLOODWAY FRINGE. That portion of the flood plain lying outside the
floodway, which is inundated by the regulatory flood.
      FLUVIAL EROSION HAZARD (FEH) CORRIDOR. Represent the areas along the
streams (including the channel and immediate overbanks areas) that are believed
to be subject to stream movement or streambank erosion. These corridors have
been delineated for most actively migrating and relatively stationary streams
in Indiana through an Indiana Silver Jackets initiative.
      FOOTING DRAIN. A drain pipe installed around the exterior of a basement
or any foundation wall to relieve water pressure caused by high groundwater
elevation.
      GASOLINE OUTLET. An operating gasoline or diesel fueling facility whose
primary function is the resale of fuels. The term applies to facilities that
create 5,000 or more square feet of impervious surface, or generate an average
daily traffic count of 100 vehicles per 1,000 square feet of land area.
      GRADE.
         (a)   The inclination or slope of a channel, canal, conduit, and the
like, or natural ground surface usually expressed in terms of the percentage
the vertical rise (or fall) bears to the corresponding horizontal distance.
         (b)   The finished surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of embankment,
or bottom of excavation; any surface prepared to a design elevation for the
support of construction, such as paving or the laying of a conduit.
         (c)   To finish the surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of
embankment, or bottom of excavation, or other land area to a smooth, even
condition.
      GRADING. The cutting and filling of the land surface to a desired slope
or elevation.
      GROUNDWATER. Accumulation of underground water, natural or artificial.
The term does not include manmade underground storage or conveyance structures.
      HABITAT. The environment in which the life needs of a plant or animal are
supplied.
      HOT SPOT DEVELOPMENT. Projects involving land uses considered to be high
pollutant producers such as vehicle service and maintenance facilities, vehicle
salvage yards and recycling facilities, vehicle and equipment cleaning
facilities, fleet storage areas for buses, trucks, and the like, industrial/
commercial or any hazardous waste storage areas or areas that generate such
wastes, industrial sites, restaurants and convenience stores, any activity
involving chemical mixing or loading/unloading, outdoor liquid container
storage, public works storage areas, commercial container nurseries, and some
high traffic retail uses characterized by frequent vehicle turnover.
      ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to a conveyance that is not composed
entirely of stormwater except naturally occurring floatables, such as leaves or
tree limbs. ILLICIT DISCHARGES include polluted flows from direct and indirect
connections to the MS4 conveyance, illegal dumping, and contaminated runoff.
      IMPAIRED WATERS. Waters that do not or are not expected to meet
applicable water quality standards, as included on IDEM’s CWA Section 303(d)
List of Impaired Waters.
      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Surfaces, such as pavement and rooftops, which
prevent the infiltration of stormwater into the soil.
      INDIVIDUAL BUILDING LOT. A single parcel of land within a multi-parcel
development.
      INDIVIDUAL LOT OPERATOR. A contractor or subcontractor working on an
individual lot.
      INDIVIDUAL LOT OWNER. A person who has financial control of construction
activities for an individual lot.
      INFILTRATION. Passage or movement of water into the soil. INFILTRATION
PRACTICES include any structural BMP designed to facilitate the percolation of
runoff through the soil to groundwater. Examples include infiltration basins or
trenches, dry wells, and porous pavement.
      LAND SURVEYOR. A person licensed under the laws of the State of Indiana
to practice land surveying.
      LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. A plan, undertaken by a single
project site owner or a group of project site owners acting in concert, to
offer lots for sale or lease; where such land is contiguous, or is known,
designated, purchased or advertised as a common unit or by a common name, such
land shall be presumed as being offered for sale or lease as part of a larger
common plan. The term also includes phased or other construction activity by a
single entity for its own use.
      MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWERS. An MS4 meets all the following criteria:
         (a)   Is a conveyance or system of conveyances owned by the state,
county, city, town, or other public entity;
         (b)   Discharges to Waters of the U.S.;
         (c)   Is designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
         (d)   Is not a combined sewer; and
         (e)   Is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM. A permit developed by
the U.S. EPA through the Clean Water Act. In Indiana, the permitting process
has been delegated to IDEM. This permit covers aspects of municipal stormwater
quality.
      NATURAL DRAINAGE. The flow patterns of stormwater runoff over the land in
its pre-development state.
      NUTRIENT(S).
         (a)   A substance necessary for the growth and reproduction of
organisms.
         (b)   In water, those substances (chiefly nitrates and phosphates)
that promote growth of algae and bacteria.
      OFFENSE. Both a violation and a failure of compliance on a particular
project. If there are multiple violations or multiple failures of compliance on
the same project, each shall be considered a SEPARATE OFFENSE.
      OPEN DRAIN. A natural watercourse or constructed open channel that
conveys drainage water.
      OUTFALL. The point, location, or structure where a pipe or open drain
discharges to a receiving body of water.
      OUTLET. The point of water disposal from a stream, river, lake,
tidewater, or artificial drain.
      PERCOLATION. The movement of water through soil.
      PERVIOUS. Allowing movement of water.
      POINT SOURCE. Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance
including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well,
discrete fissure, or container from which pollutants are or maybe discharged
(P.L. 92-500, Section 502[14]).
      POROUS PAVEMENT. A type of infiltration practice to improve the quality
and reduce the quantity of stormwater runoff via the use of manmade, pervious
pavement which allows runoff to percolate through the pavement and into
underlying soils.
      PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person licensed under the laws of the State of
Indiana to practice professional engineering.
      PROJECT SITE. The entire area on which construction activity is to be
performed.
      PROJECT SITE OWNER. The person required to submit a stormwater permit
application and required to comply with the terms of this subchapter, including
a developer or a person who has financial and operational control of
construction activities, and project plans and specifications, including the
ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications.
      RECEIVING STREAM, RECEIVING CHANNEL, OR RECEIVING WATER. The body of
water into which runoff or effluent is discharged. The term does not include
private drains, unnamed conveyances, retention and detention basins, or
constructed wetlands used as treatment.
      RECHARGE. Replenishment of groundwater reservoirs by infiltration and
transmission from the outcrop of an aquifer or from permeable soils.
      REDEVELOPMENT. Development occurring on a previously developed site.
      REFUELING AREA. An operating gasoline or diesel fueling area whose
primary function is to provide fuel to equipment or vehicles.
      REGIONAL POND. A detention/retention basin sized to detain/retain the
runoff from the entire watershed, onsite and off-site, tributary to the pond’s
outlet.
      REGULATORY FLOOD. The discharge or elevation associated with the 100-year
flood as calculated by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and
approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known as the BASE
FLOOD.
      RELEASE RATE. The amount of stormwater release from a stormwater control
facility per unit of time.
      RESERVOIR. A natural or artificially created pond, lake or other space
used for storage, regulation or control of water. May be either permanent or
temporary. The term is also used in the hydrologic modeling of storage
facilities.
      RETENTION. The storage of stormwater to prevent it from leaving the
development site. May be temporary or permanent.
      RETENTION BASIN. A type of storage practice, that has no positive outlet,
used to retain stormwater runoff for an indefinite amount of time. Runoff from
this type of basin is removed only by infiltration through a porous bottom or
by evaporation.
      RIPARIAN HABITAT. A land area adjacent to a waterbody that supports
animal and plant life associated with that waterbody.
      RUNOFF. That portion of precipitation that flows from a drainage area on
the land surface, in open channels, or in stormwater conveyance systems.
      SEDIMENT. Solid material (both mineral and organic) that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by
air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth’s surface.
      SEDIMENTATION. The process that deposits soils, debris and other
unconsolidated materials either on the ground surfaces or in bodies of water or
watercourses.
      SITE. The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which land disturbing activity is to be performed.
      SLOPE. Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, measured as
a numerical ratio or percent. Expressed as a ratio, the first number is
commonly the horizontal distance (run) and the second is the vertical distance
(rise), e.g., 2:1. However, the preferred method for designation of slopes is
to clearly identify the horizontal (H) and vertical (V) components (length (L)
and width (W) components for horizontal angles). Also note that according to
international standards (Metric), the slopes are presented as the vertical or
width component shown on the numerator, e.g., 1V:2H. SLOPE expressions in this
subchapter follow the common presentation of slopes, e.g., 2:1 with the metric
presentation shown in parentheses, e.g., (1V:2H). SLOPES can also be expressed
in “percent.” SLOPES given in percent are always expressed as (100*V/H), e.g.,
a 2:1 (1V:2H) slope is a 50% slope.
      SOIL. The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate
surface of the earth that serves as a natural medium for the growth of land
plants.
      SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT. A public organization created under
state law as a special-purpose district to develop and carry out a program of
soil, water, and related resource conservation, use, and development within its
boundaries. A subdivision of state government with a local governing body,
established under I.C. 14-32.
      SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, debris, or other discarded material.
      SPILL. The unexpected, unintended, abnormal, or unapproved dumping,
leakage, drainage, seepage, discharge, or other loss of petroleum, hazardous
substances, extremely hazardous substances, or objectionable substances. The
term does not include releases to impervious surfaces when the substance does
not migrate off the surface or penetrate the surface and enter the soil.
      STORM SEWER. A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater, while
excluding sewage and industrial wastes. Also called a STORM DRAIN.
      STORMWATER. Water resulting from rain, melting or melted snow, hail, or
sleet.
      STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All means, natural or man-made, used for
conducting stormwater to, through or from a drainage area to any of the
following: conduits and appurtenant features, canals, channels, ditches,
storage facilities, swales, streams, culverts, streets and pumping stations.
      STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. A collection of structural and non-
structural practices and infrastructure designed to manage stormwater on a
site. This system may include but is not limited to erosion control measures,
storm drainage infrastructure, detention/retention facilities, and stormwater
quality BMPs.
      STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A plan developed to minimize the
impact of stormwater pollutants resulting from construction activities.
      STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN. A comprehensive written document that
addresses stormwater runoff quality.
      STORMWATER QUALITY MEASURE. A practice, or a combination of practices, to
control or minimize pollutants associated with stormwater runoff.
      STORMWATER RUNOFF. The water derived from rains falling within a
tributary basin, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in
channels or conduits.
      SUBDIVISION, MAJOR. Any land that is divided or proposed to be divided
into four or more lots, whether contiguous or subject to zoning requirements,
for the purpose of sale or lease as part of a larger common plan of development
or sale.
      SUBDIVISION, MINOR. Any land that is divided or proposed to be divided
into less than four lots, whether contiguous or subject to zoning requirements,
for the purpose of sale or lease as part of a larger common plan of development
or sale.
      SUBSURFACE DRAIN. A pervious backfield trench, usually containing stone
and perforated pipe, for intercepting groundwater or seepage.
      SURFACE RUNOFF. Precipitation that flows onto the surfaces of roofs,
streets, the ground, and the like, and is not absorbed or retained by that
surface but collects and runs off.
      SWALE. An elongated depression in the land surface that is at least
seasonally wet, is usually heavily vegetated, and is normally without flowing
water. SWALES conduct stormwater into primary drainage channels and may provide
some groundwater recharge.
      TOPOGRAPHY. The representation of a portion of the earth’s surface
showing natural and man-made features of a give locality such as rivers,
streams, ditches, lakes, roads, buildings and most importantly, variations in
ground elevations for the terrain of the area.
      TRAINED INDIVIDUAL. An individual who is trained and experienced in the
principles of stormwater quality, including erosion and sediment control as may
be demonstrated by state registration, professional certification (such as
CESSWI and/or CPESC certification), or other documented and applicable
experience or coursework as deemed sufficient by the town that enable the
individual to make judgments regarding stormwater control or treatment and
monitoring.
      URBANIZATION. The development, change or improvement of any parcel of
land consisting of one or more lots for residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional, recreational or public utility purposes.
      VIOLATION. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this
subchapter or the Technical Standards, the requirements of an approved
stormwater management design plan or permit, and/or the requirements of a
recorded stormwater maintenance agreement may be subject to the enforcement
actions outlined in §§
52.26 and
52.99(B). Any such action or inaction is deemed to be a public nuisance and may
be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief in addition to, and separate
from, the imposition of any of the enforcement actions described in §§
52.26 and
52.99(B).
      WATER QUALITY. A term used to describe the chemical, physical, and
biological characteristics of water, usually in respect to its suitability for
a particular purpose.
      WATER RESOURCES. The supply of groundwater and surface water in a given
area.
      WATERBODY. Any accumulation of water, surface, or underground, natural or
artificial, excluding water features designed and designated as water pollution
control facilities.
      WATERCOURSE. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or man-made
drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff or floodwaters flow either
continuously or intermittently.
      WATERSHED. The region drained by or contributing water to a specific
point that could be along a stream, lake or other stormwater facility.
WATERSHEDS are often broken down into subareas for the purpose of hydrologic
modeling.
      WETLANDS. Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions.
(Ord. 040924B, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Civil penalties for violations.
      (1)   Any person who commits an offense under §§
52.20 through
52.27 commits a civil infraction subject to a fine not to exceed $2,500 for
each offense, plus costs, damages, and expenses. Each day such violation occurs
or continues without a compliance action that is satisfactory to the town may
be deemed a separate offense and shall make the violator liable for the
imposition of a fine for each day. The rights and remedies provided for in this
division (B) are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by
law. An admission or determination of responsibility shall not exempt the
offender from compliance with the requirements of this §§
52.20 through
52.27.
      (2)   Any person who aids or abets a person in a violation of §§
52.20 through
52.27 shall be subject to the penalties provided in this division (B).
      (3)   The town has established an enforcement response schedule as noted
in the table below that standardizes the approach that the town may, in its
discretion, employ in dealing with stormwater regulations offenses subject to
§§
52.20 through
52.27  and the associated Technical Standards document. When so employed, this
schedule shall apply separately to each offense in the following manner: the
first offense is the underlying violation itself, while the subsequent offenses
two thru eight (as necessary) are failures of compliance.
 
Offense # Type of Response Anticipated
Offense #   Type of Response Anticipated
1st offense Verbal telephone notice, letter of violation or written warning and
            administrative penalty
2nd offense Letter of violation, administrative penalty and/or site visit
3rd offense Letter of violation, administrative penalty and/or site visit
4th offense Letter of violation, administrative penalty and/or site visit
5th offense Agreed order, administrative penalty and/or site visit
6th offense Administrative order, administrative penalty and/or site visit
7th offense Compliance schedule, administrative penalty and/or site visit
8th offense Litigation and administrative penalty
 
      (4)   The town may, at its discretion, impose administrative penalties
for various infractions (see Fee Schedule on the town’s website.)
(Ord. 040924B, passed 5-14-2024)
CHAPTER 53: SEWER USE AND RATES
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Master Sewer Plan
Sewer Rates and Charges
   
53.15   Definitions
   
53.16   Billing
   
53.17   Rates based on several factors
   
53.18   Methods of measurement
   
53.19   Billing; disputes; hearing
   
53.20   By-laws and prohibitions
   
53.21   No free service
   
53.22   Connection charges
   
53.23   Procedure
Connections to and Use of Public and Private Sewers; Discharges
   
53.35   Definitions
   
53.36   Unlawful discharges
   
53.37   Private sewage disposal
   
53.38   Sewer permits; connection, installation, alteration
   
53.39   Prohibitions
   
53.40   Miscellaneous provisions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 MASTER SEWER PLAN.
   The amended Master Sewer Plan, third revision, as presented by Witsman
Engineering on October 11, 2011, and approved by motion made, seconded and
unanimously approved October 11, 2011, is hereby adopted as the Master Sewer
Plan, effective October 11, 2011, onward unless and until amended by ordinance
of the Town Council, and all future sewer service within the designated area
shall comply with the Master Sewer Plan.
(Ord. 080100, passed - -2000; Ord. 051413A, passed 5-14-2013)
SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
§ 53.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. Has the same meaning as defined in the
Sewer Use Ordinance (§§
53.35 through
53.40).
   COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of McCordsville, or any duly
authorized officials acting on its behalf.
   DEBT SERVICE COSTS. The average annual principal and interest payments on
all outstanding revenue bonds or other long-term capital debt.
   EXCESSIVE STRENGTH SURCHARGES. An additional charge which is billed to users
for treating sewage wastes with an average strength in excess of “normal
domestic sewage”.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The wastewater discharges from industrial, trade or
business processes as distinct from employee waste or waste from sanitary
conveniences.
   NH3N1 or AMMONIA NITROGEN. Has the same meaning as defined in the Sewer Use
Ordinance (§§
53.35 through
53.40).
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. For the purpose of determining surcharges,
wastewater or sewage having an average daily concentration as follows: BOD not
more than 200 mg/l; S.S. not more than 240 mg/; NH3N not more than 19 mg/l; and
P not more than 10 mg/l. As defined by origin, wastewaters from segregated
domestic and/or sanitary conveniences as distinct from wastes from industrial
processes.
   NPDES (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM) PERMIT. Has the same
meaning as defined in the Sewer Use Ordinance (§§
53.35 through
53.40).
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. Include all costs, direct and indirect,
necessary to provide adequate wastewater collection, transport and treatment on
a continuing basis and produce discharges to receiving waters that conform with
all related federal, state and local requirements. (These COSTS include
replacement.)
   OTHER SERVICE CHARGES. Tap charges, connection charges, area charges and
other identifiable charges, other than user charges, debt service charges and
excessive strength surcharges.
   P or PHOSPHORUS. Has the same meaning as defined in the Sewer Use Ordinance
(§§
53.35 through
53.40).
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. The expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the works
were designed and constructed.
   SEWAGE. Has the same meaning as defined in the Sewer Use Ordinance (§§
53.35 through
53.40).
   SEWER USE ORDINANCE. A separate and companion enactment to this subchapter,
which regulates the connection to and use of public and private sewers (found
in §§
53.35 through
53.40).
   SHALL. Mandatory; MAY is permissive.
   S.S. or SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Has the same meaning as defined in the Sewer Use
Ordinance (§§ 53.35 through 53.40).
   TOWN. The Town of McCordsville, acting by and through the Council.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of the wastewater treatment works for
the cost of operation and maintenance of the works pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1284
(b).
   USER CLASS. The division of wastewater treatment customers by source,
function, waste characteristics and process or discharge similarities (i.e.,
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental in the user
charge system).
      (1)   COMMERCIAL USER. Any establishment involved in a commercial
enterprise, business or service which, based on a determination by the town
discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences.
      (2)   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Any federal, state or local governmental user of
the wastewater treatment works.
      (3)   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any manufacturing or processing facility that
discharges industrial waste to a publicly owned treatment works.
      (4)   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Any establishment involved in a social,
charitable, religious and/or educational function which, based on a
determination by the town, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes, or
wastes from sanitary conveniences.
      (5)   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment works whose premises or
building is used primarily as a residence for one or more persons, including
all dwelling units and the like.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and commercial wastes and dispose of
the effluent.
(Ord. 090908A, passed 10-14-2008)
§ 53.16 BILLING.
   (A)   For the use of and the service rendered by the sewage works, rates and
charges shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of
real estate or building that is connected with the town’s sanitary system or
otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other
liquids, either directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewerage system of
the town.
   (B)   The rates and charges include user charges, debt service costs,
excessive strength surcharges and other service charges, which rates and
charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in an amount
determinable as follows.
      (1)   Sewer utility customers. The monthly charge shall be determined as
an average of single-family dwelling units. Sewage service bills shall be
rendered once a month (or equaling a month). The rate shall include a billing
charge rate, debt service charge rate and treatment and conveyance rate as
shown within the March 3, 2020 rate study report from Baker Tilly Municipal
Advisors, LLC, Alternate II. The charge for treatment and associated cost of
each equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) as defined herein shall be $52.99
commencing with the June 1, 2020 billing cycle. Customers residing in a one-
bedroom apartment shall be charged at the rate of 75% of the regular charge for
one EDU. Customers residing in two or more bedroom apartments shall pay the
rate of 1.00 EDU per apartment.
      (2)   For users that do not meet the above categories, their treatment
rate and user charges will be based on estimated usage as determined by the
Town Engineer for the town.
      (3)   Each sewer utility customer shall be assigned a rate code based on
the usage of utility as described in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above. The
wastewater utility rate codes shall be applied as set forth on Exhibit A,
attached to the ordinance codified in this subchapter, and incorporated by
reference herein. If the customer’s usage is calculated to exceed the next
lowest rate code designation by more than 0.125 EDUs, the customer’s rate code
shall be rounded up to the next highest rate code. If the customer’s usage
calculation is calculated to exceed the next lowest rate code designation by
less than 0.125 EDUs, the customer’s rate will be rounded down to the next
lowest rate code.
      (4)   For users that do not occupy a location served by the Sewer Utility
on the first day of the month or the last day of the month, their charges shall
be prorated on a per diem rate calculated on the basis of 30 days per month
times the monthly rate and charge for users of the same type and category
multiplied by the number of days in the month the user occupies the premises.
(Ord. 090908A, passed 10-14-2008; Ord. 101309, passed 11-10-2009; Ord. 070913C,
passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 111219A, passed 12-10-2019; Ord. 031020, passed 4-14-
2020)
§ 53.17 RATES BASED ON SEVERAL FACTORS.
   (A)   (1)   In order that the rates and charges may reflect the costs of
providing service rendered to users, the town shall base its charges not only
on the volume, but also the strength and character of the stronger-than-normal
domestic sewage and wastes which it is required to treat and dispose of. The
town shall require the user to determine the strength and content of all sewage
and wastes discharged, either directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewage
system, in such manner and by such method as the town may deem practicable in
order to determine the proper charge. The user shall furnish a central sampling
point available to the town at all times.
      (2)   Normal sewage domestic waste strength should not exceed a
biochemical oxygen demand of 175 milligrams per liter of fluid, suspended
solids in excess of 240 milligrams per liter of fluid; or ammonia nitrogen in
excess of 37 milligrams per liter of fluid. Additional charges for treating
stronger-than-normal domestic waste shall be made on the following basis:
         (a)   Rate surcharge based upon suspended solids. There shall be an
additional charge of $0.26 per pound of suspended solids for suspended solids
received in excess of 240 milligrams per liter of fluid.
         (b)   Rate surcharge based upon BOD.  There shall be an additional
charge of $0.24 cents per pound of biochemical oxygen demand for BOD received
in excess of 175 milligrams per liter of fluid.
         (c)   Rate surcharge based upon NH3. There shall be an additional
charge of $1.66 cents per pound of ammonia for NH3N received in excess of 37
milligrams per liter of fluid.
         (d)   Rate surcharge based upon P. There shall be an additional charge
of $1.58 per pound of phosphorous for P received in excess of 10 milligrams per
liter of fluid.
   (B)   The determination of suspended solids, five-day biochemical oxygen
demand, ammonia nitrogen and phosphorus contained in the waste shall be in
accordance with the latest copy of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water, Sewage, and Industrial Waste, as written by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation, and in conformance with the Guidelines Establishing Test
Procedures For Analysis of Pollutants regulation C.F.R. part 136, published in
the Federal Register on October 16, 1973 and any subsequent amendments thereto.
(Ord. 090908A, passed 10-14-2008; Ord. 070913C, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 121316C,
passed 1-10-2017)
§ 53.18 METHODS OF MEASUREMENT.
   The quantity of water discharged into the sanitary sewerage shall be
determined by the town in such manner as the town shall reasonably elect, and
the sewage service shall be billed at the above appropriate rate. The town may
make proper allowances in determining the sewage bill for quantities of water
shown on the records to be consumed, but which were also shown to the
satisfaction of the town that such quantities did not enter the sanitary
sewerage system. In order to ascertain the rate or charge provided in this
section, the owner or other interested party, shall at his or her expense,
install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric measuring devised or any
adequate and approved method of measurement acceptable to the town for
determining the sewage discharge.
(Ord. 090908A, passed 10-14-2008; Ord. 070913C, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 53.19 BILLING; DISPUTES; HEARING.
   The rates and charges shall be prepared, billed and collected by the town in
the manner provided by law and ordinance.
   (A)   The rates and charges for all users shall be prepared and billed
monthly.
   (B)   The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant or tenants occupying
the properties served, unless otherwise requested in writing by the owner, but
the billing shall in no way relieve the owner from the liability in the event
payment is not made as herein required. The owners of properties served, which
are occupied by a tenant or tenants, shall have the right to examine the
collection records of the town for the purpose of determining whether bills
have been paid by the tenant or tenants, provided that the examination shall be
made at the office at which the records are kept and during the hours that the
office is open for business.
   (C)   As is provided by statute, all rates and charges not paid when due are
hereby declared to be delinquent and a penalty of 10% of the amount of the
rates or charges shall thereupon attach thereto. The time at which rates or
charges shall be paid is now fixed at the 15th day of the month following the
month represented by said changes.
   (D)   In accordance with I.C. 26-1-3.1-502.5 and all acts amendatory or
supplemental thereto, for each returned or dishonored check, electronic or ACH
payment, including, but not limited to, debit/credit card transactions issued
to the sewer utility, there may be a fee of $30 added to the customer’s bill in
addition to the actual charge levied by the depository institution processing
the returned check, electronic or ACH payment.
   (E)   Customers of the sewer utility may deposit payments for the sewer
utility in an after-hours drop box located at the Town Hall.
   (F)   The town Clerk-Treasurer shall serve as the account review officer
(ARO) to review and resolve disputes. Before the earliest possible date of
termination of sewage service as specified in the notice, a user may request a
hearing before the ARO to dispute the correctness of all or part of the amount
(s) shown in accordance with the provisions of division (A) above. A user shall
not be entitled to dispute the correctness of all or part of the amount(s) if
all of part of the amount(s) was the subject of a previous dispute under the
following: the invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this
subchapter shall not affect the validity of any other part of this subchapter
which can be given effect without the invalid part or parts.
   (G)   The procedure for a hearing on a user dispute shall be as follows.
      (1)   Before the earliest possible date of termination as specified on
the notice of termination, the user shall notify the ARO in writing that he or
she requests a hearing to dispute the correctness of all or part of the amounts
shown on the notice of termination, stating as completely as possible the basis
for the dispute.
      (2)   An informal hearing before the ARO shall be held within 15 days of
the ARO’s receipt of the user’s written request for a hearing on the disputed
bill.
      (3)   At the hearing, the user shall be entitled to present all evidence
that is, in the ARO’s view, relevant and material to the dispute.
      (4)   Based on the evidence presented at the hearing, the ARO, within ten
days of the completion of the hearing, shall issue a written decision formally
resolving the dispute.
   (H)   The ARO shall be authorized to resolve any disputed sewage bill and
shall be authorized to order the termination of sewage service under
appropriate circumstances. Upon approval by the ARO, the user may enter into an
agreement to amortize the unpaid balance of his or her account over a
reasonable period of time, not to exceed six months. No termination shall be
effected for any user complying with any account for sewer service as charges
accrue in each subsequent billing period. If a user fails to comply with an
amortization agreement, the ARO may terminate sewer service provided written
notice is given to the user at least 48 hours prior to the termination and the
notice includes conditions the use is required to meet to avoid termination.
   (I)   Utilization of this hearing procedure shall not relieve a user of the
obligation to timely and completely pay all other undisputed sewage bills or
charges. Failure to timely and completely pay all the undisputed amounts shall
subject the user to termination of service in accordance with the provisions of
this division.
   (J)   Until the date of the ARO’s decision, the town shall not terminate
sewage service of the user. If the ARO determines that the customer must pay
some or all of the disputed amount(s), the Department or ARO in his or her
written decision, shall notify the user of the following:
      (1)   The amount to be paid:
      (2)   The date on or after which services will be terminated; and
      (3)   Notice that unless the town receives complete payment of the amount
shown prior to the earliest possible date of termination given in the notice,
sewage service shall be terminated.
   (K)   A USER for the purpose of this section is defined as:
      (1)   A person who requests, either orally or in writing, sewage service
from the town sewer utility; and/or
      (2)   A person in whose name sewage service is billed for the rendering
of the service.
   (L)   Notwithstanding the above and foregoing, the ARO may, upon a
customer’s written request, with or without a hearing at the sole discretion of
the ARO, consider a request for an amortization or payment plan which differs
from the regular billing cycle. The decision of the ARO shall be in writing and
delivered to the customer and the Department.
   (M)   Any residential customer deposit remaining after the passage of this
subchapter shall be applied to the customer’s outstanding balance until
utilized in full.
   (N)   One or more final and active accounts in the name of or guaranteed by
a party may be consolidated at the sole discretion of the utility, when one or
more of the accounts has been final and the amount owing on the account is
delinquent.
   (O)   All new or transferred accounts will be charged a one-time
administrative set-up fee of $20. The one-time administrative set up fee of $20
shall not be charged to a developer of any subdivision, but shall instead be
charged to the person or entity purchasing a lot or parcel from the developer
at the time of the sale. Furthermore an account may be reactivated by the
property owner without the payment of the one- time administrative set up fee
of $20. As an incentive to encourage the use of automated services offered by
the Sewer Utility, the following discounts will be applied to the set-up fee. A
discount of $10 credit for set-up of automatic clearing house (ACH) monthly
draft and a $5 credit for set-up of electronic billing (e-billing) will be
given to all customers who complete the new customer form. The new customer
form will be available at Town Hall, on the town’s website, faxed or by mail.
The total set-up fee will be added to the first bill.
   (P)   All owners of property shall remain ultimately and legally liable for
the payments of any and all utility charges to the premises regardless of
whether such property is used for single-family, multiple-dwelling or
commercial purposes or the fact that the billings are made in the name of a
tenant. Such billings are for the personal convenience of the property owner,
and shall not in any way affect the lien right of the town against the premises
to which the services are furnished.
   (Q)   A billing adjustment may be made by way of credit or debit to the
customer's account once a billing mistake is discovered by an authorized
utility representative.
   (R)   The customer must notify the utility at least 15 days in advance of
the service termination date. This will allow the Sewer Utility staff to
finalize the account and mail final bill due on or before closing the account.
The customer shall remain responsible for all utility charges until proper
notice is received by the Utility and service is terminated.
   (S)   In all instances the Utility, upon providing the customer with a
proper delinquent notice may terminate sewer service. The Utility may terminate
services to a customer for any one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   In accordance with an order by any court or other duly authorized
public authority;
      (2)   Detection of fraudulent or unauthorized use of sewer services for
which the Utility has reasonable grounds to believe the affected customer is
responsible;
      (3)   Non-payment of bill;
      (4)   Failure to pay for other material, fees, services or any other
outstanding balances to the town; or
      (5)   Failure to make installment payments as arranged with the Utility.
   (T)   If, prior to the termination of service date specified in the
delinquent notice, the customer notifies the Utility of not having the ability
to pay the full amount due, the Utility may make payment agreements for the
outstanding bill within the time period determined by the authorized utility
representative not to exceed six months.
   (U)   The customer may not breach any payment agreement with the Utility. If
any payment agreement is breached, the Utility may order the termination of
service immediately.
   (V)   The Utility may accept payment of the past due account balance before
the work order has been submitted to avoid disconnection of service.
   (W)   Discontinuance of service for any reason shall not release the owner
of the property from his or her obligation to pay in full the Utility bills.
(Ord. 090908A, passed 10-14-2008; Ord. 021213A, passed 2-12-2013; Ord. 081313,
passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 121316C, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 53.20 BY-LAWS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   The town shall make and enforce by-laws and regulations as may be
deemed necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management of the
town’s sewerage system, pumping stations and sewage conveyance system, for the
construction and use of house sewers and connections to the sewerage system,
and for the regulation, collection, rebating and refunding of the rates and
charges.
   (B)   The town is hereby authorized to prohibit dumping of wastes into the
town’s sewage system which, in its discretion, are deemed harmful to the
operation of the sewage treatment works of the town or to require methods
affecting pretreatment of the wastes to comply with the pretreatment standards
included in the national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit
issued to the sewage works.
(Ord. 090908A, passed 10-14-2008)
§ 53.21 NO FREE SERVICE.
   The Council shall not grant free service or use of the sewage treatment
system to any person, group or entity.
(Ord. 090908A, passed 10-14-2008)
§ 53.22 CONNECTION CHARGES.
   (A)   No connection to any municipally-owned trunk sanitary sewer shall be
allowed until a permit is obtained and payment in the form of the utility
access fee has been made into the town Sewer Improvement and Betterment Fund
pursuant to this subchapter, and/or an executed sewer service agreement.
   (B)   No new sewer collection facilities will be allowed to connect to any
municipally-owned trunk sanitary sewer or any interceptor force main or lift
station composing a part of the sanitary sewer unless
and until the area requesting extension is annexed into the town or the owners
of the real estate within the area have agreed for themselves and their legal
successors in interest not to remonstrate against the annexation in the future.
   (C)   Payment of the availability, connection costs and all other costs set
forth in this subchapter, and any ordinance amendatory or supplemental thereto,
shall be made at the following times and in the following manner unless a sewer
service agreement requires a different payment schedule.
      (1)   At the signing of the recorded plat or detailed unit development
plan approval, the sum of $1,800 per equivalent dwelling unit, which shall be
allocated to the Sewer Improvement and Betterment Fund.
      (2)   (a)   At the time of issuance of the sewer connection permit, the
person or entity purchasing said permit shall pay the entire connection fee of
$3,100, which shall be deposited into the Sewer Improvement and Betterment
Fund, unless there exists a sewer service agreement specifying a different
sewer connection fee, in which case, said sewer service agreement shall
control. In addition to the sewer connection permit fee set forth above, any
person or entity requesting the issuance of a sewer connection permit within
the following drainage basins shall pay the sums set forth on the chart below:
Drainage Basin Additional Charge
Drainage Basin Additional Charge
Austin Trace   $400
Bay Creek      $400
Buck Creek     $800
Middle Fork    $400
North Fork     $1,400
North Town     $0
Old Town       $0
Stansbury      $800
Note:
The North Fork Additional Charge shall be allocated in the amount of $1,000
for the North Fork oversizing expense and $400 for the Bay Creek oversizing
expense.
 
         (b)   All sewer connection fees and additional charges set forth above
shall be deposited into the Sewer Improvement and Betterment Fund and unless
there exists an executed sewer service agreement between the town and any
particular developer directing otherwise, in which case the executed sewer
service agreement shall control, said funds shall be disbursed as follows:
            1.   The sum of $3,100 shall remain in the Sewer Improvement and
Betterment Fund to be utilized as allocated and budgeted.
            2.   Any and all additional charges collected pursuant to the chart
set forth above, shall be disbursed to the particular developer, within the
designated basin, as reimbursement for the cost of oversizing certain
wastewater infrastructure at the request of the town, said sums to be paid
until the developer has been fully reimbursed for approved oversizing costs
pursuant to an executed sewer service agreement between the town and the
particular developer for a period not to exceed 15 years.
   (D)   All monies, including any accumulated interest from the Sewer
Improvement and Betterment Fund shall remain in the fund and be used for the
purposes set out herein.
   (E)   The cost to be paid from the above funds and account shall expressly
include construction costs, legal costs, engineering costs, construction
inspection costs, project administrative costs and easement acquisition costs
as shall be administered and defined by the Town Council. Projects which may be
funded from the Sewer Improvement and Betterment Fund shall include, at the
town’s discretion, new trunk and interceptor sewers, improvements to existing
trunk or interceptor sewers and lift stations, improvements in the wastewater
treatment plant and the sewage collection and treatment improvement projects as
determined to be reasonable and prudent by the Town Council.
   (F)   Easements, as are required by the Town Council, for the extension of
sewers across the land of a developer shall be prepared and dedicated without
cost by the owner of the real estate. Other easements may be acquired pursuant
to law.
   (G)   The Town Council is authorized to enter into special rate contracts
with users of the sewage work system where clearly definable cost to the sewage
work systems can be determined and the special contract rates are based on the
costs.
   (H)   Any owner of real estate, which either: includes an extension of an
interceptor sewer defined in the town’s Sewer Master Plan (hereinafter referred
to as “the Master Plan”); or is served, or should be served, by an interceptor
sewer to provide extensions of the town’s sewer system to other real estate;
shall be required to extend the interceptors through their property, under the
terms and conditions set out in this subchapter. For purposes of this
subchapter, the following definitions apply.
      (1)   INTERCEPTOR COSTS. Sewer costs external to a development including
the costs of oversizing, or extending an interceptor through a development
which costs would not be incurred if the interceptor was only being constructed
or extended to serve present development.
      (2)   LOCAL SEWER COSTS. Sewer costs incurred because of the development
being served.
      (3)   OVERSIZING COSTS. The difference between the interceptor costs and
the local sewer costs, including oversizing, construction of lift stations and
other costs which would not be necessary, but for the developers project, but
are only costs of construction in order to benefit real estate off site of the
property owned by persons other than the developer,
   (I)   The developer may recover a portion of his or her oversizing costs. In
order to determine the sums recoverable by the developer for oversizing certain
infrastructure, the developer must provide to
the town and the town’s engineer a bid quotation by the developer’s contractor
for the infrastructure to be constructed and installed with the entire
development, broken down by phase or section prior to the beginning of
construction.
      (1)   The cost of the infrastructure must be itemized by pipe size,
length and depth. The town and/or the town’s engineer will provide to developer
a document containing the appropriate format for the information required.
      (2)   Furthermore, the developer must provide to the town and the Town
Engineer detailed itemized final construction costs for the sewer installation
for each section or phase of the development. This information must be
submitted to the town and the town’s engineer before the town will accept
dedication of the constructed infrastructure of each phase or section of the
development.
   (J)   Extension of interceptor sewers shall be, in accordance with the
latest Sewer Master Plan, developed and approved by the town. All the
extensions of the sewer system shall be designed by a registered professional
and state licensed engineer retained by the developer subject to review and
approval of the design by the Town Engineer and approval by the Town Council.
      (1)   The cost for review of the plans and specifications by the Town
Engineer shall be pursuant to a contract executed between the developer and the
Town Engineer.
      (2)   Plans and specifications for specific extensions of the sewer
system shall be submitted to and receive approval from the town, and all
applicable regulatory agencies prior to the actual start of construction. (A
copy of all the approvals shall be filed with the town within ten days after
receipt of approval.)
      (3)   In no event will any of the town sewer revenues be used, committed
or encumbered to repay any funds advanced or contributed, nor will the town’s
General Fund be used, committed or encumbered to repay any like funds advanced
or contributed.
      (4)   The repayment, if any, will be made under the provisions of this
subchapter and will be repaid only from funds deposited in the Sewer
Improvement and Betterment Fund and the Developer Reimbursement Fund.
      (5)   No provision of this subchapter shall be construed as a guarantee
by the town that the owners and/or developers of real estate advancing funds
will be reimbursed therefor.
      (6)   The amount of credits and reimbursements, if any, due to the
developer, will be based on construction costs for labor and materials only and
will be determined by the Town Engineer, whose decision shall be final.
   (K)   All plans for any sewer infrastructure to be installed outside the
area being developed by the applicant (i.e., off-site sewers) shall be designed
by engineers retained by the developer and shall be reviewed by the Town
Engineer, the cost of which shall be paid by the developer to the Town Engineer
pursuant to separate contractual agreement between the developer and the Town
Engineer. All easements shall be granted to the town, which shall obtain the
easements, the cost of which shall be paid by the owners and/or developers and
which shall be obtained prior to the commencement of construction of the
project. Easements shall be in a form approved by the town. The owners and/or
developers shall pay upon demand by the town, any and all costs associated with
obtaining any required easements.
   (L)   All extensions to the town sewerage systems shall be dedicated to and
must be accepted by the town before connection, and once connected, shall
become and remain thereafter the sole property of the town without further
dedication thereof. The owners and/or developers making the dedication shall
post at the time of dedication, five years maintenance equal to 25% of the
project cost in a form acceptable to the town. Owners and/or developers shall
furnish an affidavit that they have paid in full all contractors, materialmen
and laborers the full cost of the extension or extensions.
   (M)   The owners and/or developers obtaining a permit for sewerage
extensions shall submit plans for on-site sewers, including trunk sewers to be
constructed within the development, to the Town Engineer for review and
approval prior to the start of construction. During construction of any on-site
or off-site sewer installations, the owners and/or developers shall pay to the
Town Engineer the expense of his or her inspection services to assure that the
construction of the facilities are in compliance with current standards and
specifications established by the Town Engineer and the town. Upon completion
of construction, the owners and/or, developers shall provide certified record
construction drawings in a digital format compatible with Auto-Cad 2000 or
similar in hard copy format to the Town Engineer within 30 days of completion
of the project. If certified record construction drawings are not provided, as
above required, the Town Engineer may prepare these at the expense of the
owners and/or developers. No potential reimbursable expenses of oversizing and/
or off-site interceptor construction will be allowed until certified record
drawings are provided to and approved by the Town Engineer. The owners and/or
developers shall pay the inspection costs and the costs for televising all
infrastructures, prior to approval and acceptance of the infrastructure by the
town, and the costs for televising required six months prior to expiration of
five-year maintenance period. The payment shall be made directly to the Town
Engineer.
   (N)   Individual connections in developed areas: if individual applicants
for sewage service in already developed acreage and/or platted subdivisions
wish to be served requiring construction of a new trunk sewer or local sewers,
they shall obtain a permit and deposit adequate funds, with the town to pay all
construction costs, engineering costs and all appurtenant costs prior to
authorization of the design by the town and receipt of bids for construction.
If the project does not proceed to completion after project costs are
established, the money so deposited by individual applicants shall be non-
refundable and will be used to pay incurred expenses. If the monies are in
excess of the town’s expenses, the excess will be returned on a pro rata basis
to the individual(s) making the deposit. If the project is completed, the
deposits of individual applicants shall be credited to the individuals’ costs.
If a connection is made to any trunk or local sewer without obtaining a permit
and paying the required availability, connection and local sewer costs, the act
shall constitute a violation of this subchapter, and individual owners and/or
developers of real estate making the connection will be subject to a fine of
$500 per day for each day the connection was unlawfully installed, and will be
required to remove the connection until the requirements of the ordinance are
complied with. Each day the unlawful connection exists may be considered a
separate offense.
   (O)   This subchapter and the costs and charges set out herein may be
amended from time to time by the Town Council when conditions exist that
indicate to the Town Council that charges herein are not equitable for the
customers of the municipal sewage system or for the subdividers, developers or
owners of property connected to the town’s sewage system.
   (P)   If a connection is made to any trunk or local sewer without obtaining
a permit and paying the required availability fee, connection fee and/or local
sewer costs, the act shall constitute a violation of this subchapter, and the
owner and/or developer of real estate so connected will be subject to a fine of
$100 per day for each day the connection was unlawfully installed, and will be
required to remove the connection until the requirements of this subchapter are
complied with. Each day the unlawful connection exists shall be considered a
separate offense.
(Ord. 090908A, passed 10-14-2008; Ord. 031213B, passed 3-12-2013; Ord. 051022B,
passed 6-14-2022)
§ 53.23 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The town will commence the imposition of wastewater charges for each
customer immediately upon the following event:
      (1)   Upon final sewer inspection for each single-family residential
connection.
      (2)   Upon first plumbing rough inspection of finished space in any non-
single-family residential structure.
      (3)   Upon final rough inspection for each single tenant/owner utilized
commercial structure.
      (4)   Upon rough inspection for each tenant within a multi-tenant
commercial structure.
   (B)   A monthly billing statement will be sent directly to the person or
entity who obtained the sewer connection permit until the person or entity has
notified the town in writing on a form provided by the town of the transfer of
title of the subject property and the date the transfer occurred in the town
does not receive the written notification within five business days of the date
of transfer of title, the person or entity obtaining the original sewer permit
shall be responsible for all sewer utility charges until the next billing cycle
following receipt of the notice by the town.
(Ord. 090908A, passed 10-14-2008; Ord. 121316C, passed 1-10-2017)
CONNECTIONS TO AND USE OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS; DISCHARGES
§ 53.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen expressed in mg/
l utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures with nitrification inhibition in five days at 20°C.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning
five feet outside the building wall.
      (1)   BUILDING DRAIN, SANITARY. A building drain which conveys sanitary
or industrial sewage only.
      (2)   BUILDING DRAIN, STORM. A building drain which conveys stormwater or
other clear water drainage, but no wastewater.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal. Also called HOUSE CONNECTION.
      (1)   BUILDING SEWER, SANITARY. A building sewer which conveys sanitary
or industrial sewage only.
      (2)   BUILDING SEWER, STORM. A building sewer which conveys storm waste
or other clear water drainage, but no sanitary or industrial sewage.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or
surface water.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES
permit if the treatment works was designed to treat the pollutants, and in fact
does remove the pollutants to s substantial degree. The term SUBSTANTIAL DEGREE
is not subject to precise definition, but generally contemplates removals in
the order of 80% or greater. Minor incidental removals in the order of 10% to
30% are not considered substantial. Examples of the additional pollutants which
may be considered COMPATIBLE include:
      (1)   Chemical oxygen demand;
      (2)   Total organic carbon;
      (3)   Phosphorus and phosphorus compounds;
      (4)   Nitrogen and nitrogen compounds; and
      (5)   Fats, oils and greases or animal or vegetable origin (except as
prohibited where these materials would interfere with the operation of the
treatment works).
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FECAL COLIFORM.  Any of a number of organisms common to the intestinal tract
of humans and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pollution.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state, such that will
separate by gravity from wastewater treatment in a pretreatment facility
approved by the town.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible
pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from employee wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.
   INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to,
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. INFILTRATION does
not include and is distinguished from inflow.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both infiltration and
inflow without distinguishing the source.
   INFLOW. The water discharge into a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar,
yard and area drains, foundation drains, unpolluted cooling water discharges,
drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from
storm sewers, and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff,
street wash waters or drainage. INFLOW does not include, and is distinguished
from, infiltration.
   INSPECTOR. The person or persons duly authorized by the town, through its
Town Council, to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and
their connection to the public sewer system.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industry that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste;
      (3)   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under § 307(a) of Pub. L. No. 92-500, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317
(a); or
      (4)   Has a significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on a treatment works or on the quality of the
effluent from that treatment works.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
groundwater.
   NH3N. The same as ammonia nitrogen measured as nitrogen. The laboratory
determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in
Standard Methods as defined herein.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Has the same meaning as defined in the Sewage Rate
Ordinance (§§
53.15 through
53.23).
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued under the national pollutant discharge
elimination system for discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of the
United States, pursuant to § 402 of Pub. L. No. 92-500, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   P or PHOSPHORUS. The chemical element phosphorus.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
group or other entity.
   pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of industrial sewage from privately owned
industrial sources prior to introduction into a public treatment works.
   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned by a public authority.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is owned and controlled by the public authority
and will consist of the following increments.
      (1)   COLLECTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewaters from individual point source discharges.
      (2)   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
      (3)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment facility.
      (4)   PUMPING STATION. A station positioned in the public sewer system at
which wastewater is pumped to a higher level.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sanitary and industrial wastes, and to
which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. The combination of liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, (including polluted
cooling water). The three most common types of SEWAGE are:
      (1)   COMBINED SEWAGE. Wastes including sanitary sewage, industrial
sewage, stormwater, infiltration and inflow carried to the wastewater treatment
facilities by a combined sewer;
      (2)   INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE. A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes
discharged from any industrial establishment, and resulting from trade or
process carried on in that establishment (this shall include the wastes from
pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water); and
      (3)   SANITARY SEWAGE. The combination of liquid and water-carried wastes
discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
   SEWAGE WORKS. The structures, equipment and processes to collect, transport
and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent and
accumulated residual solids.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SHALL. Mandatory; MAY is permissive.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than ten minutes more than three times the average 24 hours’
concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the
collection system.
   STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition,
at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
Wastewater, prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
   STORM SEWER.  A sewer for conveying water, ground water or unpolluted water
from any source and to which sanitary and/or industrial wastes are not
intentionally admitted.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the municipal sewage works of the Town
of McCordsville, Indiana, or his or her authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering under standard laboratory procedure.
   TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
   TOXIC AMOUNT. Concentrations of any pollutant or combination of pollutants,
which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause adverse
effects, such as cancer, genetic mutations and physiological manifestations, as
defined in standards issued pursuant to § 307(a) of Pub. L. No. 92-500, being
33 U.S.C. § 1317(a).
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER. The material in the sewage solids transformed to
gases or vapors when heated at 55°C for 15 to 20 minutes.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 040699SU, passed 4-6-1999)
§ 53.36 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner on public or private property within the town
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sanitary
sewer, either directly or indirectly, storm waters, surface water, ground
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted water or
unpolluted industrial process water. The town shall require the removal of
unpolluted waters from any wastewater collection or treatment facility.
   (C)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, cooling water, unpolluted water or unpolluted industrial process
water may be admitted to storm sewers which have adequate capacity for their
accommodation. No person shall use the sewers, however, without the specific
permission of the town. No new connection shall be made to any sanitary or
storm sewer unless there is capacity available in all downstream sewers, lift
stations, force mains and the sewage treatment plant including capacity for BOD
and suspended solids.
   (D)   No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner on public or private property within the jurisdiction of the
town any wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with provisions of this subchapter and the
NPDES permit.
   (E)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural
outlet any wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with provisions of this subchapter and the
NPDES permit.
   (F)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (G)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the town
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
a public sanitary sewer of the town is hereby required at his or her expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter, within 60 days after date of official notice to do so, provided
that the public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line. As a condition
of connection to a public sewer, the owner(s) shall grant a right of access
easement to the building sewer to the town for the purpose of repair and
inspection
   (H)   Sanitary sewer service shall be prohibited in wetland areas except to
currently existing structures or replacements thereof, unless an appropriate
permit can be obtained from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
   (I)   Sanitary sewer service shall be prohibited in floodplains except to
currently existing structures or replacements thereof, or as permitted by a
FEMA/IDNR-approved flood hazard ordinance.
(Ord. 040699SU, passed 4-6-1999)
§ 53.37 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
53.36(G), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Superintendent. Effective January 1, 2003, a permit and inspection fee of $50
shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer at the time of the filing of an
application for the permit.
   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is complete to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. He or she shall be allowed to inspect the works at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours
of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Board of Health. No
permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing
subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than
20,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge
to any natural outlet.
   (E)   At a time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by
a private sewage disposal system as provided in division (D) above, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this
subchapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the town.
   (G)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to the sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal system
shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
   (H)   No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
(Ord. 040699SU, passed 4-6-1999; Ord. 111202A, passed 12-10-2002)
§ 53.38 SEWER PERMITS; CONNECTION, INSTALLATION, ALTERATION.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential and commercial service; and
         (b)   For service to establishment producing industrial wastes.
      (2)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the town.
      (3)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
inspector.
      (4)   Effective January 1, 2003, a sanitary sewer lateral inspection fee
as set forth within the currently in force McCordsville Schedule of Fees and
Charges for such service which fee shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer at the
time the building permit application is approved.
   (C)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify
the town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole be considered as one building sewer.
   (E)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Inspector, to meet all
requirements of this subchapter.
   (F)   The size, scope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and S.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. FD-9 shall apply.
   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be bought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (H)   No person(s) shall make connection of roof down spouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground
water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (I)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the town or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the S.P.C.F. Manual of Practice
in No. FD-9. All the connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Superintendent before installations.
   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Inspector
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the
Inspector or his or her representative. The applicant shall provide access to
all structures (and areas of structures) to the Inspector for the purpose of
establishing compliance with division (H) above.
   (K)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town.
   (L)   All connections made to the sanitary sewer system shall be made in
compliance with Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein, and
incorporated by reference herein, or any subsequent amendments thereto.
   (M)   Whenever an entity wishing to develop a parcel of property within the
sewer district of the town, not heretofore provided with sanitary sewer
facilities, the entity must do the following as conditions precedent to being
given permission to connect to the town’s sanitary sewer facilities.
      (1)   When any entity desiring to develop property within the town,
hereinafter referred to as “developer”, shall indicate the interest to the
town, the developer is to obtain his or her own engineer to design not only the
collection system within his or her project, but also how the system would
connect to the main sewer lines and the cost of extending sewer lines to
service the project, all of which must be in accordance with the Town Master
Sewer Plan.
      (2)   The developer will enter into a separate contract and agreement
with the town’s consulting engineer to have the plans and cost estimates
reviewed at a price negotiated and agreed upon between the developer and the
town’s consulting engineer.
      (3)   A developer agreement shall be entered into between the developer
and the town, the terms of which shall include, but not be limited to, the
following conditions.
         (a)   The developer would pay, at the time of execution of the
developer agreement or at other times as agreed to between the town and
developer, 40% of the $2,500 sewer plant availability fee for each EDU to
procure plant allocation.
         (b)   The developer shall construct and install all necessary
components of a collection system including, but not limited to, if necessary,
a lift station and force main in order to connect the system serving the
proposed developed area to the town’s sanitary sewer facility with the further
condition that the collection system be designed and constructed to serve not
only the developer’s project but all potential users within the designated
service area as shown by the Master Sewer Plan.
         (c)   The total cost for the facilities installed by the developer,
excluding the collection system necessary to serve the developer’s project,
shall be divided by the total projected number of EDU’s for the entire service
area.
(Ord. 110999, passed - -1999; Ord. 040699SU, passed 4-6-1999; Ord. 111202A,
passed 12-10-2002; Ord. 121316C, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 53.39 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic (as described in § 307(a) of
the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a)) or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works or interfere with any treatment
process;
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, paper, dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either
whole or ground up by garbage grinders;
      (5)   Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agency or jurisdiction of the discharge to the receiving waters;
      (6)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
      (7)   Any waters or wastes having pH in excess of 9.5;
      (8)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works;
or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      (9)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amendable to treatment only to a degree that the sewage treatment effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
   (B)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in division (A) above, and which in
judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
         (a)   Require new industries (or other large users) or industries (or
other large users) with significant increases in discharges to submit
information on wastewater quantities and characteristics and obtain prior
approval for discharges;
         (b)   Reject the wastes in whole or in part for any reason deemed
appropriate by the town;
         (c)   Require pretreatment of the wastes to within the limits of
normal sewage as defined;
         (d)   Require control of flow equalization of the wastes so as to
avoid any “slug” loads or excessive loads that may be harmful to the treatment
works; or
         (e)   Require payment of a surcharge on any excessive flows or
loadings discharge to the treatment works to cover the additional costs of
having capacity for and treating the wastes.
      (2)   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   (C)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
   (D)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with necessary meters and other appurtenances
in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense, and shall be maintained so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
Agents of the town, the state water pollution control agencies and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing.
   (E)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this subchapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at the control manhole, except for applications for NPDES permits and
report thereof which shall be conducted in accordance with rules and
regulations adopted by the U.S. EPA (40 C.F.R. part 136).
      (1)   In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to a point at which the building sewer is connected.
      (2)   Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property.
      (3)   The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour
composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken.
      (4)   Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined
from periodic grab samples.
   (F)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the town and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the town for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the
industrial concern, at rates as are compatible with the rate ordinance.
(Ord. 040699SU, passed 4-6-1999)
§ 53.40 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Pretreatment of industrial wastes from major contributing industries
prior to discharge to the treatment works is required and is subject to the
rules and regulations adopted by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (U.S. EPA) (40 C.F.R. part 403), and Guidelines Establishing Test
Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants (40 C.F.R. part 136), in addition to any
more stringent requirements established by the town and any subsequent state or
federal guidelines and rules and regulations.
   (B)   Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to
pretreatment or control facilities shall be submitted for approval of the town
and no construction of those facilities shall be commenced until approval in
writing is granted. Where those facilities are provided, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operating order by the
owner at his or her expense, and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the
town to determine that the facilities are being operated in conformance with
applicable federal, state and local laws and permits. The owner shall maintain
operating records and shall submit to the town a monthly summary report of the
character of the influent and effluent to show the performance of the treatment
facilities and for comparison against town- monitoring records.
   (C)   Unpolluted water from air conditioners, cooling, condensing systems or
swimming pools, shall be discharged to a storm sewer, where it is available, or
to a combined sewer approved by the town. Where a storm sewer is not available,
discharge may be to a natural outlet approved by the town and by the state.
Where a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet is not available, the
unpolluted water may be discharge to a sanitary sewer pending written approval
by the town.
   (D)   Industrial cooling water, which may be polluted with insoluble oils or
grease or suspended solids, shall be pre-treated for removal of pollutants and
the resultant clear water shall be discharged in accordance with division (C)
above.
   (E)   The town may require users of the treatment works, other than
residential users to supply pertinent information on wastewater flows and
characteristics. The measurements, tests, and analysis shall be made at the
user’s expense. If made by the town, an appropriate charge may be assessed to
the user at the option of the town.
   (F)   The strength of wastewaters shall be determined, for periodic
establishment of charges provided for in the Rate Ordinance (§§
53.15 through
53.23), from samples taken at the aforementioned structure at any period of
time and of a duration and in a manner as the town may elect, or, at any place
mutually agreed upon between the user and the town. Appropriate charges for
sampling and analysis may be assessed to the user at the option of the town.
The results of routine sampling and analysis by the user may also be used, for
determination of charges after verification by the town.
   (G)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the town they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand
and other harmful ingredients, except that the interceptors or traps will not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors or
traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the town and shall be located
so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. They
shall be constructed of pervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperatures and shall be of substantial construction, be
gas-tight, water-tight and equipped with easily removable covers. Where
installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be maintained
by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all
times.
   (H)   Users of the treatment works shall immediately notify the town of any
unusual flows or wastes that are discharged accidentally or otherwise to the
sewer system.
   (I)   All provisions of this subchapter and limits set herein shall comply
with any applicable state and/or federal requirements now, or projected to be
in effect.
   (J)   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.
   (K)   (1)   The Superintendent, Inspector and other duly authorized
employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter. The Superintendent, or his or her representative shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil,
refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or
facilities for waste treatment.
      (2)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred
to in division (K)(1) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of
the town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established
by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to
the town employees and the town shall indemnify the company against loss or
damage to its property by town employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and
growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
§
53.39(E).
      (3)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the town
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the town holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement,
shall be done in accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated casement
pertaining to the private property involved.
   (L)   The rules and regulations promulgated by the town, after approval by
the Town Council shall, among other things, provide for an appeal procedure,
whereby a user shall have the right to appeal a decision of the administrator
of the sewage system to the Town Council, and that any decision concerning
sewage system of the Town Council may be appealed to a court of competent
jurisdiction under the appeal procedures provided for in the Indiana
Administrative Adjudication Act, being I.C. 4-21.5-3.
(Ord. 040699SU, passed 4-6-1999)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
73.   GOLF CARTS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Stopping at stop signs
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 STOPPING AT STOP SIGNS.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to regulate compliance with the stop
signs directing the flow of traffic on public streets within the town for the
protection of public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Whenever a stop sign is erected at or near an intersection, and duly
ordained by an ordinance of the Town Council, every driver of a vehicle shall
come to a complete stop:
      (1)   Parallel to the stop sign;
      (2)   Before a marked stop line; or
      (3)   Before a marked crosswalk prior to cautiously entering into the
intersection, unless traffic at the intersection is controlled by a police
officer, in which event every driver shall comply with the direction of the
police officer.
   (C)   An officer of the Town Police Department may issue a citation for a
failure to comply with a duly erected stop sign within the corporate boundaries
of the town.
(Ord. 081412B, passed 8-14-2012) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   There is hereby added to this penalty the additional penalty of
attorney’s fees incurred by the town if civil action through a court of
competent jurisdiction is required in order to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Any person violating §
70.01 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 for the first violation
and $75 for the second violation. All fines prescribed by this division (C) for
violation shall be paid to the Town Ordinance Violations Bureau, which shall
render to the person making payment a receipt stating the amount and purpose
for which the fine has been paid, a duplicate of which shall be made a part of
the records of the town.
(Ord. 121206C, passed 12-12-2006; Ord. 081412B, passed 8-14-2012)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   Fire hydrants and fire hoses
   
71.03   Business/Residential Districts; highway
   
71.04   Rights-of-way
   
71.05   Alleys
   
71.06   General stopping; exception
   
71.07   General procedure/angle of parking
   
71.08   Parking in the Austin Trace Subdivision
   
71.09   Road weight limits
   
71.10   Parking during severe winter events
   
71.11   Parking in subdivisions
   
71.12   Unattended vehicles
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARTERIAL STREET. A street which serves the major traffic movements within a
community, such as between the Central Business District and the outlying
commercial and residential areas, as well as a majority of the vehicular
traffic entering and leaving the town to travel to and from adjacent
communities. The town’s arterial streets are identified on the Thoroughfare
Plan within the McCordsville Comprehensive Plan.
   COLLECTOR STREET. A street designed and used to carry moderate volumes of
traffic from local streets to arterial streets. The town’s collector streets
are identified on the Thoroughfare Plan within the McCordsville Comprehensive
Plan.
   VEHICLE. Has the meaning set forth under I.C. 9-13-2-196 and its amendments.
(Ord. 081412A, passed 8-14-2012; Ord. 051424B, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 71.02 FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE HOSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or leave standing
any type of vehicle, either motorized or non-motorized bicycle, trailer or any
other item of whatever nature within a ten-foot radius of a water hydrant
within the corporate boundaries of the town.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or leave standing
any type of vehicle, either motorized or non-motorized bicycle, trailer or any
other item of whatever nature on or over a fire hose, whether in use or not,
within the corporate boundaries of the town.
(Ord. 081412A, passed 8-14-2012; Ord. 051424B, passed 8-13-2024) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 BUSINESS/RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS; HIGHWAY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or leave standing an
attended or unattended vehicle upon the paved part of a highway outside of a
business or residential district, if it is feasible to park, stop or leave the
vehicle off of the highway or roadway.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a person who drives a vehicle that
becomes disabled while on the paved, improved or main traveled part of a
highway or roadway in a manner and to the extent that it is impossible to avoid
stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle on the highway or
roadway.
(Ord. 081412A, passed 8-14-2012; Ord. 051424B, passed 8-13-2024) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or leave standing an
attended or unattended vehicle upon or in the right-of-way of any arterial
street or collector street.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a person who drives a vehicle that
becomes disabled while on an arterial or collector street and it is impossible
to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle on the street.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a person who temporarily pulls his or
her vehicle into a right-of-way at the direction of or to provide clearance for
a public safety vehicle.
(Ord. 051424B, passed 8-13-2024) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 ALLEYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop, leave attended or
unattended a vehicle on either side of the traveled portion of any alley or the
town’s right-of-way of any alley within the incorporated limits of the town.
(Ord. 081412A, passed 8-14-2012; Ord. 051424B, passed 8-13-2024) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 GENERAL STOPPING; EXCEPTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to avoid conflict with
the law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any
of the following places:
   (A)   On a sidewalk;
   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (C)   Within an intersection;
   (D)   On a crosswalk;
   (E)   Within 50 feet of the nearest railroad crossing, except when a train,
a train maintenance vehicle or any other vehicle allowed by law to operate on
the railroad tracks is blocking the crossing;
   (F)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station and, on the
side of a street opposite the entrance to a fire station, within 75 feet of the
entrance (when properly posted);
   (G)   Within 20 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or
traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway;
   (H)   On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb
of a street;
   (I)   Upon a bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway;
   (J)   Within six feet of any lawfully placed United States postmaster
approved mail receptacle between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. (Eastern Standard
Time) Monday through Saturday; or
   (K)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping/parking.
(Ord. 081412A, passed 8-14-2012; Ord. 051424B, passed 8-13-2024) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07 GENERAL PROCEDURE/ANGLE OF PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except where angle parking is
permitted by ordinance for streets under local control or by order of the State
Department of Transportation on streets and highways within the state highway
system, to park, stop or leave attended or unattended a vehicle in conflict
with the legally recognized flow of traffic.
   (B)   Where there is an adjacent curb, vehicles shall be parked with their
right-hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a motorcycle stopped or parked upon a
roadway where there is an adjacent curb in which the motorcycle may be stopped
or parked with the rear wheel to the curb and the front tire facing the flow of
traffic.
(Ord. 081412A, passed 8-14-2012; Ord. 051424B, passed 8-13-2024) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08 PARKING IN THE AUSTIN TRACE SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or leave attended or
unattended a vehicle:
      (1)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the west side of North
Denton Court;
      (2)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the east side of North
Denton Drive;
      (3)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the east side of North
Karnes Drive;
      (4)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the east and north side of
Odessa Way;
      (5)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the west side of North
Lufkin Court;
      (6)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the east side of North
Garland Court;
      (7)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the west side of North
Laredo Drive;
      (8)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the north side of West
Longview Drive;
      (9)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the south side of West Del
Rio Drive;
      (10)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the west side of North
Galveston Drive;
      (11)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the west side of North
Abilene Drive;
      (12)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the south side of West
Irving Drive;
      (13)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the east side of North
Mesquite Court;
      (14)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the south side of West
Denton Drive, between North Denton Drive and North Laredo Drive; and
      (15)   Upon the paved or main traveled part of the north side of West
Denton Drive, between North Laredo Drive and North Galveston Drive.
   (B)   A no-parking regulatory sign shall be installed at and along the above
locations, in the Austin Trace Subdivision, which are prohibited from parking,
stopping, standing or leaving vehicles attended or unattended pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 081412A, passed 8-14-2012; Ord. 051424B, passed 8-13-2024) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.09 ROAD WEIGHT LIMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be operated on South Railroad
Street from its intersection with Broadway to its intersection with County Road
600 West within the town, with a total weight, including cargo, exceeding seven
tons (14,000 pounds).
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be operated on the designated
streets set forth below with a total weight, including cargo, exceeding 14 tons
(28,000 pounds):
14 ton restricted From: To:
14 ton restricted From:         To:
Form Street       Broadway      CR 750 North
Center Street     Broadway      CR 750 North
McCord Street     Broadway      CR 750 North
Hanna Street      Broadway      CR 750 North
1st Street        Hanna Street  CR 600 West
2nd Street        Center Street CR 600 West
3rd Street        Form Street   Hanna Street
 
(Ord. 011414A, passed 1-14-2014; Ord. 051424B, passed 8-13-2024) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.10 PARKING DURING SEVERE WINTER EVENTS.
   (A)   Definitions. The following definitions are guidelines by the Indiana
Department of Homeland Security.
      CONDITION WHITE (CLEAR). No advisories in effect.
      CONDITION YELLOW (ADVISORY).  The lowest level of local travel advisory,
means that routine travel or activities may be restricted in areas because of a
hazardous situation, and individuals should use caution or avoid those areas.
      CONDITION ORANGE (WATCH). Means the conditions are threatening to the
safety of the public. During a watch local travel advisory, only essential
travel, such as to and from work or in emergency situations, is recommended,
and emergency action plans should be implemented.
      CONDITION RED (WARNING). Means that travel may be restricted to emergency
management workers only.
   (B)   Condition Yellow. For the purpose of this section when a Yellow Travel
Advisory has been issued for Hancock County, the public is encouraged to remove
their automobiles from being parked on the street.
   (C)   Condition Orange or Red. When an Orange or Red Travel Advisory has
been issued for Hancock County, on-street parking shall be prohibited and all
vehicles parked on all streets of the town shall be removed by the owner in
order not to impede the clearing of such streets.
   (D)   Duty of the Police Department. At the issuance of an Orange or Red
Travel Advisory in Hancock County, it shall be the duty of the McCordsville
Police Department to issue parking violations to the owner of the vehicle(s)
found in violation of this section. Furthermore, if the vehicle(s) have not
been removed from the streets after the issuance of an Orange Travel Advisory
in Hancock County, and after the issuance of a parking violation, it shall be
the duty of the McCordsville Police Department, when possible, to forthwith
employ some reputable person to remove such vehicles from the streets and store
them at a garage or within a vehicle impound, and the reasonable cost of such
removal and storage shall be paid by the owners of the vehicles to the owner of
the garage or pound at the time the owners take possession of their vehicles.
Possession shall not be given to an owner until the expenses and costs are
first paid.
   (E)   Fines.  The fine for parking on the street during an Orange or Red
Travel Advisory shall be in accordance with the parking in town limits fine
found in §
32.04.
   (F)   Conditional waiver. During the time that an Orange or Red Travel
Advisory has been issued for Hancock County, the provision of §
71.05 regarding the prohibition of parking over a sidewalk shall be waived
until travel status has been returned to White.
(Ord. 040814, passed 4-8-2014; Ord. 051424B, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 71.11 PARKING IN SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Persons are permitted to park their vehicles on opposite sides of the
street in a residential subdivision when doing so still allows other vehicles
to travel through the subdivision safely.
   (B)   Should a subdivision with public streets less that the town’s
requirement on roadway width desire to restrict parking to one side of the
street, the subdivision’s homeowners’ association may file a petition with the
Town Council requesting an amendment to this subchapter.
      (1)   (a)   With the petition, the homeowners’ association or a resident
must provide a record of a majority of all lot owners or residents, at least 18
years of age, within the subdivision, having voted affirmative to the following
question and certifying the result of such election results to the town:
            “Shall on-street parking be restricted to one side of the street
within [insert name of the neighborhood/HOA]?”
         (b)   The petition shall not count more than one resident or lot owner
per lot towards the calculation of a majority of the subdivision.
      (2)   Any petition to restrict on-street parking, as outlined above,
shall include the town’s on-street parking restriction application.
(Ord. 051424B, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 71.12 UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop, or leave standing an
attended or unattended vehicle upon the paved portion of County Road 700 North
and/or on or in the right-of-way on the north and south side of County Road 700
North from its intersection with County Road 600 West to the eastern
incorporated boundary of the town, a distance of approximately 2,569 feet.
(Ord. 061119A, passed 6-11-2019; Ord. 051424B, passed 8-13-2024) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $25 for the first violation and $50 for the second. All fines
prescribed by this section for violation shall be paid to the Town Ordinance
Violations Bureau, which shall render to the person making payment a receipt,
stating the amount and purpose for which the fine has been paid, a duplicate of
which shall be made a part of the records of the town. All fines thus received
shall be deposited in the General Fund of the town.
   (B)   There is hereby added to this penalty the additional penalty of
attorneys’ fees incurred by the town if civil action through a court of
competent jurisdiction is required in order to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Any person or entity violating §
71.09 shall be subject to a fine of $250 for the first, second and/or third
violation within any 12-month period, fine of $1,000 for any fourth violation
within any 12-month period, a $2,000 fine for any fifth violation within any
12-month period and a fine of $2,500 for any sixth or subsequent violation
within any 12-month period, all in addition to any attorneys’ fees incurred in
connection with the collection of the fines or penalties.
(Ord. 121206C, passed 12-12-2006; Ord. 081412A, passed 8-14-2012; Ord. 011414A,
passed 1-14-2014; Ord. 051424B, passed 8-13-2024)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
      
II.   Intersections; stop signs
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Vehicles traveling the following shall not exceed the following speed
limits:
Street, Road, Zone Direction(s) Location Speed Limit
Street, Road, Zone    Direction(s)           Location               Speed Limit
                                             Where a speed limit
Any subdivision                              has not been           25 mph
                                             established by an
                                             ordinance of the town
                                             From its intersection
                                             with 600 West
500 North             Easterly and westerly  traveling westerly     45 mph
                                             1,336 feet or 0.253
                                             miles
                                             From its intersection
                                             with 600 West
500 North             Easterly and westerly  traveling easterly     45 mph
                                             2,417 feet or 0.458
                                             miles
                                             From its intersection
                                             County Road 1000 North
                                             to its intersection    40 mph
                                             with County Road 800
                                             North
                                             From its intersection
                                             with County Road 800
County Road 600 West  Northbound or          North to its           30 mph
                      southbound             intersection with
                                             County Road 750 North
                                             From its intersection
                                             with County Road 650
                                             North to distance of   40 mph
                                             150 feet south of
                                             intersection with
                                             County Road 750 North
                                             From the intersection
                                             of 600 North and 600
600 North             Easterly               West traveling         45 mph
                                             easterly 3,428 feet or
                                             0.652 miles
                                             From the intersection
                                             of 600 West to the
                                             intersection of 650
650 North                                    North and Carroll      45 mph
                                             Road/700 West a
                                             distance of 5,301 feet
                                             or 1.003 miles
                                             From its intersection
                                             with County Road 600
County Road 650 North Eastbound or westbound West to the eastern    40 mph
                                             and western town
                                             limits
                                             From a point 1,127
                                             feet east of the
                      Easterly or westerly   intersection with
County Road 700 North direction              County Road 600 West   40 mph
                                             to the eastern
                                             incorporated limits of
                                             the town
                                             From the centerline of
County Road 700 West  Northbound or          County Road 1000 North 40 mph
                      southbound             for a distance of
                                             1,188 feet south
                                             From the west edge of
County Road 750 North Eastbound or westbound Hanna Street to the    30 mph
                                             western boundaries
                                             From its intersection
                                             with County Road 700
County Road 800 North Eastbound or westbound West to it             40 mph
                                             intersection with
                                             County Road 600 West
                                             From its intersection
                                             with County Road 700
County Road 900 North Eastbound or westbound West to the eastern    45 mph
                                             limit of the
                                             incorporated town
                                             Between Broadway
Old Village - Center  Northbound or          Street (also known as
Street                southbound             State Road 67/United   25 mph
                                             States 36) and County
                                             Road 750 North
Old Village - Cindy   Northbound or          County Road 750 North
Drive                 southbound             until the street dead  25 mph
                                             ends
                                             From Broadway Street
Old Village - Depot   Northbound or          (also known as State
Street                southbound             Road 67/United States  25 mph
                                             36) until the street
                                             dead ends
                                             Between Broadway
Old Village - Form    Northbound or          Street (also known as
Street                southbound             State Road 67/United   25 mph
                                             States 36) and County
                                             Road 750 North
                                             Between Broadway
Old Village - Hanna   Northbound or          Street (also known as
Street                southbound             State Road 67/United   25 mph
                                             States 36) and County
                                             Road 750 North
                                             Between Broadway
Old Village - McCord  Northbound or          Street (also known as
Street                southbound             State Road 67/United   25 mph
                                             States 36) and County
                                             Road 750 North
Old Village - Second  Eastbound or westbound From County Road 600   25 mph
Street                                       West to Center Street
Old Village - Third   Eastbound or westbound From Hanna Street to   25 mph
Street                                       Form Street
Old Village - West    Eastbound or westbound From County Road 600   25 mph
North Railroad Street                        West to Depot Street
                                             From County Road 600
Old Village - West                           West to Broadway
South Railroad Street Eastbound or westbound Street (also known as  25 mph
                                             State Road 67/United
                                             States 36)
                                             On County Road 750
                                             North from its
Park Zone             Eastbound or westbound intersection with      20 mph
                                             County Road 600 West
                                             to the west edge of
                                             Hanna Street
                                             Monday through Friday,
                                             on days that school is
                                             in session, between
                                             the hours of 7:00 a.m.
                                             and 4:00 p.m., no
                                             vehicle traveling in a
                                             northerly or southerly
                                             direction on 600 West
                      Northerly or southerly commencing at a point  30 mph
                                             between 150 feet south
                                             of said road's
                                             intersection with
                                             County Road 700 North
School Zone - County                         for a distance of
Road 600 West -                              2,322 feet north of
McCordsville                                 said commencement
Elementary                                   point
                                             Monday through Friday,
                                             on days the school is
                                             in session, between
                                             the hours of 7:00 a.m.
                                             and 4:00 p.m., no
                                             vehicle traveling in
                      Easterly or westerly   an easterly or         30 mph
                                             westerly direction on
                                             County Road 700 North
                                             from its intersection
                                             with County Road 600
                                             West for a distance of
                                             1,127 feet east of
                                             said intersection
                                             Vehicles traveling
                                             eastbound or westbound
                                             on County Road 900
                                             North commencing at a
                                             point that is 50 feet
                                             west of its
                                             intersection with
                                             County Road 600 West,
School Zone - County                         and extending for a
Road 900 North        Eastbound or westbound distance of 840 feet   25 mph
                                             west of the point of
                                             beginning, shall not
                                             travel at a speed in
                                             excess of 25 mph when
                                             the lights on
                                             specially installed
                                             signage are flashing
                                             indicating that school
                                             is in session.
 
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this schedule shall, upon
conviction, be fined based upon the following schedule:
      (1)   From one to ten mph over the designated speed limit not less than
$50;
      (2)   From 11 to 20 mph over the designated speed limit not less than
$75;
      (3)   From 21 to 25 mph over the designated speed limit not less than
$85; and
      (4)   Twenty-six mph and over should be state ticket and not ordinance
violation.
(Ord. 121112, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 011315, passed 1-13-2015; Ord. 021417,
passed 2-14-2017; Ord. 121019B, 12-10-2019; Ord. 011420A, passed 1-14-2020;
Ord. 021120A, passed 2-11-2020; Ord. 071420C, passed 7-14-2020)
SCHEDULE II. INTERSECTIONS; STOP SIGNS.
   (A)   Any person operating a vehicle on the following shall come to a
complete stop before proceeding into the intersection, and shall not proceed
until it is safe to do so:
 Intersection Location
                        Intersection Location
W. CR 700 N             N. CR 600 W                Vehicles proceeding
                                                   westbound on W. CR 700 N
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. CR 900 N             N. CR 600 W                eastbound or westbound on W.
                                                   CR 900 N
W. CR 800 N             N. CR 600 W                Vehicles proceeding
                                                   eastbound on W. CR 800 N
W. CR 700 N             CR 600 W                   Vehicles proceeding
                                                   westbound on 700 N
W. CR 750 N             N. CR 500 W                Vehicles proceeding
                                                   eastbound on W. CR 750 N
W. CR 650 N             CR 600 W                   Vehicles proceeding
                                                   eastbound on W. CR 650 N
N. Franks Lane          W. CR 600 N                Vehicles proceeding
                                                   southbound on N. Franks Lane
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. CR 500 N             N. CR 600 W                westbound or eastbound on W.
                                                   CR 500 N
N. Cindy Drive          W. CR 750 N                Vehicles proceeding
                                                   northbound on N. Cindy Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. CR 750 N             N. CR 600 W                eastbound or westbound on W.
                                                   CR 750 N
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Cardinal Drive       N. CR 700 W                westbound on W. Cardinal
                                                   Drive
                        Old Town
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
2nd Street              Hanna Street               northbound and southbound on
                                                   Hanna Street
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
3rd Street              Center Street              eastbound and westbound on
                                                   3rd Street
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
3rd Street              McCord Street              eastbound or westbound on
                                                   3rd Street
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
McCord Street           3rd Street                 northbound or southbound on
                                                   McCord Street
3rd Street              Hanna Street               Vehicles proceeding
                                                   eastbound on 3rd Street
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Hanna Street            3rd Street                 northbound or southbound on
                                                   Hanna Street
N. Form Street          W. CR 750 N                Vehicles proceeding
                                                   southbound on N. Form Street
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Center Street        W. CR 750 N                southbound on N. Center
                                                   Street
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Hanna Street         W. CR 750 N                southbound on N. Hanna
                                                   Street
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. McCord Street        W. CR 750 N                southbound on N. McCord
                                                   Street
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Railroad Street      N. Depot Street            westbound on N. Railroad
                                                   Street
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
S. Railroad Street      N. CR 600 W                westbound on S. Railroad
                                                   Street
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Railroad Street      N. CR 600 W                eastbound on N. Railroad
                                                   Street
                        Austin Trace
Abilene Way             Irving Drive               Vehicles proceeding
                                                   northbound on Abilene Way
Mesquite Court          Irving Drive               Vehicles proceeding
                                                   northbound on Mesquite Court
Irving Drive            Chelmsford Drive           Vehicles proceeding
                                                   eastbound on Irving Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Denton Drive            Laredo Drive               eastbound or westbound on
                                                   Denton Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Laredo Drive            Denton Drive               northbound or southbound on
                                                   Laredo Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Irving Drive            Laredo Drive               eastbound or westbound on
                                                   Irving Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Laredo Drive            Irving Drive               northbound or southbound on
                                                   Laredo Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Austin Trace Boulevard  CR 700 W                   westbound on Austin Trace
                                                   Boulevard
Denton Drive            Austin Trace Boulevard     Vehicles proceeding
                                                   southbound on Denton Drive
Denton Court            Austin Trace Boulevard     Vehicles proceeding
                                                   northbound on Denton Court
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Austin Trace Boulevard  Odessa Way                 westbound on Austin Trace
                                                   Boulevard
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
North Lufkin Court      Odessa Way                 southbound on N. Lufkin
                                                   Court
N. Abilene Drive        Odessa Way                 Vehicles proceeding
                                                   southbound on N. Abilene Way
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Galveston Drive      Odessa Way                 southbound on N. Galveston
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Longview Drive       Galveston Drive            eastbound on W. Longview
                                                   Drive
                        Bay Creek at Geist
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
600 W                   Nautica Boulevard          westbound on Nautica
                                                   Boulevard
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Bayland Drive        W. Bayfield Drive          southbound on N. Bay Land
                                                   Drive
Bayhill Circle          W. Bayfield Drive          Vehicles proceeding
                                                   southbound on Bayhill Circle
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Water Bay Circle        Bayfield Drive             northbound on Water Bay
                                                   Circle
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Nautica Boulevard       Bayfield Drive             eastbound on Nautica
                                                   Boulevard
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Storm Bay Circle        Nautica Boulevard          northbound on Storm Bay
                                                   Circle
Bayfield Drive          W. Port Drive              Vehicles proceeding
                                                   northbound on Bayfield Drive
Bayland Drive           Nautica Boulevard          Vehicles proceeding
                                                   southbound on Bayland Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Driftwood Court         W. Falling Waters Drive    northbound on Driftwood
                                                   Court
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. River Chase Lane     N. Falling Waters Drive    westbound on W. River Chase
                                                   Lane
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Falling Waters Drive CR 900 N                   southbound on N. Falling
                                                   Waters Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Bayland Drive        W. Nautica Boulevard       northbound on N. Bayland
                                                   Drive
Bayfront Shores         CR 600 W                   Vehicles proceeding
                                                   eastbound on Bayfront Shores
                        Bay Creek East
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Mariners Crest       W. Port Drive              southbound on N. Mariners
                                                   Crest
N. Port Drive           CR 1000 N                  Vehicles proceeding
                                                   northbound on N. Port Drive
N. Anchor Bend          N. Port Drive              Vehicles proceeding
                                                   eastbound on N. Anchor Bend
N. Anchor Bend          N. Mariners Crest          Vehicles proceeding
                                                   southbound on N. Anchor Bend
N. Anchor Bend          W. Stream Drive            Vehicles proceeding
                                                   southbound on N. Anchor Bend
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Mariners Crest       W. Stream Drive            northbound on N. Mariners
                                                   Crest
Stream Drive            N. Mariners Crest and N.   Vehicles proceeding
                        Anchor Bend                westbound on Stream Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Turnbuckle Place     W. Port Drive              eastbound on W. Turnbuckle
                                                   Place
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Turnbuckle Place     Keel Point Way             eastbound on W. Turnbuckle
                                                   Place
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Turnbuckle Place     Keel Point Way             westbound on W. Turnbuckle
                                                   Place
N. Inlet Drive          W. Port Drive              Vehicles proceeding
                                                   northbound on N. Inlet Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Mooring Drive        N. Inlet Drive             eastbound or westbound on W.
                                                   Mooring Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Mariners Crest       W. Compass Pointe          eastbound or westbound on N.
                                                   Mariners Crest
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Stream Drive         N. Port Drive              eastbound and westbound on
                                                   W. Stream Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Port Drive           W. Stream Drive            northbound and southbound on
                                                   N. Port Drive
                        Deer Crossing
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Fawn Meadow Drive       W. Deer Crossing Boulevard northbound on Fawn Meadow
                                                   Drive
W. Aspen Way            W. Deer Crossing Boulevard Vehicles proceeding
                                                   eastbound on W. Aspen Way
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Cold Water Circle       W. Aspen Way               southbound on Cold Water
                                                   Circle
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Cedar Chase Drive       N. Deer Crossing Boulevard westbound on Cedar Chase
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Fawn Meadow Drive       W. Cedar Chase Drive       southbound on Fawn Meadow
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
White Tail Trail        W. Cedar Chase Drive       southbound on White Tail
                                                   Trail
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
White Tail Trail        W. Deer Crossing Boulevard northbound on White Tail
                                                   Trail
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Deer Crossing Boulevard CR 900 N                   northbound on Deer Crossing
                                                   Boulevard
W. Winding Bend         CR 700 W                   Vehicles proceeding
                                                   westbound on W. Winding Bend
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Deerhill Drive          W. Winding Bend            northbound or southbound on
                                                   Deerhill Drive
W. Winding Bend         N. Deerhill Drive          This intersection is an ALL-
                                                   WAY stop
                       Emerald Springs             
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Emerald Boulevard    W. Glenview Drive          northbound on North Emerald
                                                   Boulevard
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Emerald Boulevard    CR 600 W                   westbound on W. Emerald
                                                   Boulevard
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Commonview Drive     W. Emerald Boulevard       southbound on N. Commonview
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Deerview Bend        W. Emerald Boulevard       northbound on W. Deerview
                                                   Bend
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Woodview Trail       N. Springview Drive        westbound on W. Woodview
                                                   Trail
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Woodview Trail       N. Crestview Trail         eastbound on W. Woodview
                                                   Trail
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Crestview Trail      N. Springview Drive        westbound on W. Crestview
                                                   Trail
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Springview Drive     W. Glenview Drive          northbound on N. Springview
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Glenview Drive       N. Springview Drive        eastbound on W. Glenview
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Stoneview Trail      W. Glenview Drive          northbound on W. Stoneview
                                                   Trail (west intersection)
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Stoneview Trail      W. Glenview Drive          northbound on W. Stoneview
                                                   Trail (east intersection)
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Emerald Boulevard    W. Glenview Drive          northbound on N. Emerald
                                                   Boulevard
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Autumnview Drive     N. Emerald Boulevard       southbound on N. Autumnview
                                                   Drive
                       Gateway Crossing            
W. Oxford Drive         N. Lyndhurst Crossing      Vehicles proceeding
                                                   eastbound on W. Oxford Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Lyndhurst Crossing   N. Stubbington Lane        eastbound on N. Lyndhurst
                                                   Crossing
Winsor Drive            N. Stubbington Lane        Vehicles proceeding
                                                   westbound on Winsor Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Lyndhurst Crossing   W. Chelmsford Drive        northbound on N. Lyndhurst
                                                   Crossing
N. Gateway Crossing                                Vehicles proceeding
Boulevard               W. Chelmsford Drive        southbound on N. Gateway
                                                   Crossing Boulevard
Kensington Way          W CR 750 N                 Vehicles proceeding
                                                   northbound on Kensington Way
                        Chelmsford Drive and       Vehicles proceeding
W. Windstor Drive       Stubbington Lane           westbound on W. Windstor
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Glory Maple Drive    CR 700 W                   westbound on W. Glory Maple
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Spice Bush Court     W. Glory Maple Drive       northbound on N. Spice Bush
                                                   Court
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Box Elder Court      W. Glory Maple Drive       southbound on N. Box Elder
                                                   Court
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Thornebush Drive     W. Glory Maple Drive       northbound on N. Thronebush
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Thornebush Drive     N. May Apple Drive         eastbound on W. Thornebush
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. May Apple Drive      Silverthorne Drive         eastbound and westbound on
                                                   W. May Apple Drive
                       Highland Springs            
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Redhawk Station      N. Wind River Run          eastbound on W. Redhawk
                                                   Station
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Blackhawk Station    N. Wind River Run          westbound on W. Blackhawk
                                                   Station
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Northview Court      N. Briarway Lane           westbound on W. Northview
                                                   Court
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Northview Drive      N. Briarway Lane           eastbound on W. Northview
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Northview Drive      N. Briarway Lane           eastbound on W. Northview
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Crossfield Trail     N. CR 600 W                eastbound on W. Crossfield
                                                   Trail
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Crossfield Trail     W. Terra Lane              southbound on N. Crossfield
                                                   Trail
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Briarway Court       N. Briarway Lane           eastbound on W. Briarway
                                                   Court
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Briarway Lane        W. Highland Lane           southbound on N. Briarway
                                                   Lane
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Waterview Court      N. Briarway Lane           eastbound on W. Waterview
                                                   Court
W. Pin Oak Drive        N. Briarway Lane           Vehicles proceeding on W.
                                                   Pin Oak Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Pin Oak Drive        N. Tullride Station        westbound on W. Pin Oak
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Pin Oak Drive        N. Breckenridge Station    westbound on W. Pin Oak
                                                   Drive
Moonstone Place         Wind River Run             Vehicles proceeding
                                                   westbound on Moonstone Place
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Brookside Parkway    N. CR 600 W                eastbound on N. Brookside
                                                   Parkway
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Clearview Drive      W. Brookside Parkway       southbound on N. Clearview
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Brickell Lane        N. Dresden Drive           westbound on W. Brickell
                                                   Lane
Riverside Road          N. Doheny Drive            Vehicles proceeding
                                                   westbound on Riverside Road
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Runway Boulevard     N. Tanglewood Circle       northbound on N. Runway
                                                   Boulevard
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Riverside Road       N. Runway Boulevard        eastbound on N. Riverside
                                                   Road
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Brookside Parkway    N. Tanglewood Circle       westbound on W. Brookside
                                                   Parkway
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Treeline Lane        W. Clearview Drive         southbound on W. Treeline
                                                   Lane
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Clearview Drive      W. Jamison Drive           northbound on N. Clearview
                                                   Drive
N. Conti Court          W. Brickell Lane           Vehicles proceeding
                                                   northbound on N. Conti Court
                       Woodhaven                   
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Woodstock Trail      N. Woodhaven Drive         eastbound or westbound on W.
                                                   Woodstock Trail
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Woodhammer Trail     N. Woodhaven Drive         westbound on W. Woodhammer
                                                   Trail
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
Woodhammer Trail        Woodhaven Drive and North  westbound at intersection
                        Woods Edge Drive           with Woodhaven Drive and N.
                                                   Woods Edge Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Woodhaven Drive      W. CR 600 N                southbound on N. Woodhaven
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
                        Woodhammer Trail and N.    northbound and southbound at
Woodhaven Drive         Woods Edge Drive           intersection with Woodhammer
                                                   Trail and N. Woods Edge
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
W. Woods Edge Drive     N. Woodhaven Drive         eastbound on W. Woods Edge
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Woods Edge Drive     W. Woodhaven Drive         southbound on N. Woods Edge
                                                   Drive
                                                   Vehicles proceeding
N. Woods Edge Drive     Woodhaven Drive and        eastbound at intersection
                        Woodhammer Trail           with Woodhaven Drive and
                                                   Woodhammer Trail
 
   (B)   Stop sign fines:
      (1)   First offense: $50.
      (2)   Second and subsequent within a 12 month period: $75.
(Ord. 110996A, passed 11-9-1996; Ord. 031202B, passed 3-12-2002; Ord. 051104,
passed 5-11-2004; Ord. 121206C, passed 12-12-2006; Ord. 081407B, passed 8-14-
2007; Ord. 061008, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 011210, passed 1-12-2010; Ord.
041415A, passed 4-14-2015; Ord. 041216-B, passed 4-12-2016; Ord. 091316, passed
9-13-2016; Ord. 021417, passed 2-14-2017; Ord. 081418-B, passed 8-14-2018; Ord.
121223, passed 12-12-2023; Ord. 061124A, passed 7-9-2024)
CHAPTER 73: GOLF CART REGULATIONS
Section
   
73.01   Definitions
   
73.02   Application
   
73.03   Operation of golf carts
   
73.04   Designated roadways
   
73.05   Signs
   
73.06   Prohibition against operationtime of operation
   
73.07   Current driving license required
   
73.08   Public waysplace of operation
   
73.09   Golf cart equipment
   
73.10   Occupantsmaximum number
   
73.11   Slow moving vehicle emblem
   
73.12   Traffic rules
   
73.13   Requirementpossession of proof of insurance
   
73.14   Impounding golf cartsnon-compliance
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURRENT DRIVING LICENSE. Pursuant to I.C. 9-13-2-41, every class and kind of
license or permit that evidences the privilege to operate a motor vehicle upon
the highways of Indiana. The term includes a privilege granted by the license.
   GOLF CART. Pursuant to I.C. 9-13-2-69.7, a four-wheeled motor vehicle
originally and specifically designed and intended to transport one or more
individuals and golf clubs for the purpose of playing the game of golf on a
golf course.
   INDOT. The acronym for Indiana Department of Transportation.
   OEM ORIGINAL EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURER. A golf cart that has not been modified
with aftermarket equipment or altered from its originally engineered design.
   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Pursuant to I.C. 9-25-2-3, proof of
ability to respond in damages for liability that arises out of the ownership,
maintenance, or use of a golf cart in the following amounts:
      (1)   Twenty-five thousand dollars because of bodily injury to or death
of any one person;
      (2)   Subject to the limit in division (1), $50,000 because of bodily
injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident; and
      (3)   Ten thousand dollars because of injury to or destruction of
property in any one accident.
   ROADWAY. A road or alleyway included in the town’s road inventory and for
which the town has primary responsibility for maintenance and oversight.
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015)
§ 73.02 APPLICATION.
   This chapter applies to town roadways, other public ways, sidewalks and
pedestrian pathways. Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to or limit:
   (A)   The use of golf carts on golf courses;
   (B)   The use of golf carts on private property;
   (C)   The town’s use of golf carts for official purposes; or
   (D)   Vernon Township Fire Department’s use of golf carts for official
purposes.
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015)
§ 73.03 OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS.
   The operation of a golf cart on a public roadway within the corporate limits
of McCordsville, Hancock County, Indiana, is strictly prohibited unless the
golf cart is operated in full compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015)
§ 73.04 DESIGNATED ROADWAYS.
   To protect the safety of the town’s residents, golf carts shall only be
operated on roadways within neighborhoods where the following conditions have
been met:
   (A)   (1)   At least 75% of all lot owners belonging to the neighborhood’s
homeowners’ association (“HOA”) has voted in favor of allowing golf carts to
operate on roadways within in the neighborhood by voting affirmative to the
following question and certifying the result of such election results to the
town:
   “Shall golf carts be used on designated roadways within the [insert the name
of the neighborhood/HOA?”];
      (2)   If the neighborhood, or development does not have a formally
defined boundary, a map showing the self-designated boundaries must be
submitted and approved by the town prior to proceeding with the aforementioned
vote; and
      (3)   Consideration of a change to allow or disallow implementation of
the provisions of this chapter may occur once every two years from the first
vote regarding the same and shall require at least a 75% vote of all lot owners
belonging to the neighborhood’s homeowners’ association (“HOA”) vote in favor
of the proposed change.
   (B)   The town has determined, in writing, that the vote was properly
conducted and that golf carts may be safely operated on some roadways within
the neighborhood.
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 SIGNS.
   Signs that designate the neighborhood as a golf cart community must be
installed at each entrance to the neighborhood, by the neighborhood prior to
use, under the following conditions:
   (A)   The neighborhood is responsible for utility locates prior to
installation.
   (B)   All signs approved by the town shall be conspicuously located
designating the neighborhood, or roadways within the neighborhood that are
available for golf cart use (collectively “designated roadways”).
   (C)   All signs must meet minimum MUTCD (Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices) standards for size, material type, and retro-reflectivity for the
following signs: W11-11 & W16-l. (See Exhibit “A” below).
   (D)   This chapter does not prohibit or limit the town from having
discretion to require additional signs should conditions require such.
   (E)   A map showing the locations of all such signs shall be provided to
McCordsville Public Works Commissioner prior to installation and approval.
   (F)   All signs required by this chapter shall be purchased, maintained and
the responsibility of the neighborhood. Failure to maintain the signs, approved
in this section may cause the town to revoke its approval of golf cart usage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1056.jpg]
 
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.06 PROHIBITION AGAINST OPERATIONTIME OF OPERATION.
   Golf carts shall only be operated on designated roadways from sunrise to
sunset.
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 CURRENT DRIVING LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Only persons possessing a current driving license issued by the State of
Indiana or another state of the United States of America shall be permitted to
operate a golf cart on designated roadways within the town. Persons operating a
golf cart on designated roadways shall have his or her driver’s license in his
or her possession during operation.
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08 PUBLIC WAYSPLACE OF OPERATION.
   Golf carts shall not be operated in the town on any of the following:
   (A)   Sidewalks;
   (B)   Non-designated roadways;
   (C)   Multi-use pathways; and
   (D)   Crossing a roadway that has a designated speed of greater than 30
miles per hour.
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.09 GOLF CART EQUIPMENT.
   Only golf carts that have not been converted or altered from their OEM shall
be permitted to operate on designated roadways.
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.10 OCCUPANTSMAXIMUM NUMBER.
   The number of occupants in a golf cart shall be limited to the number of
persons for whom factory (OEM) seating is installed and provided for on the
golf cart. The operator and passengers shall be seated in the golf cart and no
parts of the bodies of the operator or occupants shall extend outside the outer
perimeter of the golf cart while the golf cart is in motion.
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.11 SLOW MOVING VEHICLE EMBLEM.
   Golf cart equipment exception; slow moving vehicle emblem. Except for the
equipment requirement designated by §
73.09, all golf carts being operated on designated roadways must display a slow
moving vehicle emblem. The slow moving vehicle emblem must be displayed
pursuant to I.C. 9-21-9-2, and meet the requirements for design, materials and
mounting pursuant to I.C. 9-21-9-5.
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 9-21-9-5 was repealed by P.L.227-2025, Sec. 16.
§ 73.12 TRAFFIC RULES.
   Any golf cart being operated on a designated roadway in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter shall comply with all traffic rules and regulations
enacted by the State of Indiana and the ordinances of the Town of McCordsville
which govern the operation of motor vehicles.
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.13 REQUIREMENTPOSSESSION OF PROOF OF INSURANCE.
   Each golf cart operated on designated roadways within the town shall
maintain current insurance as specified on §
73.01. The proof of insurance must be carried in or on the golf cart at all
times it is being operated on designated roadways.
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.14 IMPOUNDING GOLF CARTSNON-COMPLIANCE.
   Notwithstanding any law to the contrary a law enforcement officer authorized
to enforce motor vehicle laws who discovers a golf cart that is in violation §§
73.06,
73.07,
73.09 and/or
73.11 shall take the golf cart into the officer’s custody; and may cause the
vehicle to be taken to and stored in a suitable place, at the owner’s expense,
until such time as the owner can take possession and transport the golf cart
without violating the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The McCordsville Police Department shall issue a uniform ordinance
violation citation to any person or persons violating a provision of this
chapter. Violators of this chapter are subject to the following schedule of
fines:
      (1)   Moving violations shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50 for
each offense, along with court costs in the amount that now exists or may
hereafter be determined by ordinance, statute or the court of jurisdiction.
      (2)   Equipment (non-moving) violations shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $25 for each offense, along with court costs in the amount that now
exists or may hereafter be determined by ordinance, statute or the court of
jurisdiction.
   (B)   All fines prescribed by this chapter for a violation or violations
shall be paid to the Town Ordinance Violations Bureau, which shall render to
the person making payment a receipt stating the amount and purpose for which
the fine has been paid, a duplicate of which shall be made a part of the
records of the town.
   (C)   Should any violation or violations be referred to the McCordsville
Town Attorney for enforcement, the violator shall be responsible for all
attorney’s fees and court costs associated with such enforcement action in
addition to any fine set forth herein.
(Ord. 081115, passed 8-11-2015)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FAIR HOUSING
      
92.   FALSE ALARMS
      
93.   NOISE CONTROL
      
94.   PUBLIC NUISANCES; BURNING
      
95.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Animals at large
   
90.03   Confinement of female animals in heat/in season
   
90.04   Report of vehicular collision with domestic animal
   
90.05   Owner responsibility for animal attacks
   
90.06   Dog and cat curbing requirements
   
90.07   Animals causing nuisance prohibited
   
90.08   General requirements for animal care and treatment
   
90.09   Poisoning animals prohibited
   
90.10   Animal fights
   
90.11   Enticing domestic animal from premises prohibited
   
90.12   Rabies
   
90.13   Civil liability
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT. The voluntary relinquishment of possession by the owner with
the intention of his or her ownership, but without vesting possession in any
other person. The failure to make adequate provision of food, water and/or
shelter shall be prima facie evidence of ABANDONMENT.
   ADULT DOG AND CAT. Any dog or cat that is three months of age or older for
the purposes of rabies vaccinations and tags.
   ALTERED ANIMAL. Any animal which has been spayed or neutered.
   ANIMAL. Any living, non-human, vertebrate creature.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner while not under the control of the
owner or other person by chain, cord, leash or other device of actual physical
restraint or under the control of the accompanying owner or other person who
has the ability to control the dog or cat by voice commands.
   ATTACK. Unprovoked action in an aggressive manner against a human that
includes a bite or causes a scratch, abrasion or bruising or on a domestic
animal, that causes death or injury that requires veterinary treatment.
   BIRDS OF PREY. Members of the Accipitridae, Aguila, Haliaeetus,
Falconiformes, Accipiter and Buteo family.
   CAT/FELINE. Includes animals of the Felis Catus species, and hybrids of a
Felis Catus and any other member of the Felis genus.
   DANGEROUS.
      (1)   Constitutes a danger to human life or property;
      (2)   Has caused serious injury to a person without having been provoked
by that person;
      (3)   At a place other than its owner’s property has:
         (a)   Chased or approached a person in a menacing fashion or apparent
attitude of attack; or
         (b)   Attacked another domestic animal.
      (4)   Because of its training or behavior, is capable of inflicting
physical harm or death to humans;
      (5)   Involved in more than one reported bite incident reported to the
Town Police Department and/or the Hancock County/City of Greenfield Animal
Management Shelter in the last 12 months; and
      (6)   Animals while engaged in law enforcement activities are not
considered DANGEROUS for the purpose of this chapter.
   DOG/CANINE. Includes animals of the Canis Familiaris species, and hybrids of
a Canis Familiaris and any other member of the Canis genus, including wolves.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal kept and harbored by a human primarily as a pet,
including any animal of a normally wild species which has been born in
captivity or tamed and is kept and harbored by a human for those purposes.
   DOMESTIC FARM ANIMAL.
      (1)   Cattle, including cows, bulls, steers and calves;
      (2)   Horses, including mares, stallions, geldings and ponies;
      (3)   Mules;
      (4)   Donkeys or burros;
      (5)   Goats;
      (6)   Sheep or lambs;
      (7)   Rabbits for the purposes of commercial sale for their meat and/or
pelts;
      (8)   Swine, including pigs, hogs, boars, sows or piglets;
      (9)   Poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, turkeys, ducks,
geese, guinea, fowl, peafowl, pigeons and pheasants;
      (10)   Exotic animal, being defined as a wild animal that is non-native
to the state;
      (11)   Bees; or
      (12)   Any other animal kept, owned, maintained or raised for the
commercial purpose of selling it for the meat, pelts or other product.
   ESTROUS CYCLE. The time when the female animal is sexually receptive and
releases pheromones announcing that reception to the male members of the
species.
   EXOTIC. Any animal or reptile not naturally found in the State of Indiana.
   EXPOSED TO RABIES. An animal has been exposed to rabies if it has been
bitten by or been in contact with any animal known or reasonably suspected to
have been infected with rabies.
   GUARD DOG. Any dog trained by a recognized training facility for the purpose
of protecting individuals from assault and/or preventing loss or damage. The
term RECOGNIZED TRAINING FACILITY means any person holding a state kennel
license and a business license for either of the purposes described in this
definition.
   GUIDE DOG. A properly trained dog certified as a guide dog by a licensed
training facility that has an expertise in training dogs for the physically
impaired person and that is actually being used by a person to assist that
person.
   IN HEAT or IN SEASON. A female of the species is entering, enduring or
ending her estrous cycle.
   INHUMANE. Infliction of injury, pain or suffering upon an animal or failure
to provide adequate food, water, shelter or ventilation to an animal.
   KENNEL (COMMERCIAL). A facility operated commercially and principally for
the purpose of boarding, housing, grooming, breeding or training dogs or cats,
or both. For purposes of this chapter, KENNEL shall not include a facility in
or adjoining a private residence where dogs or cats are kept for the hobby of
the owner, lessee or other occupant of the property using the animals for
hunting, practice tracking, exhibiting in shows or field or obedience trials or
for the guarding or protecting of the property, and an occasional sale of pups
or kittens by the owner, lessee or other occupant of the property shall not
make the property a kennel for the purposes of this chapter.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT ANIMAL. An animal that is owned or used by a law enforcement
agency for the purposes of aiding in the detection of criminal activity,
enforcement of laws, the apprehension of offenders and ensuring the public
welfare.
   NON-BITE EXPOSURE. Includes scratches, abrasions, open wounds or mucous
membranes contaminated with saliva or other potentially infectious material
from a rabid animal.
   NUISANCE. Any one or more of the following conditions:
      (1)   A condition which arises by a dog, cat or other animal casing
persons, bicycles, automobiles or other moving vehicles on the streets or
sidewalks or any other public area of the town;
      (2)   A condition which arises by a dog, cat or other animal defacing or
damaging shrubbery, lawns or flowers which results in the general nuisance of
citizens in the neighborhood where the dog, cat or other animals are harbored;
      (3)   A condition which arises by a dog barking, whining or howling
constantly so as to disturb the peace of the neighborhood;
      (4)   A condition which arises from the accumulation of animal excreta on
the property of the owner, public or any other citizens so as to cause an
obnoxious odor, create a situation which could draw or breed insects, attract
vermin or cause a health nuisance; or
      (5)   Any animal deemed dangerous or vicious that has not been registered
with the Town Police Department and/or the Hancock County/City of Greenfield
Animal Management Shelter on an annual basis.
   OWN. To keep, harbor or have custody, charge or control of an animal.
   OWNER. Includes any person who owns an animal; however, veterinarians and
operators of kennels, pet shops and stables, who temporarily keep animals owned
by, or held for sale to, other persons shall not be deemed to own or be OWNERS
of the animals, but rather to be keepers of animals.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, corporation, partnership or other
association or organization, but shall exclude the following:
      (1)   Police officers, federal or state armed forces, conservation
officers, animal control or animal management personnel and other governmental
agencies, with respect to actions which constitute a discharge of their
official duties; and
      (2)   An individual, partnership, corporation or other association,
organization or institution of higher education, which is registered as a
research facility with the United States Secretary of Agriculture under 7
U.S.C. §§ 2131 et seq., commonly known as the “Animal Welfare Act”, while
engaged in the course of their performance as such.
   PUBLIC SAFETY COMMITTEE. The Public Safety Committee of the town.
   QUARANTINING AUTHORITY. The Town Board of Public Safety, its contractors,
agents, employees and designees, acting under its directives and regulations or
the State Board of Animal Health.
   RABIES. Also often referred to as HYDROPHOBIA, is highly fatal infectious
disease transmitted by the bite of infected animals, and caused by a virus in
the central nervous system and the salivary glands. The symptoms are
characteristic of a profound disturbance of the nervous system: excitement,
aggressiveness and madness, followed by paralysis and death.
   REPTILE. Any member of a large group of air-breathing scaly vertebrates,
including, but not limited to, snakes, alligators and turtles.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Any bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes or that causes: serious permanent disfigurement;
unconsciousness; extreme pain; permanent or protracted loss or impairment of
the function of a body member or organ; or loss of a fetus.
   SHELTER. The animal care and management facility located at 809 South State
Street in the City of Greenfield, Indiana or other location as approved by the
town or the Town Public Safety Committee.
   STRAY. Any animal that does not appear, upon reasonable inquiry, to have an
owner.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal that attacks, bites or injures any human being or
domesticated animal without adequate provocation, or which because of
temperament, conditioning or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite
or injure human beings or domesticated animals or to destroy property.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any living member of the animal kingdom, including mammals,
birds and reptiles, and including those animals born or raised in captivity,
except the following: human beings, domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with
wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or
margays), domestic farm animals, small rodents and captive-bred species of
common cage birds.
   VETERINARIAN. A person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the
state.
(Ord. 101210, passed - -2010)
§ 90.02 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of an animal to cause, suffer
or allow that animal which is owned or kept by the person to be at large in the
incorporated limits of the town.
(Ord. 101210, passed - -2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE ANIMALS IN HEAT/IN SEASON.
   The owner or keeper of any female animal in heat kept in the incorporated
limits of the town shall confine the animal within a secure enclosure and in a
manner so as to prevent it from becoming a nuisance.
(Ord. 101210, passed - -2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 REPORT OF VEHICULAR COLLISION WITH DOMESTIC ANIMAL.
   A person whose vehicle causes injury or death to a domestic animal in the
incorporated limits of the town shall stop at once, and assess the extent of
the injury to the extent that it is safe to do so. The person shall immediately
notify the animal’s owner, if known, or the animal care and control shelter,
either directly or through a local law enforcement agency. The notice shall
include a description of the animal struck, the location of the incident, a
description of the condition of the animal, and if it can be safely
ascertained, the rabies tag number of the animal. The person shall not be
required to report his or her name, as the primary purpose of this requirement
is to aid the stricken animal and notify its owner, if any.
(Ord. 101210, passed - -2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANIMAL ATTACKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or keeper of an animal to allow that
animal to attack and injure a person who did not provoke the animal prior to
the attack. For purposes of this section, PROVOKE  means the infliction of
bodily harm on the animal or another person, or conduct that constitutes a
substantial step toward the infliction of bodily harm on the animal or another
person.
   (B)   It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section if:
      (1)   The attack occurred in an enclosure in which the animal was
confined without means of escape, there was posted at the main entrance of the
enclosure a notice to beware of the animal, and the person attacked entered the
enclosure without invitation; or
      (2)   The person was attacked during his or her commission or attempted
commission of a criminal act on the property of the owner or keeper of the
animal.
(Ord. 101210, passed - -2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 DOG AND CAT CURBING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person knowingly shall allow a dog or cat which is kept by that
person to defecate on a public street, byway, municipally owned or public land
or building, or upon private property, in the incorporated limits of the town,
without the prior permission of the owner of the property; however, if an
animal defecates on property described in this division (A), the animal’s owner
or keeper promptly shall remove any feces to a waste container, or otherwise
dispose of the material in a manner inoffensive to reasonable public
sensibilities.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, the owner of a
dog serving a vision-impaired person in an auxiliary ocular capacity or in any
capacity to assist the person with a physical impairment may permit the dog to
relieve itself on ground situated outside of pedestrian or vehicular traffic
ways, and is relieved of the requirement to remove any feces to the extent the
requirement is impractical for a person of the impairment.
   (C)   No person knowingly shall allow his or her dog or cat to disperse or
deposit waste material placed for public or private collection upon any public
street, or byway or right-of-way or any municipally owned or public land or
building, or upon private property.
(Ord. 101210, passed - -2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 ANIMALS CAUSING NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to own or keep any animal which by
frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, screeching, other vocalization
or otherwise shall cause serious annoyance or disturbance to persons in the
vicinity.
(Ord. 101210, passed - -2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ANIMAL CARE AND TREATMENT.
   (A)   Every owner or keeper of an animal kept in the incorporated limits of
the town shall see that the animal:
      (1)   Is kept in a clean, sanitary and healthy manner and is not confined
so as to require an animal to stand, sit or lie in its own excrement. The
person(s) responsible for an animal(s) shall regularly and more often if
necessary clean and maintain all areas in which the animal comes into contact
consistent with the provisions of this division (A)(1) so as to prevent any
odor, health or sanitation problems;
      (2)   Has food that is appropriate for the species in adequate amounts to
maintain good health, fresh potable drinking water where appropriate, shelter
and ventilation, including quarters that are protected from excessive heat and
cold and are of sufficient size to permit the animal to exercise and move about
freely;
      (3)   Shall not be tethered, to an immovable object, by use of a choke
collar;
      (4)   Shall not be tethered with any rope, chain or steel cable that is
not equipped with a swivel on both ends, so as to reduce the likelihood of
entanglement;
      (5)   Shall not be tethered with a rope, chain or steel cable that is
less than three times the length of the animal and/or too heavy to permit the
animal to move freely;
      (6)   Shall be tethered using a “properly” fitting buckle type collar or
harness worn by the animal; and
      (7)   Shall provide the reasonably necessary medical care, in addition to
the required rabies vaccination, and if diseased or injured, or exhibiting
symptoms of disease, receives proper care and is segregated from other animals
so as to prevent transmittal of the disease.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to beat, starve or otherwise
mistreat any animal in the incorporated limits of the town, or to fail to
comply with any requirement of division (A) above.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to leave a domestic animal unattended in a
vehicle when the conditions in that vehicle would constitute a health hazard to
the animal.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any dog, cat or other animal to ride in the
bed of a pickup truck on public streets, highways and/or rights-of-way, unless
the animal is securely caged and protected from the environment, or unless the
bed of the pickup truck is enclosed with a camper shell or other device, and
there is appropriate and sufficient ventilation for the animal.
   (E)   In the discretion of the enforcement authority, a person who violates
any provision of this section for the first time may be given written notice of
the practices or conditions which constitute the violation, and the enforcement
authority shall in that instance direct remedies to the person where
appropriate and provide a time period of no longer than 30 days within which to
correct the violation(s). Failure of the person to correct the violations
within the specified time period shall constitute prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section.
(Ord. 101210, passed - -2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 POISONING ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit poisoned meat or any poison or
poisoned or harmful substance in any public place or on any private premises
for the purpose of destroying any dog or other animal; however, this section
does not prevent prudent use of commercially prepared toxins by an authorized
public animal control or health officer, or by a private individual upon his or
her own premises, for purposes of eradicating rats, mice or other vermin.
(Ord. 101210, passed - -2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 ANIMAL FIGHTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to incite, train to fight or set any
animal to fighting another animal or to incite combat between animals and
humans in the incorporated limits of the town.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, the owner of a
dog serving as a law enforcement service animal or an animal certified as a
property protecting guard dog is exempted from the prohibited act of training
the animal to fight to the extent that the training is only for the purpose
outlined in this division (B).
(Ord. 101210, passed - -2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 ENTICING DOMESTIC ANIMAL FROM PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to entice an animal from the premises of
the person owning, keeping or harboring the same with the intention to deprive
the person of possession thereof or so as to cause the animal to be in
violation of this chapter or any other applicable law or ordinance.
(Ord. 101210, passed - -2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.12 RABIES.
   (A)   Anti-rabies vaccinations required for dogs and cats. It shall be
unlawful to keep a dog or cat over the age of six months in the incorporated
limits of the town unless the cat or dog is immunized
against rabies by a vaccination performed by a veterinarian, and the period of
immunization specified by the veterinarian performing the vaccination has not
expired.
   (B)   Record of anti-rabies vaccinations; tag required.
      (1)   A veterinarian who administers an anti-rabies vaccination shall, at
the time a dog or cat is vaccinated, issue to the animal’s owner a durable
rabies vaccination tag, as prescribed by state law.
      (2)   For the purpose of identification, each owner of a dog or a cat,
which is kept in the incorporated limits of the town, shall cause the anti-
rabies vaccination identification tag to be affixed to the animal’s collar, and
to be worn by the animal at all times.
   (C)   Precautionary measures, and individual animal quarantine. A captured
animal known to have bitten or otherwise exposed a person to the possibility of
contracting rabies through non-bite exposure shall be humanely quarantined for
a period of not less than ten days. In the sole discretion of the quarantining
authority, the quarantine may be on the premise of the animal’s owner, at the
animal control or management center or those of its contractors, if any, or at
the owner’s expense in a kennel or veterinary hospital.
   (D)   Surrender of suspected animal by owner. Whenever the quarantining
authority has reasonable cause to suspect than an animal has been exposed to
rabies, or bitten or exposed through non-bite exposure a person to rabies, the
animal shall be surrendered by its owner for quarantine and observation
promptly upon demand by the quarantining authority. The quarantine shall be at
the owner of the animal’s expense.
   (E)   Rabid or vicious animals. It shall be the duty of any town police
officer or other duly appointed law enforcement officer or Animal Management
Officer to capture, if safely possible, or kill if reasonably necessary:
      (1)   Any animal(s) thought to be infected with rabies; or
      (2)   Any vicious or vicious acting animal which is not adequately
restrained and is unwarrantably attacking or threatening to attack any person
or other domestic animal.
(Ord. 101210, passed - -2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.13 CIVIL LIABILITY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting the civil liability
of the owner of an animal for damages or acts committed by the animal.
(Ord. 101210, passed - -2010)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) below, the first violation
of §
90.02 in any 12-month period shall be subject to a written warning, issued by
any police officer or animal management officer, and the second offense of §
90.02 in a 12-month period is subject to enforcement and a fine of $100. For
the third offense of §
90.02 in a 12-month period of time is subject to a fine of $200, and for every
violation thereafter is subject to a fine of $500.
      (2)   If, while the animal is at large in violation of §
90.02 at a location other than its owner’s or keeper’s property, it does either
of the following, then the violation shall be subject to enforcement procedures
and penalties, and the fine imposed shall not be less than $250, or $500 if
another animal or person is injured as a result of the animal’s actions:
         (a)   Attacks another animal; or
         (b)   Chases or approaches a person in a menacing fashion or apparent
attitude of attack;
   (C)   A person who violates any provision of §
90.05 shall be punishable as provided with a fine imposed for the violation of
not less than $500. If the violation results in the animal causing serious
bodily injury to any person, the Town Attorney/Prosecutor shall request the
court order the animal forfeited and destroyed.
   (D)   A person who violates any provision of §
90.06 shall be fined not less than $25 for the first violation. For the second
offense, the violator is subject to a fine of not less than $50, and for every
violation thereafter the violator is subject to a fine of not less than $100.
   (E)   A person who violates any provision of §
90.07 shall be fined for the violation not less than $25, subsequent or
continued violations may also subject the owner to impoundment of the animal by
a person having authority to impound the animal.
   (F)   (1)   A person who violates any provision of §
90.08 shall be fined for any like violations as follows:
         (a)   For the first violation, not less than $25; and
         (b)   For the second or subsequent violations, not less than $100, and
the court, upon request, may order forfeiture or other disposition of the
animal involved.
      (2)   A judgment by the court which orders forfeiture or other
disposition of the animal by the town or any third party shall include as a
part of the judgment adequate provisions for the collection of costs of
forfeiture or impoundment from the person found in violation.
   (G)   Any person violating §
90.09 shall be fined not less than $100 or more than $300.
   (H)   Any person violating §
90.10 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100; however, causing
animals to fight for the deliberate purpose of conducting an animal fighting
contest shall be subject to criminal prosecution, as allowed by statute.
   (I)   Any person violating §
90.11 shall be fined not less than $25 or more than $50.
   (J)   (1)   A violation of §
90.12 shall be fined for any violation not less than $50.
      (2)   A person who violates §
90.12(B)(2) shall be fined for the violation not less than $5.
   (K)   There is hereby added to this penalty the additional penalty of
attorney’s fees incurred by the town if civil action through a court of
competent jurisdiction is required in order to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 121206C, passed 12-12-2006; Ord. 101210, passed - -2010)
CHAPTER 91: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
91.01   Policy statement
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Unlawful practice
   
91.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
91.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions
   
91.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
91.07   Interference, coercion or intimidation
   
91.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
   
91.09   Exemptions
   
91.10   Administrative enforcement of chapter
§ 91.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   It shall be the policy of the town to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits, as provided for
under the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, being 42 U.S.C. §§
1404a et seq., the Federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as
amended, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5301 et seq., and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 040699A, passed 4-6-1999)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who:
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that the person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-2)
   COMMISSION. The State Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C. 22-9-
1-4 et seq.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)
   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint under
I.C. 22-9.5-6.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
91.04,
91.05,
91.06,
91.07 or
91.08 or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or part of a building or structure that is
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a
residence by one or more families.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-8).
   FAMILIAL STATUS. Discrimination on the basis of FAMILIAL STATUS means
discrimination because the person is:
      (1)   Pregnant; or
      (2)   Domiciled with an individual under the age of 18 years of age in
regard to whom the person is:
         (a)   The parent or legal custodian;
         (b)   Has the written permission of the parent or legal custodian for
domicile with that person; or
         (c)   In the process of obtaining legal custody of an individual
younger than 18 years of age.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual, with the status of the FAMILY being
further defined in this section.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-9)
   HANDICAP or DISABILITY.
      (1)   With respect to a person:
         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of the person’s major life activities;
         (b)   A record of having a like impairment;
         (c)   Being regarded as having a like impairment;
         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the Federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.; or
         (e)   Any other impairment defined under I.C. 22-9-5-6.
      (2)   The terms HANDICAP or DISABILITY shall not include current illegal
use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802
(I.C. 22-9-5-6); nor do the terms HANDICAP or DISABILITY include an individual
solely because that individual is a transvestite.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under U.S.C. Title 11, receivers and fiduciaries.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy the premises not owned by the occupant.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)
(Ord. 040699A, passed 4-6-1999)
§ 91.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, §
91.09 and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or
rental of housing set forth I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in §
91.04 shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings, except as exempted by division (B) below, and I.C. 22-
9.5-3;
   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) below, nothing in §
91.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three like single-family houses
at any one time; provided that in the sale of the single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or who
was not the most recent resident of the house prior to the sale, the exemption
shall apply only to one like sale within any 24-month period. The private
individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or reserved on his
or her behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from
the sale or rental of more than three like single-family houses at any one
time. The sale or rental of any like single-family house shall be excepted from
application of this section only if the house is sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner the sales or rental facilities or
services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson, or any person in the
business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any
broker, agent or salesperson or person; and
         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
91.04(C), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other professional assistance
as necessary to perfect or transfer this title.
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwelling containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of the living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions
involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
      (3)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended
for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Ord. 040699A, passed 4-6-1999)
§ 91.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   As made applicable by §
91.03, and except as exempted by §
91.03(B) and §
91.09, it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial
status, disability or national origin;
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
familial status or national origin;
   (C)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published
any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on
race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin, or
an intention to make any like preference, limitation or discrimination;
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental when the dwelling is fact so
available;
   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion,
sex, disability, familial status or national origin; or
   (F)   (1)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability
of:
         (a)   That buyer or renter;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with the dwelling, because of a disability of:
         (a)   That person;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (3)   For purposes of this division (F), DISCRIMINATION includes:
         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the disabled person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the
person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full
enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on
the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services, when the accommodations may be necessary to afford the
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months after
March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in a manner
so that:
            1.   The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons;
            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
disabled persons in wheelchairs; and
            3.   All premises within the dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
               a.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
               b.   Light, switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
               c.   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and
               d.   Usable kitchens and bathrooms so that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
      (4)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., and the American
National Standards for Buildings and Facilities Providing Accessibility and
Usability for Physically Handicapped People (commonly cited as “ANSI A1 17.1”)
suffices to satisfy the requirements of division (F)(3)(c)3. above.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (F) requires that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.
(Ord. 040699A, passed 4-6-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.05 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available a like transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of a transaction, because of race, color, religion,
sex, disability, familial status or national origin.
   (B)   As used in the section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED
TRANSACTION means the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, disability or familial
status.
(Ord. 040699A, passed 4-6-1999)
§ 91.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her
in the terms or conditions of the access, membership or participation, on
account of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national
origin.
(Ord. 040699A, passed 4-6-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected
by §§
91.03,
91.04,
91.05 or
91.06.
(Ord. 040699A, passed 4-6-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status or national origin and because he or she is or has
been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings;
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
the person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in division (A)
above; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage the citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in division (A)
above, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any
denial of the opportunity to participate, shall be fined according to local,
state and federal law.
(Ord. 040699A, passed 4-6-1999)
§ 91.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq. shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those activities or
organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society, or any non-profit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to the persons, unless
membership in the religion is restricted on account of race, color or national
origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact
open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of the lodgings to its members
or from giving preference to its members.
   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply
with respect to housing for older persons.
      (2)   As used in this section, HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS means housing:
         (a)   Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary
of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the State Civil
Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program);
         (b)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or
older; or
         (c)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55
years of age or older per unit.
(Ord. 040699A, passed 4-6-1999)
§ 91.10 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering this
chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commission as set forth in
division (B) below shall be vested in the Chief Executive Officer of the town.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the town, because
of a lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully administer
enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this chapter, herein
elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the provisions of this
chapter by complainants to the State Civil Rights Commission (“Commission”) for
administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6, and the chief
elected officer of the town shall refer all the complaints to the Commission as
provided for under division (A) above to the Commission for purposes of
investigation, resolution and appropriate relief as provided for under I.C. 22-
9.5-6.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the town shall administer
their departments, programs and activities relating to housing and urban
development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter
and shall cooperate with the chief executive officer and the Commission to
further those purposes.
   (D)   The chief executive officer of the town, or the chief executive
officer’s designee, shall provide information on remedies available to any
aggrieved person or complainant requesting the information.
(Ord. 040699A, passed 4-6-1999)
CHAPTER 92: FALSE ALARMS
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Unlawful amount of false alarms
   
92.03   Automatic voice dialers prohibited
   
92.04   Testing or repairing equipment
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM HOLDER. The owner, lessee or person responsible for the existence of
an alarm system device within or upon his or her premises.
   ALARM SYSTEM.
      (1)   Any device, silent or audible, which is designed to actuate or
activate manually or automatically upon the detection of an unauthorized entry,
intrusion, fire or other emergency, in or on any building, structure, facility
or premises, which when activated, leads to notifications being made directly
or indirectly to the Public Communications Center which serves as dispatcher.
      (2)   This definition shall not include:
         (a)   An alarm system installed on a motor vehicle;
         (b)   A medical alarm system; or
         (c)   An alarm system installed upon premises occupied by the United
States, the State of Indiana or any political subdivision thereof.
   BUSINESS. A building, dwelling or structure either occupied or unoccupied
that was either designed for the purpose or serves the purpose of
manufacturing, storing or selling of goods and/or services.
   EXEMPT. A status assigned to any number of “false” alarms that in the
responding officer’s opinion, arrived at by either investigation, observation,
training or experience, were not caused by a malfunction of the alarm, operator
error of the alarm or other actions that could have been controlled by the
residence or business owner.
   FALSE ALARM. Any signal request or similar event, the purpose of which is to
summon Police or Fire Department assistance, but which is not in response to an
actual or threatened emergency or criminal activity. FALSE ALARMS include any
communication, either directly or indirectly, to the Police or Fire Department,
by a central station, intermediary or signal device, which is in response to a
signal or warning issued intentionally or accidentally; negligently or
accidentally activated signals; signals which are the result of faulty,
malfunctioning or improperly installed or maintained equipment, and signals
which are purposely, but improperly, activated to alert or summon the Police or
Fire Department; FALSE ALARMS shall not include signals activated by unusually
severe weather conditions, or timely and proper telephone call to the Public
Safety Communications center canceling any response by police to the alarm
signal.
   MUNICIPAL EMERGENCY SERVICES. Services, responses and actions taken by the
Town Police Department, Town Volunteer Fire Department, Inc. and any department
of the town (such as the Street Department) that responds to a false alarm, as
defined herein. This includes responses by the County Sheriff’s Department, the
Fortville Police Department, the state police and neighboring fire departments
that have a mutual aid agreement with the town or who without any agreement,
nonetheless responds to a call for service that results in a false alarm, as
herein defined, within the town.
   RESIDENTIAL. A home, house, dwelling either occupied or unoccupied that was
designed for the purpose of providing a living space for individuals. For the
purpose of this chapter, RESIDENTIAL shall include buildings located on the
property where the residence is also located. BUILDINGS shall include, but not
be limited to, outbuildings, attached or unattached garages or other similar
facilities.
(Ord. 101204B, passed 12-14-2004)
§ 92.02 UNLAWFUL AMOUNT OF FALSE ALARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for a person who owns or controls residential or
business property within the corporate limits of the town, on which an alarm
system is monitored to issue, cause to be issued or permit the issuance of more
than three false alarms in a one-year period; provided, however, a calculation
of the number of false alarms under this section shall not include any false
alarm issued within 30 days after the date the alarm system is first installed.
(Ord. 101204B, passed 12-14-2004) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALERS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The installation hereafter of any automatic voice dialer to the Police
Department or central answering point is prohibited.
   (B)   Alarm holders, who at the time of the enactment of this section, have
been granted permission to have an automatic voice dialer connected to the
Police Department or central answering point, shall be allowed to retain the
connection for a period of not more than 90 days after the effective date of
this chapter.
(Ord. 101204B, passed 12-14-2004)
§ 92.04 TESTING OR REPAIRING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No alarm system designed to transmit alarm conditions directly to the
Police or Fire Department shall be tested or demonstrated without first
obtaining permission from the Police or Fire Department.
   (B)   Permission is not required to test or demonstrate alarm devices not
transmitting alarm conditions directly to the Police or Fire Department, unless
the alarm conditions are to be relayed to the Police or Fire Department Failure
to notify the Police Department or Fire Department prior to testing or
conducting repairs on an alarm system shall constitute a false alarm.
   (C)   Responsibility for the aforementioned notification lies with the alarm
holder.
(Ord. 101204B, passed 12-14-2004)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who owns or controls residential or business property within
the corporate limits of the town, on which an alarm system is monitored, shall
be subject to the following procedures and penalties.
      (1)   For his or her first three false alarms, the person shall receive a
written warning from any member of the Town Police Department.
      (2)   For the fourth false alarm issued in the same one-year period as
the three written warnings, the person shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $10.
      (3)   For the fifth false alarm issued to the same one-year period as the
three written warnings and the first issued citation for violation of this
chapter, the person shall be subject to a fine of not less than $20.
      (4)   For the sixth false alarm issued in the same one-year period as the
three written warnings and the first and second citation for violation of this
chapter, the person shall be subject to a fine of not less than $30 or a waiver
of the fine if the person successfully completes an alarm system training
course, as provided by their alarm monitoring service, and/or provides
maintenance records that indicate the system has been repaired/maintenanced.
      (5)   For the seventh false alarm issued in the same one-year period as
the three written warnings and the first, second and third citation for
violation of this chapter, the person shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $100.
   (B)   A fine shall be due and payable by the alarm user within ten days
after written notice from the Town Police Department of the violation. In the
event the alarm user does not pay his or her fine as assessed, the town may
also take appropriate legal action to enforce the collection of the fine, and
the alarm user shall be liable to the town for all court costs and attorney’s
fees necessary to collect the fines. In addition thereto, the town shall be
permitted to seek injunctive relief. All fines shall be payable to the town and
fines collected shall be deposited into the town’s General Fund.
   (C)   There is hereby added to this penalty the additional penalty of
attorney’s fees incurred by the town if civil action through a court of
competent jurisdiction is required in order to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 101204B, passed 12-14-2004; Ord. 121206C, passed 12-12-2006)
CHAPTER 93: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
93.01   Application
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited
   
93.04   Exceptions
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this section shall apply to the control of all noise
within the town limits, as the limits now exist or may hereafter be
established.
(Ord. 102898, passed 11-14-1998; Ord. 121024D, passed 1-21-2025)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CALENDAR YEAR. January through December.
   COMPLAINANT. Person(s) who report the alleged unreasonable noise to the
town.
   dB(A). The intensity of a sound expressed in decibels read from a calibrated
sound level meter using the A-level weighting scale and the slow meter
response, as specified by the American National Standards Institute.
   DECIBEL. A unit measure of sound level; the symbol is dB.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Any activities performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by
existing or imminent peril.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A member of the McCordsville Police Department or a
McCordsville Code Enforcement Officer.
   LEQ(A). The sound pressure level averaged over a defined time using A-level
sound weighting and displayed in decibels (dB).
   PERSON. Any individual, association, partnership, corporation or any other
legal entity.
   PROPERTY LINE. The real line and its vertical extension which separates the
real property owned, leased or occupied by any person from contiguous real
property owned, leased or occupied by any other person.
   QUIET HOURS. From 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday, and from
11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m., Friday and Saturday.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument designed and used by the town to measure
sound pressure levels.
   SOURCE PROPERTY. The property from which the sound being measured
originates.
   UNREASONABLE NOISE. Sound that is of a volume, frequency, or pattern that
prevents, disrupts, injures, or endangers the health, safety, welfare,
prosperity, comfort or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities
within the town, given the time of day or environment in which the sound is
made.
(Ord. 102898, passed 11-14-1998; Ord. 111318, passed 12-19-2018; Ord. 090820,
passed 9-8-2020; Ord. 121024D, passed 1-21-2025)
§ 93.03 LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person to cause, make, or allow any unreasonable noise in or on any real or
personal property occupied or controlled by that person. Sound shall be
considered an unreasonable noise when it exceeds 64 dB(A).
   (B)   Quiet hours. Sound shall be considered an unreasonable noise when it
exceeds 55 dB(A) during quiet hours.
   (C)   Measurement procedures. The following procedure shall be followed to
identify a sound level:
      (1)   The sound level shall be measured by the Enforcement Officer at the
property line of the complainant at a location as near as possible to the
source property.
      (2)   The sound level meter shall be calibrated, and the battery checked
before each use.
      (3)   The sound level meter shall be turned on and set to the dB(A) mode
to begin use.
      (4)   The record button shall be activated to allow the sound level meter
to record the sound levels for 30 seconds. This shall be done twice. After the
second recording, the lower of the two decibel level numbers provided is the dB
(A).
(Ord. 102898, passed 11-14-1998; Ord. 111318, passed 12-19-2018; Ord. 090820,
passed 9-8-2020; Ord. 121024D, passed 1-21-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section:
   (A)   Farming activities during planting and harvesting seasons;
   (B)   Noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure
relief valves;
   (C)   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency, fire or police vehicle
when responding to an emergency call, acting in time of emergency or in
connection with official Police or Fire Department business;
   (D)   Noises resulting from emergency work;
   (E)   Noises made by religious institutions using bells as part of their
religious observance and by persons having obtained a permit to use the
streets;
   (F)   Any aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant to, federal law,
federal air regulations, and air traffic control and instructions and pursuant
to and within the duly adopted federal air regulations. Any aircraft operating
under technical difficulties in any kind of distress, under emergency orders of
air traffic control or being operated pursuant to and subsequent to the
declaration of an emergency under federal air regulations is also exempt;
   (G)   All noises resulting from normal operations of railroad trains are
exempt as provided by state or federal law;
   (H)   Noises resulting from alarms and other warning devices when properly
installed, providing the cause for such alarm or warning device sound is
investigated and turned off within a reasonable period of time;
   (I)   Noises resulting from rubbish collection utilizing any mechanical
equipment between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. only;
   (J)   Noises associated with equipment or animals lawfully utilized by
persons with disabilities to accommodate their disability;
   (K)   In accordance with I.C. 22-11-14-6, noises associated with legal
consumer fireworks used during the following times:
      (1)   Between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and two hours after sunset on June
29, June 30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6, July 7, July 8, and July
9;
      (2)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. on July 4; and
      (3)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00 a.m. on
January 1;
   (L)   Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration
permitted by law and for which a permit has been granted by the town;
   (M)   Noise associated with the normal operation of a gun range or club,
during daytime business hours, for such entity that was established prior
January 21, 2025;
   (N)   Any street-legal vehicles idling in a legally permissible location for
a reasonable amount of time;
   (O)   Any street-legal vehicles traveling within the jurisdiction of the
town;
   (P)   Noise emitted by emergency generators resulting from a power failure,
periodic testing, or maintenance;.
   (Q)   Noise generated by the use or maintenance of any equipment used for
lawn care, so long as such use or maintenance is between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m.
(Ord. 061422C, passed 6-14-2022; Ord. 121024D, passed 1-21-2025)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Whomever violates this chapter shall be issued a warning for the first
offense, fined a sum of $500 for the second offense, a sum of $1,500 for the
third offense, a sum of $2,500 for the fourth offense and a sum of $5,000 for
any additional offenses that occur within any one calendar year. All violations
of this chapter shall be cumulative. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each occasion a complaint is made and the owner and/or occupant of
the source property refuses to come into compliance with the regulations listed
above. Should enforcement of this chapter require the utilization of the
services of the Town Attorney, the violator shall, in addition to any fines
imposed, be responsible for and shall pay all such reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the town.
(Ord. 071012, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 111318, passed 12-19-2018; Ord. 090820,
passed 9-8-2020; Ord. 121024D, passed 1-21-2025)
CHAPTER 94: PUBLIC NUISANCES; BURNING
Section
Unwholesome Environmental Condition
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Prohibition
   
94.03   General nuisances described
   
94.04   Construction nuisances described
Enforcement Procedure
   
94.15   Authority to make inspections
   
94.16   Abatement notice
   
94.17   When abatement notice not required
   
94.18   Hearings
   
94.19   Compliance with abatement notice
   
94.20   Failure to comply with abatement notice
   
94.21   Alternative enforcement
   
94.22   Abatement by town
Towing/Impoundment of Nuisance Vehicles
   
94.40   Towing and impoundment of motorized vehicles and/or non-traditional
vehicles
   
94.41   Operations
 
   
94.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Animals, see
Chapter 90
   Noise regulations, see
Chapter 93
UNWHOLESOME ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITION
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS. The construction, alteration, repair, extension,
demolition or dismantling of buildings or structures, which shall include any
work to the land necessary to prepare the project.
   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The town’s Planning and Building Department.
   HEARING AUTHORITY. The Town Council.
   LITTER. Includes any man-made or man-used waste, which, if deposited within
the town otherwise than in a litter receptacle, tends to create a danger to
public health, safety, and welfare or tends to impair the environment or
aesthetic well-being of the community. It shall include, but not be limited to,
garbage, trash, refuse, debris, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste,
paper products, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, motor vehicle parts,
furniture, appliances, carcasses of dead animals, or other waste material of an
unsightly, unsanitary, nauseous or offensive nature.
   NUISANCE. As defined in I.C. 32-30-6-6, to-wit: whatever is injurious to
health, indecent, offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of
property, so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life
or property.
   OF RECORD. As recorded in the tax records of Hancock County.
   PERSON. An individual, a firm, labor organization, partnership, association,
corporation, limited liability company, legal representative, trustee, trustee
in bankruptcy, or receiver.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any and all land arid/or structures upon that land not
publicly owned.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all land and/or structures upon that land publicly
owned.
   SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. Any right in real property that may be
affected in a substantial way by actions authorized by this chapter, including
a fee interest, a life estate interest, a future interest, a present possessory
interest, or an equitable interest of a contract purchaser.
(Ord. 070924, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 94.02 PROHIBITION.
   No owner, occupant, tenant, or any person having a substantial property
interest in any real or personal property within town limits, or any agent
thereof, shall maintain, create, cause, place, deposit, leave, or permit a
nuisance to remain on such property, or upon any public place abutting such
real or personal property.
(Ord. 070924, passed 7-9-2024) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.03 GENERAL NUISANCES DESCRIBED.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following list includes, but is not
limited to, conditions which constitute a nuisance:
   (A)   Litter or accumulations of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk, or other
abandoned materials, metals, and lumber.
   (B)   Any form of leaf burning or wood burning, or the burning of trash,
rubbish or garbage, on private or public property. This shall not include
monitored or supervised recreational or ceremonial fires. Fires must be
attended at all times until completely extinguished.
   (C)   Fallen trees, removed or abandoned tree stumps, dead trees, cut brush,
fallen or cut limbs except stacked firewood.
   (D)   Dilapidated or deteriorated appliances, household items, furniture and
tires stored outdoors.
   (E)   Demolition remains.
   (F)   Open excavations, uncovered or improperly covered holes, whether lined
or unlined, and dirt piles on any open or unfenced real property within the
town.
   (G)   Automobile parts, disassembled automobiles, automobiles without
engines, plumbing and piping materials and parts, scrap metal, unseaworthy or
dilapidated boats, dilapidated, deteriorated, or nonoperable jet skis,
snowmobiles, bicycles, trailers, or mopeds.
   (H)   Structures defaced with paint, graffiti, or wording.
   (I)   Emission of a significant amount of odor, dust, smoke, or other matter
into the atmosphere which renders ordinary use and enjoyment of property in the
vicinity uncomfortable or impossible.
   (J)   Any waste water, filth, offal, dead animal or animal parts, garbage,
rubbish, animal waste, human excrement, which is deposited, allowed or caused
to be upon any public or private property.
   (K)   Any water or any other substance which is caused or permitted to flow
onto or be deposited upon any private or public way, except natural surface
water drainage.
   (L)   The erection of a dam or any other obstruction by a private party
which prevents the natural flow of water and causes it to collect in a pool on
any private or public property.
   (M)   Any real or personal property which is infected with contagious
disease or is likely to cause an immediate health hazard.
   (N)   Any real or personal property, used as a place of residence or
habitation or for sleeping, that is maintained in such a way as to be dangerous
or detrimental to life or health due to lack of or defects in water, drainage,
heat, electricity, plumbing, ventilation or garbage and trash removal.
   (O)   The storage of any explosive, combustible or other material which
creates a safety or health hazard.
   (P)   Trees, shrubbery, weeds, or other matter obstructing public ways, or
causing visual barriers which create vehicular traffic or pedestrian safety
hazards.
   (Q)   Grass, weeds, or other lawn vegetation which has attained a height of
eight inches or more.
   (R)   Accumulations of stagnant water.
   (S)   Any real or personal property infested with insects, rats, vermin, or
wild or domestic animals, to a degree that prevents the reasonable use and
enjoyment of adjoining and surrounding properties or creates a health hazard or
unsanitary or dangerous condition.
   (T)   Basketball goals or other privately owned structures erected in, or
infringing upon, any public place.
   (U)   Fences and walls on commercial, residential or industrial properties
that are not maintained to community standards, in a state of disrepair and/or
a danger to the public.
   (V)   Exterior lighting fixtures on commercial or industrial structures and/
or lighting fixtures in the parking lot surrounding commercial or industrial
structures that are broken, non-functioning, burned out and/or are insufficient
in number or brightness to provide for the safety and security of employees or
patrons of the commercial or industrial establishment.
   (W)   Paint, siding, shingle, stucco, wood or any other exterior covering on
commercial, residential or industrial structures that is chipping, flaking,
missing, decayed, in disrepair, or detached from the exterior of the structure.
   (X)   Offensive exterior lighting.
(Ord. 070924, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 94.04 CONSTRUCTION NUISANCES DESCRIBED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person to perform professional construction operations from 10:00 p.m. on
Saturday through 7:00 a.m. on Monday. This shall include dropping off and
picking up equipment at a construction site.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform construction operations
on New Year’s Day, January 1; Memorial Day, the last Monday in May; Labor Day,
the first Monday in September; Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in
November; and Christmas Day, December 25.
   (C)   Exemptions. Construction operations, for which building permits have
been issued or construction operations for which a permit is not required shall
be exempt under the following conditions and with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Such operations that occur after 7:00 a.m. and before 10:00 p.m.,
except as otherwise provided in this section;
      (2)   Because of the loud and unusual sounds, and the ground vibrations
associated with pile drivers, steam shovels, pneumatic hammers, and steam or
diesel gasoline hoists, the operation of this equipment shall be exempt but
only when it occurs between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. or when
allowed by special permit.
      (3)   In order to be exempt, all equipment used in such operations shall
be operated with the manufacturer’s mufflers and noise reducing equipment in
use and in proper operating condition.
(Ord. 070924, passed 7-9-2024) Penalty, see § 94.99
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE
§ 94.15 AUTHORITY TO MAKE INSPECTIONS.
   It is the duty of all officers and employees of the town to report the
existence of nuisances to the enforcement authority. The enforcement authority,
or any other municipal employees so designated by Council, shall be authorized
to visit, enter upon any lot, grounds, or premises within the limits of the
town for the purpose of ascertaining and discovering any nuisances and to make
examination thereof. If an officer or employee is denied access to inspect
inside a building or structure upon request, the officer or employee may seek
an administrative warrant.
(Ord. 070924, passed 7-9-2024) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.16 ABATEMENT NOTICE.
   (A)   Abatement notice. Where, upon inspection, reasonable cause is found to
believe that a nuisance exists, the enforcement authority shall issue a written
abatement notice.
   (B)   To whom notice is given. An abatement notice shall be served upon all
known holders of substantial property interests in the real estate upon which
the nuisance property is alleged to exist. If the resident or occupant of the
premises is not the owner of record of the real estate, the enforcement
authority is authorized to serve the owner of record as shown in the Hancock
County Recorder’s Office in addition to other known holders of substantial
property interests, including the resident or occupant.
   (C)   Content of notice. The abatement notice must contain:
      (1)   The name of the person to whom the order is issued.
      (2)   The common address and parcel number of the real estate where the
nuisance is located which is the subject of the notice.
      (3)   The action that the notice requires. The ordered action must be
reasonably related to abatement of the condition(s) constituting the nuisance.
      (4)   The period of time within which the action ordered is required to
be accomplished, measured from the time when the abatement notice is served.
      (5)   A statement that the order becomes final ten calendar days after
notice is served, unless a hearing is requested in writing by a person holding
a substantial property interest in the private premises upon which the nuisance
is alleged to exist. The request for a hearing must be served upon the
enforcement authority prior to the expiration of the aforementioned ten
calendar day period.
      (6)   A statement briefly indicating what action can be taken by the town
if there is non-compliance with the orders contained in the abatement notice.
      (7)   The name, business address, and business telephone number of the
enforcement authority.
   (D)   Manner of giving notice. Service of abatement notices shall be made by
any of the following means:
      (1)   Sending a copy of the notice by registered or certified mail to the
residence or place of business or employment of the person to be notified, with
return receipt requested.
      (2)   Delivering a copy of the notice personally to the person to be
notified.
      (3)   Leaving a copy of the notice at the dwelling or usual place of
abode of the person to be notified.
      (4)   Posting a copy of the notice in a prominent place upon the premises
where the nuisance is located.
      (5)   If, after a reasonable effort, service cannot be obtained by any of
the means described in divisions (D)(1) through (D)(4) above, service may be
made by publishing the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county in which the property subject to the notice is located. Publication
shall be made one time.
   (E)   Effective date of notice. The date when notice is considered given is
as follows:
      (1)   If the notice is delivered personally or left at the dwelling or
usual place of abode, notice is considered given on the day when the order or
statement is delivered to the person or left at his or her dwelling or usual
place of abode.
      (2)   If the notice is mailed, notice is considered given on the date
shown on the return receipt, or, if no date is shown, on the date when the
return receipt is received by the Department of Building and Code Enforcement.
      (3)   Notice by publication is considered given on the date of
publication.
(Ord. 070924, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 94.17 WHEN ABATEMENT NOTICE NOT REQUIRED.
   Where, in the opinion of the enforcement authority, an emergency nuisance
exists which creates a substantial and imminent health or safety hazard
requiring immediate abatement in order to protect health and safety, the
enforcement authority may abate the nuisance without the necessity of issuing
an abatement notice as set out herein. The enforcement authority shall then
present its actions to Council at the Council’s next meeting following the
abatement action.
(Ord. 070924, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 94.18 HEARINGS.
   (A)   Any owner, tenant or occupant, or person holding a substantial
property interest in private premises upon which a nuisance is alleged to exist
who disputes the existence of such, or disputes the nature of the abatement
action ordered in the abatement notice, may, within ten calendar days of
service of the abatement notice, serve upon the enforcement authority a written
request for a hearing. The written request does not need to be in any
particular form, but shall clearly indicate that a hearing is requested.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the written request for a hearing, the enforcement
authority shall place the matter on the agenda of the Town Council for hearing.
The Council shall function as the hearing authority to adjudicate the matter.
   (C)   The enforcement authority shall give written notice to the party
requesting the hearing of the date and time of the hearing.
   (D)   At the hearing, which may be adjourned from time to time, it shall be
the enforcement authority’s burden to go forward with evidence sufficient to
demonstrate that a nuisance exists, and that the actions required are
reasonably calculated to abate the nuisance within a reasonable period of time.
The party requesting the hearing shall have the right to dispute the existence
of the nuisance, the reasonableness of the remedy, or the reasonableness of the
time allowed for remedial action.
   (E)   At the hearing, both sides may present witnesses, elicit testimony,
introduce physical evidence, cross-examine opposing witnesses or dispute
evidence submitted by their hearing opponent. Both sides may present oral
arguments. Both sides may be represented by counsel.
   (F)   All such hearings shall be open to the public.
   (G)   Upon conclusion of the presentation of evidence and oral argument, if
any, Council shall deliberate and render a decision either confirming,
amending, or rescinding the disputed content of the abatement notice. Council
may also impose a fine in accordance with I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B). If a penalty
is imposed, Council’s decision may be appealed to the circuit or superior
courts of Hancock County within 60 days on which the order is entered. If no
penalty is imposed, Council’s decision is final.
   (H)   All time parameters set out in the abatement notice for completion of
compliance actions shall be tolled, pending the outcome of the Council’s
decision. In cases where the actions of the enforcement authority are upheld,
or are upheld as modified by the Council, it shall be the responsibility of the
Council, in its decision, to establish time periods for completion of
compliance activities held in abeyance during the hearing process.
(Ord. 070924, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 94.19 COMPLIANCE WITH ABATEMENT NOTICE.
   When a nuisance is abated to the satisfaction of the enforcement authority
or as required by Council after hearing, no further fines or penalties will be
imposed. The enforcement authority shall make written note of the compliance
and the enforcement file shall be closed.
(Ord. 070924, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 94.20 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ABATEMENT NOTICE.
   Failure, neglect, or refusal by the person to comply with the abatement
notice within the time period set out therein, or within any extended time
periods agreed to by the enforcement authority, or as imposed by Council
following a hearing, shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall
render the person upon whom the abatement notice was served liable to a fine as
set by local ordinance. The record owner of the premises upon which the
nuisance is found to exist, and the tenant or occupant, may be held jointly and
severally liable for the payment of fines assessed under this chapter.
(Ord. 070924, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 94.21 ALTERNATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
   In lieu of an administrative hearing before the Town Council, the town may
file a civil action to enforce any violation of this chapter pursuant to I.C.
36-1-6-4 and I.C. 32-30-6-6.
(Ord. 070924, passed 7-9-2024)
§ 94.22 ABATEMENT BY TOWN.
   (A)   In addition to fines imposed in accordance with I.C. 36-l-3-8(a)(10)
(B), where abatement is not accomplished by the person(s) who received the
abatement notice within the period of time permitted, the town may enter onto
the property and take appropriate action to bring the property into compliance.
Continuous enforcement orders (as defined in I.C. 36-7-9-2) can be enforced and
liens may be assessed without the need for additional notice.
   (B)   If the town takes action to bring into compliance, the expenses
incurred by the town constitute a lien against the property. The lien attaches
when notice of the lien is recorded in the Hancock County Recorder’s Office.
The lien is superior to all other liens except liens for taxes, in an amount
that does not exceed:
      (1)   Ten thousand dollars for real property that:
         (a)   Contains one or more occupied or unoccupied single or double
family dwellings or the appurtenances or additions to those dwellings; or
         (b)   Is unimproved; or
      (2)   Twenty thousand dollars for all other real property not described
in division (B)(1) above.
   (C)   A bill issued under division (B) is delinquent if the owner of the
real property fails to pay the bill within 30 days after the date of the
issuance of the bill.
   (D)   Whenever the town determines it necessary, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
prepare:
      (1)   A list of delinquent fees and penalties that are enforceable under
this section, including:
         (a)   The name or names of the owner or owners of each lot or parcel
of real property on which fees are delinquent;
         (b)   A description of the premises, as shown on the records of the
County Auditor; and
         (c)   The amount of the delinquent fees and the penalty; or
      (2)   An instrument for each lot or parcel of real property on which the
fees are delinquent.
   (E)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall record a copy of each list or each
instrument with the Hancock County Recorder, who shall charge a fee for
recording the list or instrument under the fee schedule established in I.C. 36-
2-7-10.
   (F)   The amount of the lien shall be placed on the tax duplicate by the
Auditor. The total amount, including any accrued interest, shall be collected
in the same manner as delinquent taxes are collected and shall be disbursed to
the general fund of the municipal corporation.
(Ord. 070924, passed 7-9-2024)
BURNING OF RUBBISH AND OTHER LIKE CONTAMINANTS
§ 94.25 PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall start, kindle, cause, allow or maintain any form of leaf
burning, wood burning of any kind, or the burning of trash, rubbish or garbage,
on private or public property and constituting a nuisance as defined herein
below, except as specifically authorized by this subchapter.
(Ord. 111307E, passed 12-11-2007)
§ 94.26 NUISANCE DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, a NUISANCE is defined as whatever is:
   (A)   Injurious to health;
   (B)   Indecent;
   (C)   Offensive to the senses;
   (D)   An obstruction to the free use of property; and/or
   (E)   So as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life
or property, is a nuisance, and the subject to an action.
(Ord. 111307E, passed 12-11-2007)
§ 94.27 PERMITTED FIRES.
   The following types of fires are permitted:
   (A)   Customary burning of logs and other wood products in residential
fireplace;
   (B)   Burning of charcoal and other food cooking fuels customarily used in
outdoor grills or traditional food cooking devices;
   (C)   Fire celebrating “Twelfth Night Ceremony”;
   (D)   Fire celebrating school pep rallies;
   (E)   Fire celebrating scouting activities;
   (F)   Fire used for recreational purposes (i.e., campfires);
   (G)   Industrial and/or commercial burning through methods specifically and
previously approved by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management
(IDEM), or other appropriate local, state and/or federal regulatory agencies;
and
   (H)   Any other type of fires whereby a citizen of the town has obtained a
variance from the provisions of this subchapter by filing a written petition
with the Town Manager, requesting a variance from the provisions of this
subchapter; however, the Town Council cannot grant a variance that would
otherwise violate the provisions of 326 I.A.C. §§ 4-1 et seq., as amended, and/
or provisions of I.C. 13-17-9-2.
(Ord. 111307E, passed 12-11-2007)
§ 94.28 VARIANCE; PETITION.
   (A)   The Town Council shall consider the following criteria in granting a
variance from this petition:
      (1)   The approval of the variance will not be injurious to the public
health, safety and general welfare of the community and/or adjoining property
owners;
      (2)   The quiet use and enjoyment of the area adjacent to the property
included within the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse
manner; and
      (3)   The strict application of the terms of this subchapter will result
in practical difficulties in the use of the subject property.
   (B)   The Town Council may grant the petition unconditionally, deny the
petition or grant the petition subject to conditions.
   (C)   In addition, the variance may be granted in the sole discretion of the
Town Council for one or more occasions and/or a stipulated period of time.
   (D)   The Town Council may require the owner of the property to make written
commitments concerning burning of materials, a copy of the commitments shall be
kept on file in the offices of the town by the Town Manager.
(Ord. 111307E, passed 12-11-2007)
TOWING/IMPOUNDMENT OF NUISANCE VEHICLES
§ 94.40 TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTORIZED VEHICLES AND/OR NON-TRADITIONAL
VEHICLES.
   (A)   Any motorized and/or non-traditional vehicle parked or left standing
unattended upon any street or public place in the town, at any time, in
violation of any provisions of this subchapter or other ordinances of the town,
or of any state law, any motorized and/or non-traditional vehicle known to have
been stolen and so left on any street, or authorized to be towed and impounded
by any state or federal statute, is declared a nuisance and an unlawful
obstruction upon the street or public place, and a hazard to traffic thereon.
   (B)   Any police officer, when discovering a motorized and/or non-
traditional vehicle parked or kept standing unattended, or when it is attended
and the occupant or operator refuses, if able to do so, or fails to move it on
request, shall attach to the motorized and/or non-traditional vehicle, or serve
upon the person a notice of violation, as provided for in this chapter. In
addition, the officer may remove the motorized and/or non-traditional vehicle,
or cause it to be removed to any town-owned or operated property, or to a
private storage area or place authorized pursuant to contract, where the
motorized and/or non-traditional vehicle shall be impounded and detained as
hereinafter provided. The motorized and/or non-traditional vehicle shall be
released only upon a police order authorizing the motorized and/or non-
traditional vehicle to be surrendered, or upon an order of a judge of any court
having jurisdiction, pursuant to any other legal proceedings, and only after
the owner’s completion of a tow/impoundment release form, and the remittance of
$20.
   (C)   Removal and impounding of a motorized and/or non-traditional vehicle
shall be accomplished with reasonable care, but otherwise shall be at the risk
of the owner, his or her agent or representative, and the expense and result of
removal and storage shall be borne by the owner, his or her agent, or
representative, for the use and benefit of the town, or of the person who
operates or has charge of the garage or other storage place, whether public or
private, unless otherwise ordered by a judge of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (D)   Removal, impounding and storage of a motorized and/or non-traditional
vehicle, pursuant to this section’s provisions, shall in no way supersede, bar,
excuse or prevent a prosecution of any person or in any way relieve him or her
from the penalty prescribed for his or her violation of this subchapter or any
other town ordinance or state law, for the violation of which the motorized
and/or non-traditional vehicle has been removed, impounded and stored, but
remedies and penalties are declared to be distinct and separate as means of
enforcing compliance to this subchapter.
   (E)   Whenever an owner, his or her agent or representative fails or refuses
to pay expenses of removal and storage of a motorized/non-traditional vehicle
impounded, in addition to and separate from the penalty incurred by him or her,
the police officer discovering the motorized and/or non-traditional vehicle
parked or left standing, illegally, shall file or cause to be filed, in any
court having jurisdiction an affidavit charging the owner, his or her agent or
representative with the committed offense. The person so charged shall be cited
to appear on a certain day and hour to answer and stand trial upon the charge.
The police officer, who executed the affidavit, shall be present and assist in
the prosecution of the charge.
   (F)   Pending a hearing upon the charge, the owner, his or her agent or
representative may obtain possession of the impounded motorized and/or non-
traditional vehicle by filing a bond with the clerk of the court of $20, plus
accrued towing and storage charges, or in another reasonable sum fixed by the
judge of the court, conditioned upon the appearance of the owner, his or her
agent or representative before the court at the day and hour set for trial, to
answer the charge in the affidavit.
   (G)   In the event the judge finds the motorized and/or non-traditional
vehicle to have been properly towed and/or impounded, the judge shall, in all
instances, not only assess the penalty prescribed herein, or by law for the
violation, but in addition thereto, shall determine and assess against the
defendant whatever amount, within the limits prescribed by this subchapter, the
judge finds from the evidence is a fair and equitable reimbursement to the town
or other persons, for the removal expense for impounding and storage of the
motorized and/or non-traditional vehicle, plus attorney’s fees incurred by the
town; however, in no event shall the sum assessed for impounding be more that
the maximum amount in this subchapter, but the charge shall be additional to
the assessment of the reasonable charges for the towing and storage of the
motorized and/or non-traditional vehicle, not exceeding the towing and storage
charges herein provided for.
   (H)   In the event that the judge finds from the evidence that the motorized
and/or non-traditional vehicle was not parked or left standing in violation of
any provisions of this subchapter, or other ordinance or statute, as charged in
the affidavit, the judge shall order the motorized and/or non-traditional
vehicle restored to the owner, agent or representative without any penalty of
the assessment of any charges made against him or her.
   (I)   Independent of and in addition to the remedy, action and assessment of
any penalty provided for the violations, a police officer may order and effect
the removal of the motorized and/or non-traditional vehicle from the street or
other public place and may cause it to be impounded and stored, as provided for
in this subchapter, and any action against or charges assessed against or paid
by or for the person as a result of impounding and storage shall be wholly
distinct from and independent of any offense and penalty which may be assessed
against and paid by or for the person.
   (J)   Any and all sums of money collected in excess of the expenses incurred
for towing and/or storage of an impounded motorized and/or non-traditional
vehicle shall be deposited into the local law enforcement continuing education
fund for expenditure in compliance with the ordinance creating the fund.
(Ord. 101111, passed 10-11-2011) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.41 OPERATIONS.
   The Town Police Department is authorized and directed to establish and
maintain the following office hours for the purpose of releasing towed/
impounded vehicles:
   (A)   Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m., excluding posted
holidays; and
   (B)   Monday through Friday from 12:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., excluding posted
holidays.
(Ord. 101111, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99. There is hereby added to this penalty the additional penalty of
attorney’s fees incurred by the town if civil action through a court of
competent jurisdiction is required in order to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in §§
94.40 and
94.41, whoever violates any provisions of §§
94.40 and
94.41 shall be fined not more than $200.
(Ord. 121206C, passed 12-12-2006; Ord. 111307E, passed 12-11-2007; Ord. 111009,
passed 11-10-2009; Ord. 070924, passed 7-9-2024)
CHAPTER 95: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Destructive vehicles prohibited
   
95.02   Tampering with street monuments or markers prohibited; permit
   
95.03   Burning of rubbish on street pavement prohibited
   
95.04   Access to streets and alleys
   
95.05   Definitions
Items Allowed to be Located in Right-of-Way
   
95.15   Approval required
   
95.16   Receipt of approval
   
95.17   Mailboxes
 
   
95.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 DESTRUCTIVE VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall permit any vehicle under his or her ownership or control to
operate on the streets or sidewalks of the town if the vehicle seriously
damages or destroys the streets or sidewalks of the town.
(Ord. 2991C, passed 3-9-1991) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.02 TAMPERING WITH STREET MONUMENTS OR MARKERS PROHIBITED; PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, move, alter or tamper
with, any monuments, stakes, spikes or other means of identification
(hereinafter referred to as “monuments”) placed upon a right-of-way of the town
for street purposes by officers or employees of the town, or so placed at the
direction of officials of the town.
   (B)   If any monument shall cause a hazardous situation or inconvenience, a
resident of the town may apply to the Clerk-Treasurer for a permit, to be
granted by the Council, to replace or alter the monument, and the Clerk-
Treasurer may, in his or her discretion, issue the permit in order to relieve a
situation of hazard or extreme inconvenience.
(Ord. 2991C, passed 3-9-1991) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.03 BURNING OF RUBBISH ON STREET PAVEMENT PROHIBITED.
   No person may at any time build any fire or burn any trash, brush, leaves or
other combustibles upon any paved street or public sidewalk of the town.
(Ord. 2991C, passed 3-9-1991) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 ACCESS TO STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   No person or entity shall be allowed access to streets or alleys
within the town for commercial drives, residential drives, road cuts, cuts for
the installation of pipe, cable or conduit, for borings under any street,
roadway or alley, or for poles to be located within the town, rights-of-way for
any street or alley without first applying for and obtaining a permit utilizing
the procedure and the form on file with the Public Works Commissioner.
   (B)   (1)   The Town Manager, the Public Works Commissioner or their duly
authorized designee is empowered to issue an order requiring the suspension of
any activity threatened to be conducted or actually conducted in violation
hereof. The stop work order shall be posted on the property in question in a
conspicuous place or shall be personally delivered to the owner, possessor or
person in charge or person conducting the activity in question stating the
conditions under which the activity may be resumed. If said stop work order is
not honored, the town may institute suit in a court of competent jurisdiction
to enforce the provisions of said stop work order, including the request for a
temporary, preliminary and/or permanent injunction, the recovery of litigation
costs and attorney’s fees.
      (2)   Any person or entity who is deemed to have violated the provisions
hereof shall be deemed to have committed a civil ordinance violation and may be
issued a citation by the designated enforcement entity consisting of the Town
Manager, the Town Public Works Commissioner or their duly authorized designee
and/or any member of the Town Police Department. Said citation shall indicate
that each day a violation remains in existence shall constitute a separate
civil ordinance violation subject to additional fines and if incurred by the
town, court costs, litigation expense and attorney’s fees. All fines provided
for in this section shall be paid through the Town Clerk-Treasurer who shall
render to the person making the payment a receipt stating the amount and
purpose for which the fine has been paid, a duplicate of which shall be made a
part of the records of the town.
      (3)   If a person or entity who receives a citation or a stop work order
and continues in violation of the terms and provisions hereof or fails to bring
their activity within the compliance hereof, the Town Council, through its
designated representative, may commence legal proceedings to enforce the terms
and provisions hereof. A person or entity adjudged to have committed a civil
ordinance violation is liable for court costs, litigation expense and
attorney’s fees. No costs shall be assessed against the town in this type of
action and there shall be no change of venue from the county in this type of
case.
      (4)   Any person or entity who applies for a permit pursuant hereto after
having been in violation hereof shall pay a fee for said permit that is twice
the scheduled fee for said action.
      (5)   As an additional penalty for violation hereof, a fine of up to the
sum of $2,500 for each violation may be imposed by the Town Council, with each
day said violation exists to constitute a separate and individual violation
subject to the penalties imposed herein. In addition to said fines and other
penalties set forth herein, the person or entity in non-compliance herewith
shall be required to reimburse the town for any attorney’s fees, court costs or
other expense associated with the imposition and collection of any said fine.
   (C)   The town hereby establishes an Underground and Buried Utilities
District ("Area") to be in effect April 28, 2017 and to apply throughout all
town ROW, and is further defined as follows:
      (1)   In all areas of the town where no overhead or above ground
utilities, utility facilities, overhead lines, or associated overhead
structures used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar and
associated services currently exist;
      (2)   In all areas of the town where planned road projects, redevelopment
areas and/or economic development areas provide for and require underground
buried utilities and utility facilities, including but not limited to electric,
communication or similar and associated services;
      (3)   All other areas of ROW or proposed ROW throughout the town, whether
or not above ground utilities or utility facilities currently exist.
      (4)   (a)   Notwithstanding divisions (C)(1) through (3) above, any
utility that requires construction, placement, or use of small cell facility in
an Area designated strictly for underground or buried utilities, may submit an
application to the Town Council requesting a waiver to install new utility
poles or new wireless support structures within the Area pursuant to the
provisions in division (I) as stated in this section. The waiver process is
described as follows:
         (b)   A waiver from the provisions of this section may be granted upon
application to the McCordsville Town Council who, after conducting a public
hearing on such a request, shall determine whether to grant the waiver based
upon the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of McCordsville.
   (D)   From and after the effective date of this chapter, no person,
corporation, or utility shall erect or construct within the town's ROW any
pole, overhead line, or associated overhead structure used or useful in
supplying electric, communication or similar associated services.
   (E)   Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Town Council, all
utilities located within the town's ROW shall be placed underground and/or
buried.
   (F)   All existing overhead poles, wires, and/or utility transmission lines
may remain within the town's ROW, but may not be replaced or relocated without
the prior written authorization from town staff and which authorization will
not be unreasonable held.
   (G)   Small cellular facilities shall be permitted to be installed on any
existing above-ground utility structure without the need for a waiver.
   (H)   Exceptions. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the
following structures within the ROW:
      (a)   Facilities or structures used solely for emergency communications
intended to provide information to the public for safety purposes, such as
emergency weather sirens, emergency warning systems, emergency communication
systems and devices, opticom, and the associated support structures for those
systems, equipment and devices.
      (b)   Facilities, equipment, or structures used solely for orderliness
and safety of persons, vehicles, and other equipment in the ROW such as traffic
signals and street lighting.
   (I)   Small cellular facilities and associated support structures, located
in ROW within the Underground and Buried Utilities District, which receive a
waiver from the Town Council under the terms of division (C) of this section,
shall be restricted as further defined below:
      (1)   Any person or entity seeking to install small cellular facilities,
related equipment, a substantial modification, or collocate shall seek a right-
of-way permit and telecommunications facility permit from the town.
Additionally, a right-of-way bond and certificate of liability insurance, in
amounts determined appropriate by the town, shall be required.
      (2)   Small cellular facilities shall be monopole design constructed to
support the initial user and at least one additional user.
      (3)   A proposal for a new wireless support structure or wireless
facilities shall not be approved unless the petitioner submits an affidavit
that the telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed structure cannot
be accommodated on an existing or approved utility pole, electrical
transmission tower, other wireless support structure, or other structure due to
one or more of the following reasons:
         (a)   The planned telecommunications equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved utility pole, electrical
transmission tower, other wireless support structure, or other structure as
documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and the existing
or approved utility pole, electrical transmission tower, other wireless support
structure, or other structure cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate the planned telecommunication equipment at a reasonable cost; or
         (b)   The planned telecommunications equipment would cause
interference impacting the usability of other existing telecommunication
equipment at the site if placed on existing structures. Supportive
documentation by a qualified and licensed professional engineer indicating the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost; or
         (c)   The existing or approved utility pole, electrical transmission
tower, other wireless support structure, or other structure within the search
radius cannot accommodate the planned telecommunication equipment at a height
necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer; or
         (d)   Other unforeseen reasons make it unfeasible or impossible to
locate the planned telecommunication equipment upon an existing or approved
utility pole, electrical transmission tower, other wireless support structure,
or other structure; or
         (e)   The petitioner has been unable to enter a commonly reasonable
lease term with the owners of existing or approved utility pole, electrical
transmission tower, other wireless support structure, or other structure.
      (4)   The overall maximum antenna and tower height shall be 50 feet from
grade level.
      (5)   The minimum tower separation shall be 1,000 feet between any other
support structures primarily used for telecommunications, as measured in any
direction between support structures, not necessarily a dimension measured
parallel to a road right-of-way. Additionally, no tower shall be closer than
100 feet to a single-family residential structure.
      (6)   Support structures must be metal or fiberglass monopoles matching
the design and color of the town's non-residential street lights, as amended.
The town street light color is Federal Green or color equivalent. The town
reserves the right to require luminaires on support structures that match the
town's street light luminaire specifications. Such luminaires shall be
maintained in good working order, be illuminated consistent with the timing of
other street lights along the corridor, at the cost of the applicant, including
the cost of electricity.
      (7)   Any antenna equipment mounted to the support structure shall also
be matching in color to the support structure.
      (8)   All facility equipment at a single facility (with the exception of
the antenna itself) shall be ground mounted in a cabinet having an area not to
exceed 40 cubic feet and no greater than 48 inches in overall height. Under
special circumstances, contingent upon a mutual agreement, the town may allow a
pole mounted cabinet with dimensions not exceeding 20 inches by 20 inches by
six inches (20" x 20" x 6"), ground mounted cabinet not to exceed two feet by
two feet by one foot (2' x 2' x 1') and other considerations, such as, but not
limited to, the addition of shrouding and landscaping to mitigate the visual
impact of the equipment. If a mutual agreement cannot be reached, then the Town
of McCordsville Public Works Committee shall intervene and make a
determination.
      (9)   All support structures shall have a plaque identifying the
structure, the owner, and the owner's contact information; the plaque shall not
exceed 0.25 square feet.
      (10)   All support structures shall avoid conflicts with sidewalks,
multi-use trails, and other roadway and utility infrastructure.
      (11)   All conduit, wiring and fiber shall be concealed within the
support structure and/or shall be buried underground. All new electrical
service lines to the support structure and/or equipment shall also be
underground. Existing aerial electrical service lines may remain. Under no
circumstance shall any service drop crossing a street or roadway be run in any
manner other than underground via a bore.
      (12)   Wireless support structures and facilities shall be designed to
blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color, camouflaging
and architectural treatment. The entire facility shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with its environment. The use of materials
compatible with the surrounding environment is required for associated support
structures, which shall be designed to architecturally match the exterior of
residential or commercial structures within the neighborhood or area. Specific
requirements for aesthetics of the wireless support structures and facilities
shall be in accordance with the standards established by the McCordsville Town
Council, from time to time.
      (13)   Operation. A petitioner receiving a permit for a: (1) new
construction of a wireless support structure; (2) substantial modification of
wireless support structure; or (3) collocation of wireless facilities on an
existing structure, inherently agrees that if the wireless support structure or
wireless facilities are not used for a period of six months, they will be
removed by the facilities owner at its expense. Should such owner fail to
remove the wireless support structure or wireless facilities after 30 days from
the date of notice of violation is issued by the town, the town may remove such
structure or facilities and bill the owner for the costs of removal and clean-
up and restoration of the site. The owner of any facility shall annually file a
copy of any inspections completed on such wireless support structure or
wireless facilities with the town for continued operation and use of the
structure or facility, and provide documentation of compliance with the
financial assurance provisions of Section 4.15(C).
      (14)   Confidential. All confidential information submitted by the
petitioner shall be maintained to the extent authorized by I.C. 5-14-3 et seq.
      (15)   Application process for new wireless support structures.
         (a)   Contents of application. An application for a permit shall
include the following:
            1.   The name, business address, email address, telephone number,
and point of contact for the applicant;
            2.   The location address, and latitude and longitude of the
proposed or affected wireless support structure or wireless facility, and
identify all small cell towers within 1,500 feet of the proposed new support
structure;
            3.   A small cell facility construction plan, as defined herein,
that describes the proposed wireless, support structure and all equipment and
network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations,
power supplies, cabling, and related equipment sufficient to determine
compliance with these standards; and
            4.   Evidence supporting the choice of location, including, without
limitation:
               a.   Maps or plats showing the proposed location(s) of
applicant's proposed wireless support structure;
               b.   A sworn statement from the individual responsible for the
choice of location demonstrating that collocation of wireless facilities on an
existing wireless support structure was not a viable option based upon
documentation by a qualified and licensed professional engineer.
         (b)   Single application. An applicant may submit one application for
multiple wireless service facilities that are located within R/WCO. The permit
authority may issue a single permit for all wireless support structures and
service facilities included in the application rather than individual permits
for each wireless support structure and service facility.
         (c)   Procedure.
            1.   Determination of completion/defects. Within ten business days
of receipt of an application, the permit authority shall review the application
to determine if the application is complete. If the permit authority determines
that an application is not complete, the permit authority shall notify the
applicant in writing, which shall be an email within the specified time period,
and followed-up by a mailed letter which may not be within the specified time
period, of all defects in the application. An applicant that receives a written
notice of incompletion may cure the defects and resubmit the application within
30 business days of receiving the notice. If an applicant is unable to cure the
defects within the 30 day period, the applicant shall notify the permit
authority of the additional time the applicant requires to cure the defects.
            2.   Decision by permit authority. Not more than 14 business days
after the permit authority makes an initial determination of completeness, the
permit authority shall:
               a.   Review the application to determine if it complies with
applicable requirements of Section 4.15(E);
               b.   Review the application to determine if it complies with
standards required as established by the permit authority; and
               c.   Notify the applicant in writing, which shall be an email
within the specified time period, and followed-up by a mailed letter which may
not be within the specified time period, whether the application is approved or
denied. However, if the applicant requested additional time to cure defects in
the application, the 14 business days shall be extended for a corresponding,
reasonable amount of time.
         (d)   Written determinations. A written determination, which shall be
delivered via an email within the specified time period and followed-up by a
mailed letter which may not be within the specified time period, shall state
clearly the basis for the decision to approve or deny an application. If the
permit authority denies an application, the written notice must include
substantial evidence in support of the denial. A notice is considered written
if it is included in the minutes of a public meeting of the permit authority.
      (16)   Application process for substantial modification.
         (a)   Contents of application. An application for substantial
modification of a wireless support structure shall include:
            1.   The name, business address, email address, telephone number,
and point of contact for the applicant;
            2.   The location of the proposed or affected wireless support
structure or wireless facility; and
            3.   A small cell facility construction plan, as defined herein,
that describes the proposed modifications to the wireless support structure and
all equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters,
receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related equipment.
         (b)   Single application. An applicant may submit one application for
multiple modifications of wireless support structures and service facilities
that are located within R/WCO. The permit authority may issue a single permit
for all wireless support structures and service facilities included in the
application rather than individual permits for each wireless support structure
and service facility.
         (c)   Procedure.
            1.   Determination of completion/defects. Within ten business days
of receipt of an application, the permit authority shall review the application
to determine if the application is complete. If the permit authority determines
that an application is not complete, the permit authority shall notify the
applicant in writing, which shall be an email within the specified time period,
and followed-up by a mailed letter which may not be within the specified time
period, of all defects in the application. An applicant that receives a written
notice of incompletion may cure the defects and resubmit the application within
30 business days of receiving the notice. If an applicant is unable to cure the
defects within the 30 day period, the applicant shall notify the permit
authority of the additional time the applicant requires to cure the defects.
            2.   Decision by permit authority. Not more than 14 business days
after the permit authority makes an initial determination of completeness, the
permit authority shall:
               a.   Review the application to determine if it complies with
applicable requirements of this Section 4.15(B);
               b.   Review the application to determine if it complies with
standards required as established by the permit authority; and
               c.   Notify the applicant in writing, which shall be an email
within the specified time period, and followed-up by a mailed letter which may
not be within the specified time period, whether the application is approved or
denied. However, if the applicant requested additional time to cure defects in
the application, the 14 business days shall be extended for a corresponding,
reasonable amount of time.
         (d)   Written determinations. A written determination, which shall be
delivered via an email within the specified time period and followed-up by a
mailed letter which may not be within the specified time period, shall state
clearly the basis for the decision to approve or deny an application. If the
permit authority denies an application, the written notice must include
substantial evidence in support of the denial. A notice is considered written
if it is included in the minutes of a public meeting of the permit authority.
      (17)   Application process for collocation.
         (a)   Contents of application. An application for collocation of a
wireless support structure shall include:
            1.   The name, business address, email address, telephone number,
and point of contact for the applicant;
            2.   The location of the proposed or affected wireless support
structure or wireless facility;
            3.   Evidence of conformance with applicable building permit
requirements; and
            4.   Evidence from a qualified and licensed professional engineer
demonstrating the existing support structure can handle the additional
equipment.
         (b)   Single application. An applicant may submit one application to
collocate multiple wireless service facilities that are located within R/WCO.
The permit authority shall issue a single permit or all wireless service
facilities included in the application rather than individual permits for each
wireless service facility.
         (c)   Procedure.
            1.   Determination of completion/defects. Within ten business days
of receipt of an application, the permit authority shall review the application
to determine if the application is complete. If the permit authority determines
that an application is not complete, the permit authority shall notify the
applicant in writing, which shall be an email within the specified time period,
and followed-up by a mailed letter which may not be within the specified time
period, of all defects in the application. An applicant that receives a written
notice of incompletion may cure the defects and resubmit the application within
30 business days of receiving the notice. If an applicant is unable to cure the
defects within the 30 day period, the applicant shall notify the permit
authority of the additional time the applicant requires to cure the defects.
            2.   Decision by permit authority. Not more than 14 business days
after the permit authority makes an initial determination of completeness, the
permit authority shall:
               a.   Review the application to determine if it complies with
applicable requirements of this Section 4.15(E);
               b.   Review the application to determine if it complies with
standards required as established by the permit authority, and
               c.   Notify the applicant in writing, which shall be an email
within the specified time period, and followed-up by a mailed letter which may
not be within the specified time period, whether the application is approved or
denied. However, if the applicant requested additional time to cure defects in
the application, the 14 business days shall be extended for a corresponding,
reasonable amount of time.
         (c)   Written determinations. A written determination, which shall be
delivered via an email within the specified time period and followed-up by a
mailed letter which may not be within the specified time period, shall state
clearly the basis for the decision to approve or deny an application. If the
permit authority denies an application, the written notice must include
substantial evidence in support of the denial. A notice is considered written
if it is included in the minutes of a public meeting of the permit authority.
      (18)   Construction requirements. All wireless support structures,
wireless facilities, telecommunication towers, accessory structures, and any
associated equipment and wiring shall comply with the following requirements:
         (a)   All applicable provisions of the Town's Municipal Code, Zoning
Ordinance, Subdivision Control Ordinance, and all other town ordinances, as
amended.
         (b)   All applicable provisions of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC).
         (c)   All applicable provisions of the Building Code of the State of
Indiana, as amended.
         (d)   All wireless facilities and support structures shall be
certified by a qualified and licensed professional engineer to conform to the
latest structural standards and wind loading requirements of the Uniform
Building Code, as amended, and the Electronics Industry Association.
         (e)   All wireless facilities and support structures shall be designed
to conform with accepted electrical engineering methods and practices and to
comply with the provisions of the National Electric Code, as amended.
         (f)   All wireless facilities and support structures shall be
constructed to conform with the requirements of the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA).
         (g)   All wireless facilities and support structures shall be designed
and constructed to all applicable standards of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) manual, as amended.
(Res. 030299A, passed 3-2-1999; Ord. 071901, passed 7-19-2001; Ord. 071205B,
passed 7-12-2005; Ord. 110916, passed 11-9-2016; Ord. 042817, passed 4-28-2017)
§ 95.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. Any communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of wireless communications
service.
   BASE STATION.  A station located at a specific site that is authorized to
communicate with mobile stations. The term includes all radio transceivers,
antennas, coaxial cables, power supplies, and other electronics associated with
a station.
   COLLOCATION. The placement or installation of wireless facilities on
existing structures that include a wireless facility or a wireless support
structure, including water towers and other buildings or structures. The term
includes the placement, replacement, or modification of wireless facilities
within an approved equipment compound.
   ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION TOWER. A structure that physically supports high
voltage overhead power lines. The term does not include a utility pole.
   EQUIPMENT COMPOUND. The area that: (1) surrounds or is near the base of a
wireless support structure; and (2) encloses wireless facilities.
   PERMIT AUTHORITY. The staff of the Town of McCordsville and the applicable
Board of Zoning Appeals within the jurisdiction of the town.
   SMALL CELL FACILITY. A personal wireless service facility as defined by the
Act or a wireless service facility that satisfies the following requirements:
(1) each antenna, including exposed elements, has a volume of three cubic feet
or less; (2) all antennas, including exposed elements, have a total volume of
six cubic feet or less; and (3) the primary equipment enclosure located with
the facility has a volume of 40 cubic feet or less.
   SMALL CELL FACILITY CONSTRUCTION PLAN. A written plan for construction,
provided by a qualified and licensed professional engineer that demonstrates
the aesthetics of the wireless support structure is substantially similar to
the town's street lights; includes the total height and width of the wireless
facility and wireless support structure, including cross section and elevation,
footing,  foundation, and wind speed details; a structural analysis indicating
capacity for future and existing antennas, including a geotechnical report and
calculations for the foundations capacity; the identity and qualifications of
each person directly responsible for the design and construction; and
documentation that shows the proposed locations of the wireless facility and
wireless support structure and all easements and existing structures within 200
feet of such wireless facility or wireless support structure.
   SMALL CELL NETWORK. A collection of interrelated small cell facilities
designed to deliver wireless service.
   STREET LIGHT. A structure that is installed for the sole purpose of
providing illumination within the right-of-way. This structure is not
considered a utility for the purpose of the Underground and Buried Utilities
District Ordinance.
   SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION OF A WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. The mounting of a
wireless facility on a wireless support structure in a manner that: (1)
increases the height of the wireless support structure by the greater of: (a)
10% of the original height of the wireless support structure; or (b) 20 feet;
(2) adds an appurtenance to the wireless support structure that protrudes
horizontally from the wireless support structure more than the greater of: (a)
20 feet; or (b) the width of the wireless support structure at the location of
the appurtenance; or (3) increases the square footage of the equipment compound
in which the wireless facility is located by more than 2,500 square feet. The
term SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION does not include the following: (1) increasing
the height of a wireless support structure to avoid interfering with an
existing antenna; (2) increasing the diameter or area of a wireless support
structure to: (a) shelter an antenna from inclement weather; or (b) connect an
antenna to the wireless support structure by cable.
   TRAFFIC SIGNAL. A device, including its support structure or set of support
structures that is that is solely used to control traffic at road junctions,
intersections, and crosswalks. This structure is not considered a utility for
the purpose of the Underground and Buried Utilities District Ordinance.
   UTILITY POLE. A structure that is: (1) owned or operated by: (a) a public
utility; (b) a communications service provider; (c) a municipality; (d) an
electric membership corporation; or (e) a rural electric cooperative; and (2)
designed and used to: (a) carry lines, cables, or wires for telephone, cable
television, or electricity; or (b) provide lighting.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. The set of equipment and network components necessary to
provide wireless communications service. The term does not include a wireless
support structure.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure designed to support
wireless facilities. The term does not include a utility pole or an electrical
transmission tower.
(Ord. 042817, passed 4-28-2017)
ITEMS ALLOWED TO BE LOCATED IN RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 95.15 APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   After due passage of this subchapter, it shall be unlawful for anyone to
locate any items, either permanently or on a temporary basis, within the public
right-of-way of the streets, road and alleys within the incorporated boundaries
of the town without first obtaining approval from the Public Works Commissioner
of the town.
(Ord. 120995, passed - -1995; Ord. 091305C, passed 9-13-2005) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.16 RECEIPT OF APPROVAL.
   Upon receipt of approval by the Town Public Works Commissioner, the planting
of flora and fauna, the placement of mailboxes subject to the restrictions of §
95.17 and any other approved item may be placed within the public right-of-way
of the streets, alleys and roads of the town.
(Ord. 120995, passed - -1995) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.17 MAILBOXES.
   Mailboxes may be allowed to be placed within the public right-of-way of the
streets and roads within the incorporated area of the town, but only if they
comply with the following regulations.
   (A)   The support post shall be a single four-inch by four-inch or four and
one-half inch diameter wooden post or a metal post, with a strength no greater
than two-inch diameter standard strength steel pipe and embedded no more than
24 inches into the ground, with the further condition that a metal support
shall not be fitted with an anchor plate but may have an anti-twist device that
extends no more than ten inches below the ground surface.
   (B)   All mailboxes shall be located on the right-hand side of the roadway
in the direction of the delivery route, except on one-way streets, where they
may be placed on the left-hand side. The bottom of the mailbox shall be set at
an elevation between three and one-half feet and four feet above the surface
roadway. The roadside face of the box shall be offset from the edge of the
traveled way a minimum of the greater of either eight feet where no paved
shoulder exists, the width of the all-weather shoulder, plus eight to 12 inches
or the width of an all-weather turnout, as specified by the United States
postal service, plus eight to 12 inches.
   (C)   On curbed streets, the roadside face of the mailbox shall be set back
from the face of the curb a distance of six inches to 12 inches. On residential
streets without curbs or all-weather shoulders and that carry low traffic
volumes operating at low speed, the roadside face of a mailbox shall be offset
between eight to 12 inches behind the edge of the pavement.
   (D)   Where a mailbox is located by a driveway entrance, it shall be placed
on the far side of the driveway in the direction of the delivery route.
   (E)   Where a mailbox is located at an intersecting road, it shall be
located a minimum of 100 feet beyond the center of the intersecting road in the
direction of the delivery route; however, this distance shall be increased to
200 feet when the average daily traffic on the intersecting road exceeds 400
vehicles a day.
   (F)   Mailboxes shall be made of light sheet metal or plastic construction
conforming with the requirements of the United States postal service with a
further provision that no more than one mailbox may be mounted on a support
structure.
   (G)   Mailbox supports shall not be set in concrete.
(Ord. 120995, passed - -1995) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99. There is hereby added to this penalty the additional penalty of
attorney’s fees incurred by the town if civil action through a court of
competent jurisdiction is required in order to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Any person or entity violating any provision of §§
95.15 through
95.17 shall receive notice of the violation either verbally, in writing, by
facsimile transmission or e-mail transmission.
      (1)   Upon notice from the Public Works Commissioner of the town of an
existing violation, the offending person or entity shall have 30 days to remove
the offending material or structure if the offending material or structure is
flora, fauna, a mailbox or a fence.
      (2)   For all other structures, either temporary or permanent, placed in
the public right-of-way in violation of §§
95.15 through
95.17, the offending party shall have 12 hours upon receipt of the first notice
of any violation from the Public Works Commissioner to remove the offending
item.
      (3)   If the offending item is not moved within the allotted time as set
forth above, the town or its designated representative may take all necessary
steps to remove the offending item and shall be entitled to collect all costs
actually incurred associated with the removal in addition to which, if the town
is required to institute litigation to either enforce the terms of §§
95.15 through
95.17, or to collect the fines and/or expenses incurred by the town, the town
as an additional item of damage shall be allowed to collect its reasonable
attorney’s fees.
      (4)   Any person or entity violating the provisions of §§
95.15 through
95.17 shall be fined the sum of not more than $2,500.
(Ord. 091305C, passed 9-13-2005)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
      
111.   LIQUOR RETAILER’S PERMITS
      
112.   SPECIAL EVENTS
CHAPTER 110: PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Exceptions
   
110.03   Violations
   
110.04   Application for certificate of registration
   
110.05   Nonrefundable payment to accompany application
   
110.06   Disapproval; appeal
   
110.07   Certificate of registration not transferable
   
110.08   Hours to enter upon private property
   
110.09   Examination of certificate
   
110.10   Revocation
   
110.11   Right of appeal
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ITINERANT. Any person and/or persons who travels from place to place
without legal residence within the corporate limits of the town.
      PEDDLER. Any person, including a salesperson and vendor, who goes from
house to house, place to place, or to any one house or to any one place, or in
or along the streets, within the town, selling and making immediate delivery or
offering for sale and immediate delivery, any goods, wares, merchandise,
newspapers, magazines or services, or anything of value in the possession of
the peddler to persons other than manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers or
retailers in those commodities or services.
      SOLICITOR. Any person, including a salesperson and vendor, who engages in
the business of going from house to house, place to place, or to any one house
or to any one place, or in or along the streets, within the town, selling or
taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for goods, wares,
merchandise, newspapers, magazines or services, or other thing of value, for
future delivery or for services to be performed in the future, to persons other
than manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers or retailers in those commodities or
services.
   (B)   The terms ITINERANT, PEDDLER, and SOLICITOR do not include and
specifically exclude any person or persons engaged in non-commercial speech as
long as such person or persons do not solicit funds or the sale of material or
products.
(Ord. 051424, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 110.02 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Additionally, §
110.01 shall not apply to any person authorized to peddle or solicit without a
license in the state by virtue of a state statute providing for an exemption.
The person shall be granted a certificate of registration upon satisfactory
proof being made to the Town Manager that the applicant is so exempt.
   (B)   Any nonprofit organization, recognized by the Town Manager as such,
utilizing exclusively minors under the age of 17 to perform the duties of a
peddler or solicitor as defined herein shall be exempt from those portions of
the application for certificate of registration contained in §
110.04 below as deemed appropriate by the Town Manager.
(Ord. 051424, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 110.03 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any itinerant solicitor or itinerant peddler not
having been requested or invited on or upon any private property in the town by
the owner or owners, occupant or occupants, of the private property, to go in
or upon any private property for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale
of goods, wares, merchandise and/or disposing of, and/or peddling, selling or
offering to sell, or taking orders for goods, wares, merchandise or other
articles for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, or
to solicit charitable contributions without having on his or her person a
certificate of registration secured from the Town Manager with the approval of
the Chief of Police as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 051424, passed 5-14-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to engage in the occupations herein regulated,
before engaging in that occupation in the town, shall apply to the Town Manager
for a certificate of registration. The application for a certificate of
registration shall be made on a form to be provided by the Town Manager, which
shall require that the applicant give the following information:
      (1)   Name, age, sex, height, weight, color of hair of applicant;
      (2)   Permanent home address and local address of applicant;
      (3)   The name and address of the employer or the name and address of the
person, firm or corporation furnishing the goods, wares and/or merchandise
sought to be sold;
      (4)   The length of time, within the period of time stated in §
110.05, that the applicant is expecting to be soliciting or peddling within the
corporate limits of the town;
      (5)   The approval of both the Town Manager and the Chief of Police, or,
in the event of their absence, their designees;
      (6)   Business and bank references for the applicant and the firm he or
she seeks to represent, in whatever capacity; and
      (7)   A copy of the applicant’s Indiana state issued photo
identification.
   (B)   The Town Manager or the Town Manager’s designated agent may deny the
application if the application does not completely and correctly provide the
required information and documentation.
(Ord. 051424, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 110.05 NONREFUNDABLE PAYMENT TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION.
   (A)   At the time of application, the applicant shall pay to the town by way
of credit card or check only, through the Town Manager or the Town Manager’s
appointed agent, the following applicable nonrefundable sum:
      (1)   For a ten-day permit exclusive of Sundays and holidays, the sum of
$50 for the originating vendor and $10 for each individual applicant operating
for, on behalf of, or in any way benefiting the original vendor.
      (2)   For a 120-day permit, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, the sum of
$100 for the originating vendor and $10 for each individual applicant operating
for, on behalf of, or in any way benefiting the original vendor.
      (3)   In the event the applicant desires an immediate registration, he or
she shall be required to file an additional cash or surety bond, payable to the
town, in the principal sum of $500, conditioned upon the faithful performance
of the applicant of any contract that he or she may enter with the town or any
citizen of the town during the period required for the review, processing and
investigation of the application and provided that this bond shall be further
conditioned upon the truth and veracity of the statements made by the applicant
under oath upon the form provided by the Town Manager.
   (B)   Upon compliance of the applicant with all provisions contained herein
and payment of the aforementioned sum(s), the Town Manager or the Town
Manager’s designated agent shall issue a registration certificate for the
appropriate period of time to the vendor and for each individual applicant
operating for, on behalf or, or in any way benefitting the original vendor.
(Ord. 051424, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 110.06 DISAPPROVAL; APPEAL.
   (A)   If, as a result of the review, processing and/or investigation as
provided by this chapter, the applicant is found to be unsatisfactory, the Town
Manager, the Chief of Police, or their designee(s) shall make his or her
findings and reasons for disapproval and transmit the same to the applicant
that his or her application is disapproved and that no certificate of
registration will be issued.
   (B)   Upon the disapproval of the application, as a result of the findings
of the Town Manager and/or the Chief of Police, any person denied a certificate
of registration shall have the right of appeal to the Town Council.
   (C)   The appeal shall be taken by filing with the Town Council and the
Clerk-Treasurer, within ten days after notice of the action complained of has
been mailed to the applicant’s last known address, or to the applicant’s
address as appearing on his or her application, a written statement setting
forth fully the grounds of appeal. The Town Council shall set a time and a
place for a hearing of the appeal and notice shall be given to the appellant by
mail, postage prepaid, to his or her address, as aforesaid, at least five days
prior to the date set for a hearing.
   (D)   The disposition and order of the Town Council shall be final and
conclusive.
(Ord. 051424, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 110.07 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall be transferable and the same, as issued, shall be personal to the person
to whom issued.
(Ord. 051424, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 110.08 HOURS TO ENTER UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful and is declared to be a public nuisance for any person
engaging in the occupations herein regulated and carrying a certificate of
registration to enter upon any private property for these purposes prior to 10:
00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. local time excluding Sundays and holidays.
(Ord. 051424, passed 5-14-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.09 EXAMINATION OF CERTIFICATE.
   Any certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall be kept in the possession and on the person of the itinerant solicitor or
itinerant peddler of merchandise or charitable contributions to whom it is
issued and upon demand of the Town Manager, any member of the Police Department
and/or citizen of the town that the registrant desires to solicit must be
produced for examination.
(Ord. 051424, passed 5-14-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.10 REVOCATION.
   Certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this chapter may
be revoked by the Town Manager for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Fraud—misrepresentations or false statements, contained in the
application for the certificate of registration.
   (B)   Fraud—misrepresentations made in the course of carrying on the
business of peddling or soliciting.
   (C)   Conducting the business of peddling or soliciting in an unlawful
manner, or in a manner so as to constitute a breach of the peace and to
constitute a menace of the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   (D)   Any violation of this chapter or of the certificate of registration
provisions of this chapter, or statutes of the state.
(Ord. 051424, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 110.11 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Upon the revocation of any certificate of registration issued under the
provisions of this chapter, the Town Manager shall make his or her findings and
reasons for revocation and transmit them to the registered, whose license has
been revoked, and a copy thereof to the Clerk-Treasurer. The holder of the
certificate of registration, whose registration has been revoked, shall have
the right of appeal to the Town Council in the same manner and in conformity
with the same procedure set forth in §
110.06.
(Ord. 051424, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, individual, or entity who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be fined the sum of $50 for each such violation. Each day a violation
occurs shall constitute a separate violation subject to an additional fine in
the amount set forth above. Any such fines imposed shall be paid in full upon
issuance of a notice of violation/citation to the McCordsville Ordinance
Violations Bureau in accordance with the terms and conditions established under
§§
32.01 through
32.04, and all subsequent amendments thereto.
(Ord. 051424, passed 5-14-2024)
CHAPTER 111: LIQUOR RETAILER’S PERMITS
Section
   
111.01   Issuance to applicants
   
111.02   Enabling chapter
   
111.03   No other provisions may be enacted
§ 111.01 ISSUANCE TO APPLICANTS.
   Liquor retailer’s permits may be issued to applicants in respect to premises
located within the town.
(Ord. 041007A, passed 4-10-2007)
§ 111.02 ENABLING CHAPTER.
   This chapter is intended as, and shall be interpreted and construed to
constitute, an enabling ordinance for the purposes of I.C. 7.1-3-9-3.
(Ord. 041007A, passed 4-10-2007)
§ 111.03 NO OTHER PROVISIONS MAY BE ENACTED.
   For all legal purposes, including the purposes of I.C. 7.1-3-9-4, this
chapter is a general chapter containing no conditions, exceptions or
limitations; after its enactment, this chapter may not be altered, amended or
repealed for a period of two years and 60 days after the date of its enactment;
and during the aforesaid period, no other ordinance on the subject may be
enacted.
(Ord. 041007A, passed 4-10-2007)
CHAPTER 112: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Permit required
   
112.03   Limitation on permits
   
112.04   General provisions for special events
   
112.05   Exceptions
   
112.06   Exclusions
   
112.07   Permit application
   
112.08   Issuance of permit
   
112.09   Appeal
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. The area encompassed by the following
description: East: Civic Drive; South: CR 750N; West: CR 600W; and North: W.
Broadway.
   OWNER. The owner of real property as shown in the records maintained by the
Auditor of Hancock County. If there is more than one owner of real estate, they
shall be treated as one owner for purposes of this chapter.
   SPECIAL EVENT.
      (1)   An outdoor gathering in a non-residential district to which people
are invited, encouraged to attend, or is advertised or promoted; that includes
at least one of the following:
         (a)   1.   Reasonably anticipated to cause the following:
               A.   Impact the normal flow of traffic; and/or
               B.   Require the temporary closure of public/private streets or
rights-of-way to accommodate the event.
            2.   This division (1)(a) can be identified by the owner or the
Police Chief, or his or her designee, based either upon past experience with
the same event or experience with other events of a similar nature;
         (b)   Use of a temporary structure which could include but is not
limited to a tent greater than 120 square feet, a stage, temporary bar
utilizing a third-party liquor license, or other similar structure;
         (c)   Anticipated to exceed the location’s designated parking spaces
available;
         (d)   Attendance of 500 or more.
(Ord. 031224C, passed 6-11-2024)
§ 112.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as herein provided, no special event shall be held within the
town, without a permit for such event having first been obtained by the owner.
   (B)   Special event permits shall be issued by the Town Manager in
accordance with the town’s internal approval process.
   (C)   All special event permit applications shall be submitted to the Town
Manager and/or Assistant Town Manager no more than 365 calendar days before the
planned special event, and no less than 45 days prior to the proposed date of
the special event. The Town Manager shall have the ability to waive the 45-day
requirement upon a showing of good cause.
(Ord. 031224C, passed 6-11-2024) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 LIMITATION ON PERMITS.
   Except for events held in the Central Business District, no more than eight
special event permits will be issued to an owner in any one calendar year.
(Ord. 031224C, passed 6-11-2024)
§ 112.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   Special events reasonably expected to affect the normal flow of
traffic or require street closures may require safety personnel to help direct
and/or regulate traffic. During the internal review process, the Police Chief
or his or her designee will make a recommendation, based upon the totality of
the circumstances made available in the application, whether any such
qualified, safety personnel will be required, and, if so, the number of persons
required. Off duty sworn officers may be utilized. If available, the town may
also provide a list of approved vendors that provide the safety services
identified herein.
   (B)   Permits shall be issued per event and may extend over consecutive
calendar days, not to exceed three days or 72 hours. An owner is limited to two
permits under this provision per calendar year unless the owner qualifies for
the exception.
   (C)   Special events shall not violate state or local laws.
   (D)   An owner will be required to provide trash collection and cleanup of
the event site, adjoining properties, and public thoroughfares immediately upon
conclusion of the event. If the owner fails to satisfactorily provide for trash
collection and clean up immediately following an event, any and all costs
incurred by the town in collecting trash and/or cleaning the event site shall
be assessed to the owner. Such charges shall be in addition to any fines
imposed. Failure to satisfactorily provide trash collection and clean up
following an event may constitute grounds for the denial of future special
events permits held by the owner and/or the same special event in subsequent
years.
   (E)   Event activities shall not interfere with or create public safety
issues due to increased parking on surface streets adjacent to the event
location.
   (F)   In accordance with the town’s fee ordinance, the owner shall be
required to assume all costs incurred by the town relative to any necessary
town services needed or requested to support the event, such as barricading,
sanitation, traffic control measures, or safety and security measures. To
assist in budget planning for the special event, at the time a permit
application is approved, town staff shall provide a good faith estimate of such
costs, which estimate may be superseded by actual costs incurred. Should the
owner fail to reimburse the town within 30 days after the special event for
such costs incurred by the town, the town shall have the right to take any and
all actions under Indiana law, including filing a lawsuit, to recover all costs
incurred, which shall include reasonable attorney’s fees, in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (G)   An owner may need to obtain additional permits from other communities
if those jurisdictions are reasonably anticipated to be impacted and permits
are required by ordinance.
(Ord. 031224C, passed 6-11-2024) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.05 EXCEPTIONS.
   Non-profit organizations and educational institutions that hold a series of
related events in a calendar year that qualify as special events may be
considered a single special event that only requires the approval of one
application annually. Fees may be waived at the discretion of the Town Manager.
(Ord. 031224C, passed 6-11-2024)
§ 112.06 EXCLUSIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to town events held on town
property.
(Ord. 031224C, passed 6-11-2024)
§ 112.07 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   The owner shall complete an application provided by the town. The
application is not considered complete until the fee listed in the town permit
fee schedule is submitted.
(Ord. 031224C, passed 6-11-2024)
§ 112.08 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   Once an application is submitted, it shall be reviewed for completion. In
arriving at its decision to issue a permit, the town will take into account the
completeness of the application, demonstrated compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, past experience with the same event, and the event’s anticipated
effect to cause or create public safety issues. Should a permit be denied, the
town staff shall make written findings identifying the reasons for its denial.
Town staff shall make all efforts to review an application within 14 days of
submission. However, if staff determines that an application is incomplete or
requests additional information be provided, the review process may be delayed.
(Ord. 031224C, passed 6-11-2024)
§ 112.09 APPEAL.
   If denied, an owner may appeal the staffs findings to the Council for review
and consideration. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer
within five days of the staff’s denial of the permit.
(Ord. 031224C, passed 6-11-2024)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The town may seek injunctive relief to prevent threatened violations
of this chapter.
   (B)   The town’s enforcement officers may stop a special event that is
occurring without a permit.
   (C)   Persons determined to need a permit and who fail to receive a permit
prior to a special event may be fined not more than $2,500 per violation.
   (D)   Persons found to be in violation of this chapter may:
      (1)   Be fined not more than $2,500 per violation; and/or
      (2)   Have all subsequent permits in that calendar year revoked or
denied.
   (E)   Remedies for violation of this chapter shall be cumulative and not
mutually exclusive.
   (F)   The town shall have the authority to take any and all necessary legal
and equitable actions to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Should
enforcement of this chapter require the utilization of the services of the Town
Attorney, the violator shall, in addition to any fines imposed, be responsible
for and shall pay all such reasonable attorney fees incurred by the town.
(Ord. 031224C, passed 6-11-2024)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   CURFEW FOR MINORS
      
131.   DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS/FIREARMS
CHAPTER 130: CURFEW FOR MINORS
Section
   
130.01   Violations
   
130.02   Defenses
   
130.03   Guardians of minors
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be considered a violation of this chapter for a child 13, 14,
15, 16 or 17 years of age to be, appear or remain in, along or upon any of the
streets, alleys or public places within the corporate limits of the town:
      (1)   Between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday;
      (2)   After 10:30 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday;
or
      (3)   Before 5:30 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday.
   (B)   It shall be considered a violation of this chapter for a child under
13 years of age to be in any public place after 10:00 p.m. or before 5:00 a.m.
on any day.
(Ord. 091311C, passed 9-13-2011) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 DEFENSES.
   (A)   It is a defense to a violation under this section that the child was
emancipated:
      (1)   Under I.C. 31-37-19-27 or I.C. 31-6-4-15.7 (before its repeal);
      (2)   By virtue of having married; or
      (3)   In accordance with the laws of another state or jurisdiction, at
the time that the child engaged in the prohibited conduct.
   (B)   It is a defense to a violation under this section that the child
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the child's parent, guardian or custodian;
      (2)   Accompanied by an adult specified by the child's parent, guardian
or custodian;
      (3)   Participating in, going to or returning from:
         (a)   Lawful employment;
         (b)   A school sanctioned activity;
         (c)   A religious event;
         (d)   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
         (e)   An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights
protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or Art.
1, § 31, of the Constitution of the state, or both, such as freedom of speech
and the right of assembly; or
         (f)   An activity conducted by a non-profit or governmental entity
that provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the
supervision of one or more adults.
      (4)   Participating in an activity undertaken at the prior written
direction of the child's parent, guardian or custodian; or
      (5)   Engaged in interstate or international travel from a location
outside Indiana to another location outside Indiana.
(I.C. 31-37-3-3.5)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 31-6-4-15.7 was repealed by P.L.1-1997, Sec. 157.
§ 130.03 GUARDIANS OF MINORS.
   It shall be considered a violation of this chapter for any person charged by
law with the care, custody and control of any person under 18 years of age, or
any parent, parents, person or persons or any individual having temporary care,
custody and control of any person under 18 years of age, to allow or permit the
child, ward or other person under 18 years of age to go upon, and/or along any
of the streets, alleys or public places within the corporate limits of the
town, at times prohibited as set forth in §
130.01 as set forth above, unless the person under 18 years of age is
accompanied by his or her parent, parents, guardian or other adult person
charged with the care, custody and control of the person under 18 years of age;
or unless there exists a reasonable necessity for the person under 18 years of
age to be in or along those places set forth above during the times prohibited
above.
(Ord. 091311C, passed 9-13-2011) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The penalty for violation of any provision of this section shall be
imposed upon the parent, parents, guardian, custodian or any individual having
temporary care, custody and control of any child who violates the provisions of
this chapter, and shall be as follows:
      (1)   First violation: $25;
      (2)   Second violation: $50; and
      (3)   Third and subsequent violations: $100.
   (B)   All penalties imposed by this chapter shall be payable through the
Town Ordinance Violations Bureau.
   (C)   There is hereby added to this penalty the additional penalty of
attorney’s fees incurred by the town if civil action through a court of
competent jurisdiction is required in order to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 121206C, passed 12-12-2006; Ord. 091311C, passed 9-13-2011)
CHAPTER 131: DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS/FIREARMS
Section
   
131.01   Purpose
   
131.02   Title
   
131.03   Definitions
   
131.04   Violations
   
131.05   Minors
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to secure and maintain the public peace,
health, safety, welfare and convenience of the residents and property owners of
the town, by regulating the use of firearms, explosives, explosive articles or
devices and other dangerous projectiles within the corporate limits of the
town.
(Ord. 101204A, passed 12-14-2004)
§ 131.02 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Town of McCordsville, Indiana,
Discharge of Firearms Regulatory Ordinance”.
(Ord. 101204A, passed 12-14-2004)
§ 131.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GUN. Any gun or device, by whatever name known, which is designed to
expel or propel a projectile, pellet or missile, leaden or otherwise, by the
action of compressed air or gas, or by the action  of a spring or elastic, but
does not mean a firearm.
   AUTHORIZED AGENT. Applies to any person or persons who have written and
notarized permission from a farmer or rancher to destroy vermin on the farmer
or rancher’s farmland.
   BOWS. Any device, by whatever name known, which is designed to support any
missile or arrow and which hurls, throws or flings the same by the expanding or
flexing of any part of the apparatus, but does not mean a firearm.
   BUILDING, STRUCTURE or EDIFICE. A space within its walls and usually, but
not necessarily, covered with a roof.
   FARMERS and/or RANCHERS. A person or persons who is actively engaged in the
act of farming or ranching row crops, livestock, breeding stock or field crops.
   FARMLAND. Agricultural land that is devoted to or best adaptable for the
production of crops, fruits, timber and the raising of livestock; or assessed
as agricultural land for property tax purposes.
   FIREARM. In addition to I.C. 14-22-40-3, any weapon or device from which is
propelled any missile, projectile, bullet, shot or pellet by means of
explosives, compressed air or gas, or by means of springs, levers or other
mechanical devices.
   NUMBER 2 SHOTGUN PELLET. A shotgun pellet, specifically lead buckshot, with
a diameter not to exceed 0.26 caliber (inches) and an average pellet weight of
29.4 grains.
   SHOTGUN PELLETS. Shotgun pellets (shot) are classified into two general
categories:
      (1)   Birdshot, of which individual pellets are typically less than 0.20
caliber in diameter; and
      (2)   Lead buckshot, which varies in diameter from 0.24 caliber to 0.36
caliber.
   VERMIN. Any of the following animals that are in the process of causing
damage to row crops, live stock, breeding stock or field crops.
      (1)   Deer;
      (2)   Beavers;
      (3)   Foxes;
      (4)   Coyotes;
      (5)   Skunks;
      (6)   Brown-headed cowbirds;
      (7)   Common grackles;
      (8)   Red-winged blackbirds;
      (9)   Rusty blackbirds;
      (10)   Brewer’s blackbirds; and
      (11)   Crows.
(Ord. 101204A, passed 12-14-2004)
§ 131.04 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall, from after the effective date and proper posting of
this chapter, discharge any pistol, revolver or rifle within the corporate
limits of the town, except:
      (1)   Authorized police officers are permitted to discharge their duty
weapons or other departmentally-approved weapons in the performance of their
duties;
      (2)   A person shall be permitted to discharge a firearm for the
protection of his or her life and his or her property;
      (3)   Members of the armed forces of the United States engaged in the
performance of their official duties;
      (4)   Members of the State National Guard engaged in the performance of
their official duties;
      (5)   Persons conducting a shooting gallery who have first procured a
license therefor in accordance with the license ordinance of the town, nor to
shooting clubs conducting at a fixed place of business within the town, and in
a manner that there is no danger to any person whatsoever, provided the
shooting club has first obtained written permission from the Town Council to
conduct the same; and
      (6)   A farmer or rancher may discharge a shotgun or bow and arrow for
the purpose of protecting his or her row crops, livestock, breeding stock or
field crops from vermin.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge any shotgun with slugs, ball, cut or
ring shotgun shell, or shot larger than “Number 2”, except as authorized by
this chapter in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful, after the effective date of this chapter:
         (a)   To discharge any firearm not prohibited elsewhere in this
chapter, within an area of 100 yards of any building, structure or edifice,
whether occupied or unoccupied; and
         (b)   It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm permitted
elsewhere, upon any platted land, or within 200 yards of any public or private
school real property, not to include private daycare facilities which may or
may not provide educational instruction.
      (2)   However, it shall be permissible to discharge a shotgun with
“Number 2” or smaller shot, within 100 yards of any building, structure or
edifice, provided the individual shooting the firearm is an authorized agent of
the building, structure or edifice, but in no instance shall a shotgun be
discharged within 200 yards of any public or private school real property.
   (D)   From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be
unlawful to discharge any firearms, upon or across any public road, constructed
bike or walk path or highway within the town.
(Ord. 101204A, passed 12-14-2004) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.05 MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 17 years to discharge a
firearm unless under the direct supervision and control of and accompanied by a
parent, legal guardian or adult person authorized by the parent, legal guardian
or adult person authorized by the parent or legal guardian, to have direct
supervision of the person under the age of 17 years, and further, it shall be
the responsibility of every parent, guardian or other person having the
physical custody or charge of any minor under the age of 17 years, to control
the minor and prevent him or her from violating or attempting to violate any
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 101204A, passed 12-14-2004) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined a sum of not less than $100 for the first offense, a sum of
not less than $200 for the second offense and a sum of not less than $500, nor
more than $1,000 for any additional offenses. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each time the violation(s) occurs or continues.
(Ord. 101204A, passed 12-14-2004)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
151.   BUILDING CODE
      
152.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
153.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
154.   ZONING CODE
      
APPENDIX A: OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF USES
      
APPENDIX B: BULK USE STANDARDS MATRIX
      
APPENDIX C: LIGHTING DRAWINGS
      
APPENDIX D: OFFICIAL PARKING SCHEDULE
      
APPENDIX E: SIGN STANDARDS MATRIX
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
150.01   Debris control; structures
   
150.02   Occupancy permit release
   
150.03   Fence construction permits
   
150.04   Numbering of structures
   
150.05   Development reports
 
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 DEBRIS CONTROL; STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Any person constructing a new structure or, when deemed altering or
repairing of any existing structures, shall commit to the Town Manager in
writing to the maintenance and use of a covered debris container of 30 cubic
yards, or other debris container as approved in writing by the Town Manager,
which shall be located on the job site at all times construction is in
progress. The person shall also commit in writing to the removal and
replacement of the debris container when full, and shall not allow any debris
to escape the particular job site in question.
   (B)   No one constructing a new structure or, when altering or repairing an
existing structure, shall allow vehicles of any type to track onto, carry or
transfer any debris, including mud or earth, onto the traveled portion of any
street or alley within the town, and shall further erect erosion control
barriers to prevent erosion of the construction site onto adjoining streets,
alleys or property.
   (C)   The Town Manager, or his or her designated representative, including
each and every member of the Town Police Department, is duly authorized to
issue a citation of violation of the provisions of this section. The warning
ticket shall include the following:
      (1)   Date;
      (2)   Address of property where violation is located;
      (3)   Name of violator;
      (4)   A reference that the citation is being issued for violation of this
section by number;
      (5)   The amount of the fine assessed;
      (6)   The time, manner and location to pay the fine;
      (7)   Notice that each day is a new violation; and
      (8)   Name and phone number issuing the citation.
(Ord. 061201, passed 6-12-2001; Ord. 010802, passed 1-8-2002) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.02 OCCUPANCY PERMIT RELEASE.
   (A)   Attached as the format for the town’s occupancy permit release is
Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived, and
incorporated by reference herein, which shall be procured by each builder,
developer or homeowner for each new structure within the town, before the town
will notify the County Building Inspector that the structure meets the terms
and conditions of the town overlay ordinance and all other town ordinances.
   (B)   Effective January 1, 2003, a charge of $50 shall be paid by each
applicant to defray the cost and expense of inspecting the property and issuing
the occupancy permit release form, which charge shall be paid at the same time
as the builder, developer or homeowner applies for the issuance of a sewer
permit.
   (C)   Effective January 1, 2003 if additional inspections are required
because of non-compliance of the structure with the town overlay ordinance or
any other town ordinance, each reinspection shall be done only after the
builder, developer or homeowner has paid an additional $50 reinspection fee,
which shall be paid for each reinspection required.
(Ord. 111202B, passed 12-10-2002) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.03 FENCE CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
   (A)   No fence and/or wall shall be erected within the town without first
applying for and obtaining a permit to erect the structure from the office of
the Town Manager or his or her designee.
   (B)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall proceed forthwith to
prepare an application form and a permit form for individuals or entities
wishing to construct fences and/or walls within the town to use in obtaining a
fence and/or wall construction permit.
   (C)   The review process shall consist, in whole or in part, of a review of
a site plan submitted by the applicant showing the exact location of the
proposed fence and/or wall, as well as the location of all designated,
dedicated, and/or apparent utility and/or drainage easements upon the subject
real estate, all road rights-of-way, and. if requested, a description of the
materials and height of the proposed fence and/or wall, in addition to any
other information requested by the Town Manager or his or her designee deemed
necessary in order to adequately review the application. Should the proposed
fence and/or wall encroach, or possibly encroach upon a designated, dedicated
and/or apparent utility and/or drainage easement, the applicant shall, in
addition to the provisions of this section comply in all respects with §
154.118(D)(3).
   (D)   The application shall be accompanied by the materials set forth in
division (C) above, any other additional information required by the Town
Manager or his or her designee and an application fee of $10, which shall be
non-refundable.
   (E)   It shall constitute a violation of this section for anyone or entity
to erect a fence and/or wall in violation of the provisions of this section
and/or the Zoning Code and/or applicable restrictive zoning commitments, or
failure to obtain the appropriate permit as contained within this section, with
each day the violation exists to constitute a new and separate violation.
(Ord. 111307A, passed 11-13-2007; Ord. 070913A, passed 8-13-2013) Penalty, see
§
150.99
§ 150.04 NUMBERING OF STRUCTURES.
   (A)   This section repeals and replaces Ord. 11492B, an ordinance providing
for the identification and numbering of structures within the town.
   (B)   The Town Advisory Plan Commission, through the Technical Review
Committee shall, by rule, prescribe a numbering system for lots and structures
and approve the assignment of street numbers to lots and structure in
accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-4-405(b), (c) and this code.
   (C)   All buildings and building sites within the town shall be numbered in
a uniform plan, and all buildings shall have displayed on front or street side
thereof the numbers as may be designated under the plan and provisions of this
code.
   (D)   Numbering of buildings and building sites in the town shall be in
accordance with the previously assigned numbers established by the County
Planning Commission.
      (1)   Address and street name assignments are granted by the Town
Advisory Plan Commission in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-4-405
(b) and (c).
      (2)   Even numbers shall be used for the northerly and westerly sides of
streets, and odd numbers for the southerly and easterly sides.
      (3)   One number shall ordinarily be allowed for each 25 feet of
frontage, whether improved or vacant, provided that each existing house and
tenement or building entrance with a frontage less than 25 feet shall receive a
number.
      (4)   When assigning addresses to county roads within town limits, a
distance measurement will be taken from the nearest cross street. That distance
in linear feet will then be divided by 5.28 and adjusted to be odd or even
numbers, depending on the directional methodology which is prescribed above.
      (5)   Developers shall submit proposed addresses and street names upon
preliminary plat submission for vetting and approval.
      (6)   Temporary addresses may be assigned on a case by case basis and are
subject to change.
   (E)   Upon notification of the proper number of the building or building
site by the Town Manager of the town, or his or her designated agent, the owner
of the building or building site shall cause that number to be placed and
continuously maintained in a conspicuous place on the front of the building.
      (1)   If a building stands back more than 50 feet from a street
(property) line, the number shall be conspicuously displayed at or near the
walk, driveway or common entrance to the building at the street (property) line
and so placed so as to be easily legible from the sidewalk or street.
      (2)   Numerals shall be at least three inches in height.
   (F)   The Town Manager of the town, or his or her designated agent, shall be
authorized to change the house numbering of any street or part of a street or
of any industrial building or buildings when the change shall be necessary by
reason of readjustment of any kind, inaccuracy or mistake or for any other
cause.
   (G)   No plat or replat of a subdivision will be recorded unless each lot
bears a street number (within a border) in accordance with the requirements of
this section.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter or deface any
house number, properly assigned or placed on or near a building or to place or
retain on any building any number other than the one duly assigned by the Town
Manager or his or her designated agent.
   (I)   Streets shall be named and renamed by the Town Manager or his or her
designated agent, so that their names are easy to understand, to avoid
duplication or a conflict with other names or streets within the 46055 zip code
area.
   (J)   Whenever the Town Manager, or his or her designated agent, names or
renames a street or numbers or renumbers a lot or structure, the Town Manager,
or his or her designated agent, shall notify the County Circuit Court Clerk,
the administrator of the enhanced emergency telephone system established under
I.C. 36-8-16, the United States postal service and any person or body that the
Commission considers appropriate to receive notice of its actions no later than
the last day of the month following the month in which the action was taken
(I.C. 36-7-4-405(h)).
(Ord. 011012, passed 2-14-2012) Penalty, see §
150.99
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 36-8-16 was repealed by P.L.132-2012, Sec. 11.
§ 150.05 DEVELOPMENT REPORTS.
   (A)   From passage of this section forward, the proponent of each and every
development of whatever nature within the town upon any land proposed to be
annexed or upon any land already within the incorporated limits of the town
shall, no less than 30 days before the proponent of said development’s first
appearance before the Town Advisory Plan Commission for hearing upon any
request for rezoning, platting or any other action, present to the Town
Council, Town Manager, Town Clerk-Treasurer, Town Public Works Commissioner and
Town Planner a development report.
   (B)   The proponent of the development shall independently contract with a
person or entity and submit the report in a form approved by the Town Plan
Commission. Proponent shall be solely responsible for the payment of all costs
and expenses necessary to create such a report. The town reserves the right to
request the proponent to retain a professional whose credentials must be
approved by the Town Manager if the initial information is lacking in detail.
(Ord. 111312, passed 11-13-2012)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   There is hereby added to this penalty the additional penalty of
attorney’s fees incurred by the town if civil action through a court of
competent jurisdiction is required in order to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Each day that a structure is in non-compliance with the provisions of
§
150.02 shall constitute a separate violation of §
150.02, and each violation of §
150.02 shall be punishable by a fine of up to $2,500, plus any attorney’s fees
incurred by the town in enforcing the terms of §
150.02.
   (D)   Each violation of §
150.03 shall be subject to a penalty of up to $2,500 for each violation.
   (E)   Any person or corporation in violation of §
150.04 may be punished, subject to the provisions of I.C. 36-1-3-8,
specifically a fine of not more than $2,500 for violation of this section.
(Ord. 111202B, passed 12-10-2002; Ord. 121206C, passed 12-12-2006; Ord.
111307A, passed 11-13-2007; Ord. 011012, passed 2-14-2012)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING CODE
Section
Unsafe Buildings
   
151.01   Adoption of state law
   
151.02   Description of unsafe buildings and premises
   
151.03   Enforcement Authority
   
151.04   Signs posted; notice to owners
   
151.05   Declared a nuisance
   
151.06   Discretion of town officials
   
151.07   Reconstruction or repair to buildings
   
151.08   Unsafe Building Fund
   
151.09   Violations
   
151.10   Cost of demolition and/or removal, attorney’s fees and fines
   
151.11   Demolition of structures or buildings
Building Code; Construction, Alteration, Use, Occupancy, Location of Buildings
and Structures
   
151.25   Title
   
151.26   Purpose
   
151.27   Definitions
   
151.28   Scope
   
151.29   Authority
   
151.30   Effect of adoption on prior ordinance
   
151.31   Building permits
   
151.32   Investigations and inspections of construction activities
   
151.33   Enforcement
   
151.34   Minimum construction standards
 
   
151.99   Penalty
UNSAFE BUILDINGS
§ 151.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   (A)   I.C. 36-7-9-1 through I.C. 36-7-9-28 is hereby adopted by reference as
the Unsafe Building Law. All proceedings within the town for inspection,
repair, and removal of unsafe buildings shall be governed by this law and the
provisions of this subchapter. In the event the provisions of this subchapter
conflict with the provision of I.C. 36-7-9-1 through I.C. 36-7-9-28, or any
part thereof, the provisions of the state statute shall control and prevail.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DEPARTMENT. The Planning and Building Department for the town.
      ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The Director of Planning, Building Commissioner,
or his or her designee.
      HEARING AUTHORITY. The Town Council.
      SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. Has the same meaning set forth in I.C. 36-
7-9- 2.
(Ord. 070913, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 051424A, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 151.02 DESCRIPTION OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND PREMISES.
   (A)   The town shall follow the definitions provided in I.C. 36-7-9-4.
   (B)   UNSAFE BUILDING. Any building or structure which has any or all of the
conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be an UNSAFE
BUILDING provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that
life, health, property, or safety of the public or its occupants are
endangered:
      (1)   Any door, aisle, passageway or other means of exit is not of
sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate
means of exit in case of fire or panic;
      (2)   The stress in any materials, member, or portion thereof, due to all
dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or
stresses allowed for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;
      (3)   Any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind,
flood or by any other cause to an extent that the structural strength or
stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe, and
is less than the minimum requirements for new buildings of similar structure,
purpose or location;
      (4)   Any portion, member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, to
become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or
damage property;
      (5)   Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation, on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the
working stresses permitted for such buildings;
      (6)   Any portion thereof has cracked, warped, buckled or settled to such
an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new
construction;
      (7)   The building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of
dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; faulty construction; the removal,
movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose
of supporting the building, the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its
foundation; or any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse;
      (8)   For any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof,
is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;
      (9)   The exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean
or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of
gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base;
      (10)   The building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33%
or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members or 50%
damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, enclosing or outside
walls or coverings;
      (11)   The building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated so as to
become an attractive nuisance to children or freely accessible to persons for
the purpose of committing unlawful acts, including but not limited to trespass;
      (12)   Any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this town
or of any law or ordinance of this state or town relating to the condition,
location or structure of buildings;
      (13)   Any building or structure which, whether or not erected in
accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any non-supporting
part, member, or portion less than 50%, or in any support part, member or
portion less than 66% of the strength, fire-resisting qualities or
characteristics, or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics, required by
law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and
occupancy in the same location;
      (14)   A building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage,
faulty construction or arrangements; inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities or otherwise, is determined by the health officials to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to
cause sickness or disease;
      (15)   Any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-
resistive construction; faulty electric wiring, gas connection, or heating
apparatus; or other cause, is determined by the fire official to be a fire
hazard; and
      (16)   Any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the
demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or any building or
structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute
such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the
public.
(Ord. 070913, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 051424A, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 151.03 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   The Town Enforcement Authority shall be authorized to administer and to
proceed under the provisions of state law and this chapter, as amended, in
ordering the repair or removal of any buildings or premises found to be unsafe.
(Ord. 070913, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 051424A, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 151.04 SIGNS POSTED; NOTICE TO OWNERS.
   Unsafe buildings or structures notices shall be posted at each entrance to
such building or structure with the following: “Do Not Enter. Unsafe to Occupy.
Planning and Building Department, Town of McCordsville, Indiana.” The notice
shall remain posted until the required repairs are made or demolition is
completed. The notice shall not be removed without written permission from the
Enforcement Authority and no person shall enter the building except to make
repairs or to demolish same.
(Ord. 070913, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 051424A, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 151.05 DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   All buildings or portions thereof within the town which are determined after
inspection by the Enforcement Authority to be unsafe, hereof are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition or removal.
(Ord. 070913, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 051424A, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 151.06 DISCRETION OF TOWN OFFICIALS.
   Whenever in the building regulations of the town or in this subchapter, it
is provided that anything must be done to the approval of, or subject to, the
discretion of the Enforcement Authority, or any other officer of this town,
this shall be construed to give the officer only the discretion of determining
whether the rules and standards established by code and/or ordinance have been
complied with. No provision shall be construed as giving any officer
discretionary powers as to what the regulations or standards shall be, power to
require conditions not prescribed by code and/or ordinance or to enforce the
provisions of such code and/or ordinance in an arbitrary or discretionary
manner.
(Ord. 070913, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 051424A, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 151.07 RECONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR TO BUILDINGS.
   All work for the reconstruction, repair or demolition of buildings and other
structures shall be performed in a good workmanlike manner according to the
accepted standards and practices in the trade. The provisions of the rules
pertaining to construction, plumbing, electrical, mechanical and one- and two-
family dwellings, appropriated by the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission, shall be considered standard and acceptable practice for all
matters covered by this subchapter or orders issued pursuant to this section by
the Enforcement Authority.
(Ord. 070913, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 051424A, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 151.08 UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.
   The Town Council is hereafter authorized to set up an operating budget of
the town in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-14.
(Ord. 070913, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 051424A, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 151.09 VIOLATIONS.
   No person, firm or corporation, whether or owner, lessee, sublessee or
occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises or
cause to permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter of any order issued by the town.
(Ord. 070913, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 151.10 COST OF DEMOLITION AND/OR REMOVAL, ATTORNEY’S FEES AND FINES.
   In the event that any such building would have to be demolished and/or
removed pursuant to this subchapter, the costs together with all costs of the
town associated therewith, including the expenses of expert witnesses called by
the town, and the town's attorney's fees, shall be payable by the owner of the
building so demolished and/or removed within 30 days after they are billed to
the address shown on the property tax records of Hancock County, Indiana, for
that particular property, in addition to which, said costs and any fine imposed
shall constitute a lien against the property. A fine not to exceed $2,500 per
day for each day the structure shall have been deemed to have been in violation
of this subchapter may be imposed at the discretion of the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 070913, passed 7-9-2013)
§ 151.11 DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES OR BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Permit required. Except where specified in division (B), it shall be
unlawful for a person, partnership or corporation to engage in any demolition
or removal of structures unless a written demolition permit issued by the
division of construction and business services describing the activity has been
obtained by and is in force relative to the person, partnership or corporation
which is actually accomplishing, supervising accomplishment or is contractually
responsible for accomplishment of the demolition allowed by the demolition
permit.
      (1)   Application for a demolition permit shall be made to the Town
Planning and Building Department. The application shall be made in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   The application shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the
Division of Construction and Business Services and shall be supported with:
         (a)   A written statement from each utility that its service to the
premises has been disconnected.
         (b)   Either a written statement from the record titleholder of such
premises authorizing the demolition or removal or a court order or
administrative order requiring the demolition or removal of the structure.
         (c)   Other written documentation that may be deemed necessary.
      (3)   In the instance where a demolition permit is requested for the
purpose of allowing the demolition or removal of a structure which is in excess
of 75 feet in height, such application shall be supported by a certificate of
insurance reflecting that the obtainer of the demolition permit has a public
liability and property damage insurance policy naming the licensee and the town
as the insureds and providing also for the payment of any liability imposed by
law on such licensee or the town in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000 for any
occurrence relative to which there is injury to or death of one or more persons
and $500,000 for any occurrence relative to which there is property damage.
   (B)   Exemptions. A permit is not required for the demolition of a structure
which spans 120 square feet or less of base area, is less than 15 feet in
height, is not placed on or attached to a permanent foundation and does not
contain an electrical power distribution system, heating system, space heating
equipment, cooling system, or space cooling equipment.
   (C)   Notice of availability for inspection as a condition to the
accomplishment of further work.
      (1)   Relative to demolition or removal of a structure, notice of
availability for a “fill inspection” is required (in the instance when a
basement or chamber exists) after demolition or removal and prior to placing
fill.
      (2)   After the demolition or removal of a structure, and any fill has
been placed that is needed, notice of availability for a “rough inspection” is
required.
      (3)   After all clean-up work is completed, notice of availability for a
“final inspection” is required.
   (D)   Removing structures. Any person, partnership or corporation carrying
out the demolishing, dismantling, dismembering, razing or removing a structure
shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Before work can commence, the requirements of 326 I.A.C. 14-10
Emission Standards for Asbestos Demolition and Renovation Operations must be
followed. Proof of asbestos inspection and compliance with IDEM regulations may
be required by the town.
      (2)   The Town Building Commissioner may, if reasonably necessary to
ensure public safety, require the wrecking contractor to submit plans and a
complete schedule for demolition. Where such are required, no work shall be
accomplished until such plans and schedule are approved by the Administrator as
assigned by the Deputy Director of the Division of Construction and Business
Services or his or her authorized representative.
      (3)   Blasting and use of explosives shall be accomplished only by a
person who has obtained a blasting permit pursuant to the requirements of this
code and by special permission of and under the supervision of the Building
Commissioner, the Fire Prevention Bureau of the Vernon Fire Territory, and the
Public Works Department.
      (4)   No open fires or other sources of flame except necessary cutting
torches are permitted on the inside of the structure, which is being wrecked,
or within 100 feet of any flammable materials located outside of the structure,
and every reasonable precaution shall be taken to prevent the possibility of
fire.
      (5)   Provisions suitable to the Building Inspector shall be made for the
disposal of materials which are accumulated during the demolition of a
structure.
      (6)   The buildings, foundations, curbs, sidewalks, concrete or asphalt
drives and all appurtenances shall be removed to one foot below the ground line
or one foot below subgrade elevation, whichever of the two is lower. Such
removal shall also include the removal and disposal of buried or exposed tanks.
Concrete slabs, under which a basement, pit, well or cistern exists, shall be
broken and removed.
      (7)   If a sanitary sewer connection exists, the sewer lateral shall be
capped in the manner prescribed by the Town Engineering authority.
      (8)   All rubbish and debris including any goods, merchandise,
commodities, products or materials of any kind which may have been stored
within the structure being demolished or on such property shall be removed or
cleaned away, the ground leveled off, and the premises put in a clean and
sanitary condition; provided, however, that if such property is properly fenced
and the erection of a new structure is to be commenced within 90 days, the
ground need not be leveled until all such work on the premises is completed.
      (9)   Material used for fill or grading shall be only material that can
be properly compacted in order to avoid future settlement of filled-in earth or
the structure erected over such fill. No pieces of stone, lumber, boards or
other material which due to their size or character would prevent proper
compaction or would cause later settlement of the surface shall be used in such
fill.
      (10)   Where a structure is demolished and an excavation which at any
point is eight or more feet below grade level is left unfilled, the fence
portion of the walkway required by division (D)(7) above shall remain at the
site; provided, however, it is sufficient to prevent persons, especially
children, from falling into the excavation.
   (E)   Fees. Fees shall be per the town fee schedule, as amended.
(Ord. 101122C, passed 11-9-2022) Penalty, see §
151.99
BUILDING CODE; CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, USE, OCCUPANCY, LOCATION OF BUILDINGS
AND STRUCTURES
§ 151.25 TITLE.
   This subchapter and all material included herein by reference shall be known
as the “Building Code of the Town of McCordsville, Indiana”.
(Ord. 091311B, passed 9-13-2011)
§ 151.26 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the life, public safety, health
and general welfare of the citizens of the town, and shall be construed in a
manner to effectuate this purpose.
(Ord. 091311B, passed 9-13-2011)
§ 151.27 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING COMMISSIONER. Includes individuals employed by the Building
Department that are authorized to represent the Building Commissioner.
   CLASS 1 STRUCTURE. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-4:
      (1)   Any part of the following:
         (a)   A building or structure that is intended to be or is occupied or
otherwise used in any part by any of the following:
            1.   The public;
            2.   Three or more tenants; and/or
            3.   One or more persons who act as the employees of another.
         (b)   A site improvement affecting access by persons with physical
disabilities to a building or structure described in division (1)(a) above.
         (c)   Outdoor even equipment.
         (d)   Any class of buildings or structures that the commission
determines by rules to affect a building or structure described in division (1)
(a) above, except buildings or structures described in divisions (3) through
(6) below.
      (2)   Division (1)(a) above includes a structure that contains three or
more condominium units (as defined in I.C. 32-25-2-9) or other units that:
         (a)   Are intended to be or are used or leased by the owner of the
unit; and
         (b)   Are not completely separated from each other by an unimproved
space.
      (3)   Division (1)(a) above does not include a building or structure
that:
         (a)   Is intended to be or is used only for an agricultural purpose on
the land where it is located; and
         (b)   Is not used for retail trade or is a stand used for retail sales
of farm produce for eight or less consecutive months in a calendar year.
      (4)   Division (1)(a) above does not include a Class 2 structure.
      (5)   Division (1)(a) above does not include a vehicular bridge.
      (6)   Division (1)(a) above does not include a structure that is intended
to be or is occupied solely to provide periodic maintenance or repair of:
         (a)   The structure; or
         (b)   Mechanical or electrical equipment located within and affixed to
the structure.
      (7)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-24, STRUCTURE includes swimming pool.
   CLASS 2 STRUCTURE. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-5:
      (1)   Any part of the following:
         (a)   A building or structure that is intended to contain or contains
only one dwelling unit or two dwelling units unless any part of the building or
structure is regularly used as a Class 1 structure; and/or
         (b)   An outbuilding for a structure described in division (1)(a)
above, such as a garage, barn or family swimming pool, unless any part of the
outbuilding is regularly used as a Class 1 structure.
      (2)   Division (1) above does not include a vehicular bridge.
      (3)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-24, STRUCTURE includes swimming pool.
   CONSTRUCTION. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-7, any of the following:
      (1)   Fabrication of any part of an industrialized building system or
mobile structure for use at another site;
      (2)   Erection or assembly of any part of a Class 1 or Class 2 structure
at the site where it will be used;
      (3)   Installation of any part of the permanent heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, electrical, plumbing, sanitary, emergency detection, emergency
communication or fire or explosion suppression systems for a Class 1 or Class 2
structure at the site where it will be used;
      (4)   Work undertaken to alter, remodel, rehabilitate or add to any part
of a Class 1 or Class 2 structure; and/or
      (5)   Work undertaken to relocate any part of a Class 1 or Class 2
structure, except a mobile structure.
   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING SYSTEM. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-14, any part of a
building or other structure that is in whole or in substantial part fabricated
in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the
building site as part of a Class 1 structure, a Class 2 structure or
another building or structure; however, the term does not include a mobile
structure or a system that is capable of inspection at the building site.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-16 has the meaning set forth in
42 U.S.C. § 5402 as it existed on January 1, 2003. This definition is as
follows: MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or
40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square
feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
systems contained therein; except that the term shall include any structure
which meets all the requirements of this definition, except the size
requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and
complies with the standards established under this 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.,
and except that the term shall not include any self-propelled recreational
vehicle.
   MOBILE STRUCTURE. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-17:
      (1)   Any part of a fabricated unit that is designed to be:
         (a)   Towed on its own chassis; and
         (b)   Connected to utilities for year-round occupancy or use as a
Class 1 structure, a Class 2 structure or another structure.
      (2)   The term includes the following:
         (a)   Two or more components that can be retracted for towing purposes
and subsequently expanded for additional capacity; and
         (b)   Two or more units that are separately towable but designed to be
joined into one integral unit.
   PERSON. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-18, an individual, corporation, limited
liability company, partnership, unincorporated association or governmental
entity.
   STRUCTURE. Both Class 1 and Class 2 structures, unless specifically stated
otherwise.
   VEHICULAR BRIDGE. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-26, any bridge that is neither:
      (1)   A pedestrian walkway;
      (2)   A passageway for light vehicles; or
      (3)   Suspended between two or more parts of a building or between two or
more buildings.
(Ord. 091311B, passed 9-13-2011)
§ 151.28 SCOPE.
   (A)   All construction shall be accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-6, this subchapter shall not apply to
industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under I.C. 22-
15-4; however, the provisions of this subchapter and the rules promulgated by
the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission do apply to any construction
related to an industrialized building system or mobile structure not certified
under I.C. 22-15-4.
   (C)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-9, this subchapter is not applicable to
regulated amusement devices, regulated boilers, regulated pressure vessels or
regulated lifting devices.
(Ord. 091311B, passed 9-13-2011)
§ 151.29 AUTHORITY.
   The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to administer
and enforce the following:
   (A)   All of the provisions of this subchapter;
   (B)   Variances granted in accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-11; and
   (C)   Orders issued under I.C. 22-12-7.
(Ord. 091311B, passed 9-13-2011)
§ 151.30 EFFECT OF ADOPTION ON PRIOR ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The expressed or implied repeal of amendment by this subchapter of any
other ordinance or part of any other ordinance does not affect any rights or
liabilities accrued, penalties incurred or proceedings begun prior to the
effective date of this subchapter.
   (B)   These rights, liabilities and other proceedings are continued and
penalties shall be imposed and enforced under the repealed or amended ordinance
as if this subchapter had not been adopted.
(Ord. 091311B, passed 9-13-2011)
§ 151.31 BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   Building permit required. Construction is prohibited unless it is in
conformity with a valid building permit obtained from the Building Commissioner
prior to commencement of construction.
   (B)   Application for building permit.
      (1)   Any person required to have a building permit shall submit a
complete application to the Building Commissioner.
      (2)   This application shall be submitted on a form prepared by the
Building Commissioner, and shall contain the following:
         (a)   Information that the Building Commissioner determines to be
necessary to locate and contact the applicant;
         (b)   A clear and understandable copy of detailed plans and
specifications drawn to scale which indicate in a precise manner the nature and
location of all work to be accomplished;
         (c)   A plot plan drawn to scale; provided, however, the plot plan
shall not be required in the instance where all the construction is to occur
entirely within an existing structure. This plot plan shall reflect the
location of the structure in relation to existing property lines and show
streets, curbs and sidewalks and proposed changes or additions to the streets,
curbs and sidewalks;
         (d)   If required by state law or any rule of the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission, a copy of a design release for the work to be done
that has been issued by the Building Law Compliance Officer pursuant to I.C.
22-15-3;
         (e)   Any additional information that the Building Commissioner finds
to be necessary to determine that the construction will conform to all
applicable building laws and will not violate any other applicable ordinances
or laws; and
         (f)   The fee established by Ord. 011111 (adopted by reference in
Chapter 153).
      (3)   Application for a building permit shall be made by the person
entitled to obtain the permit or by an employee or agent of that person. The
Building Commissioner may require that an employee or agent provide written
authority to apply for a permit.
   (C)   Issuance of building permit. The Building Commissioner shall issue a
building permit to a person after the person has submitted a complete
application, including any applicable fee, provided that the proposed
construction will conform to all applicable building laws and will not violate
any other applicable ordinances or laws.
   (D)   Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy for any building
or structure shall be issued unless the building or structure was constructed
in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. It shall be unlawful to
occupy any building or structure unless a full, partial or temporary
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Commissioner.
(Ord. 091311B, passed 9-13-2011) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.32 INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   General authority to make inspections and investigations.
      (1)   All construction shall be subject to periodic inspections by the
Building Commissioner irrespective of whether a building permit has been or is
required to be obtained.
      (2)   The Building Commissioner may at any reasonable time go in, upon,
around or about the premises where any structure subject to the provisions of
this subchapter or to the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission is located for the purposes of inspection and investigation of the
structure. The inspection and investigation may be made before and/or after
construction on the project is completed for the purposes of determining
whether the structure meets building standards and procedures, and ascertaining
whether the construction and procedures have been accomplished in a manner
consistent with this subchapter and the rules of the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission.
   (B)   Inspections by Fire Department. The Building Commissioner and the Fire
Department shall work cooperatively to conduct inspections and investigations
to promote compliance with fire safety laws. (The Fire Department has
independent authority to conduct inspections and take enforcement actions under
I.C. 36-8-17.)
(Ord. 091311B, passed 9-13-2011)
§ 151.33 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Withhold issuance of permits.
      (1)   Whenever a person which is either an applicant for a building
permit or an obtainer of a building permit owes fees (including checks returned
for insufficient funds, permit fees owed pursuant to §§ 52.15 through
52.23, or inspection fees owed pursuant to Ord. 011111 (adopted by reference in
Chapter 153)) to the Building Commissioner, the Building Commissioner may
withhold the issuance of subsequently requested permits until a time that the
debt is satisfied.
      (2)   Whenever a person applies for a building permit for a structure
that is not being used or constructed in conformance with applicable provisions
of an applicable zoning ordinance or other ordinance relating to land use, the
Building Commissioner is authorized to withhold the issuance of requested
permits until a time that the property is brought into conformance with
applicable ordinances.
   (B)   Permit revocation. The Building Commissioner may revoke a building
permit when any of the following are applicable:
      (1)   The application, plans or supporting documents contain a false
statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact;
      (2)   The application, plans or supporting documents reflect a lack of
compliance with building standards and procedures;
      (3)   There is failure to comply with this subchapter; or
      (4)   The structure for which the building permit has been issued is not
being used or constructed in conformance with an applicable zoning ordinance or
other ordinance relating to land use.
   (C)   Stop-work order.
      (1)   The Building Commissioner may issue an order requiring suspension
of the pertinent construction (stop-work order) in accordance with this
section.
      (2)   The stop-work order shall:
         (a)   Be in writing;
         (b)   State with specificity the construction to which it is
applicable and the reason for its issuance;
         (c)   Be posted on the property in a conspicuous place;
         (d)   If practicable, be given to:
            1.   The person doing the construction; and
            2.   To the owner of the property or the owner’s agent.
         (e)   The stop-work order shall state the conditions under which
construction may be resumed.
      (3)   The Building Commissioner may issue a stop-work order if:
         (a)   Construction is proceeding in an unsafe manner, including, but
not limited to, in violation of any standard set forth in this subchapter or
any state law pertaining to safety during construction;
         (b)   Construction is occurring in violation of this subchapter or in
a manner so that if construction is allowed to proceed, there is a reasonable
probability that it will be substantially difficult to correct the violation;
and/or
         (c)   Construction for which a building permit is required is
proceeding without a building permit being in force.
      (4)   The issuance of a stop-work order shall in no way limit the
operation of penalties provided elsewhere in this subchapter.
   (D)   Civil action. Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-4, the town may initiate a civil
action in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain any person from
violating a provision of this subchapter.
   (E)   Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by an order issued under this
subchapter shall have the right to petition for review of any order of the
Building Commissioner. The person may file a petition using either, or both, of
the following procedures.
      (1)   Appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
         (a)   A person aggrieved by an order issued under this subchapter may
appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission, in accordance
with I.C. 22-13-2-7.
         (b)   The Commission may modify or reverse any order issued by the
town that covers a subject governed by I.C. 22-12, I.C. 22-13, I.C. 22-14, I.C.
22-15, a fire safety or a building rule.
         (c)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission must review
orders that concern a Class 2 structure if the person aggrieved by the order
petitions for review under I.C. 4-21.5-3-7 within 30 days after the issuance of
the order.
         (d)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission may review
all other orders issued under this subchapter.
         (e)   The review of an order by the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission does not suspend the running of the time period under any
statute in which a person must petition a court for judicial review of the
order.
      (2)   Appeal to an established local administrative body or court. If,
pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-9, the town has established by ordinance to hear
appeals of orders issued under ordinances, then a person aggrieved by an order
may petition for review with this administrative body in accordance with the
ordinance. If no like administrative body exists, then the person may petition
a court for judicial review of the order.
(Ord. 091311B, passed 9-13-2011)
§ 151.34 MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Adoption of rules by reference.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-3(b), the rules of the State Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission as set out in the following articles
of I.A.C. Title 675 are hereby incorporated by reference in this code and shall
include any later amendments to those rules.
         (a)   Article 13 - Building Codes:
            1.   Fire and Building Safety Standards; and
            2.   State Building Code.
         (b)   Article 14 - Indiana Residential Code;
         (c)   Article 16 - Indiana Plumbing Code;
         (d)   Article 17 - Indiana Electrical Code;
         (e)   Article 18 - Indiana Mechanical Code;
         (f)   Article 19 - Indiana Energy Conservation Code;
         (g)   Article 20 - Indiana Swimming Pool Code;
         (h)   Article 22 - Indiana Fire Code; and
         (i)   Article 25 - Indiana Fuel Gas Code.
      (2)   Two copies of the above building rules incorporated by reference
are on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer for the legislative body for
public inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
      (3)   The Building Commissioner and the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission may grant a variance to the fire safety laws and building
laws adopted in this subchapter. Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-7(b), a variance
granted by the Building Commissioner is not effective until it has been
approved by Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
   (B)   Lifting devices located within a private residence.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-22(b)(12), lifting devices, such as
elevators and wheelchair lifts located within a private residence are not
regulated lifting devices. Therefore, the following standards applicable to
lifting devices located within a private residence are incorporated by
reference:
         (a)   Part 5.3, Private Residence Elevators, ANSI/ASME A17.1-2000,
Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators, published by the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016;
         (b)   Part 5.4, Private Residence Inclined Elevators, ANSI/ASME A17.1-
2000, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators, published by the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016;
         (c)   Section 5, Private Residence Vertical Platform Lifts, ASME
A18.1a, 2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and
Stairway Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016;
         (d)   Section 6, Private Residence Inclined Platform Lifts, ASME
A18.1a, 2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and
Stairway Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016; and
         (e)   Section 7, Private Inclined Stairway Lifts, ASME A18.1a, 2001
(Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway Chair
Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park
Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
      (2)   Two copies of the above lifting device standards incorporated by
reference are on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer for the legislative
body for public inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
(Ord. 091311B, passed 9-13-2011)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   There is hereby added to this penalty the additional penalty of
attorney’s fees incurred by the town if civil action through a court of
competent jurisdiction is required in order to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   (1)   Any person, partnership, corporation or any other entity,
violating the provisions of §
151.11 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $150 with each day that an
offense continues constituting a separate violation.
      (2)   A violation of this section shall be subject to the enforcement
procedures provided in this chapter.
   (D)   Any person violating any provision of §§
151.25 through
151.34 may be subject to a fine in any sum not exceeding $2,500. The assessment
of a monetary penalty shall in no way limit the operation of the penalties
provided elsewhere in §§
151.25 through
151.34.
(Ord. 091311B, passed 9-13-2011; Ord. 101122C, passed 11-9-2022)
CHAPTER 152: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Statutory authorization; findings of fact; purpose and objectives
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
152.04   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data
   
152.05   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
152.06   Compliance
   
152.07   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.08   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground elevations
   
152.09   Interpretation; warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
152.20   Designation of administrator
   
152.21   Permit procedures
   
152.22   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
152.35   General standards
   
152.36   Specific standards
   
152.37   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
152.38   Critical facility
   
152.39   Standards for identified floodways
   
152.40   Standards for identified fringe
   
152.41   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood elevation and/or
floodways/fringes
   
152.42   Standards for flood prone areas
Variance Procedures
   
152.55   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board
   
152.56   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board
   
152.57   Variance procedures
   
152.58   Conditions for variances
   
152.59   Variance notification
   
152.60   Historic structure
   
152.61   Special conditions
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   Statutory authorization. The Indiana Legislature has in I.C. 36-7-
4 granted the power to local government units to control land use within their
jurisdictions. Therefore, the Town Council of the Town of McCordsville does
hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations.
   (B)   Findings of fact.
      (1)   The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
      (2)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities,
and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, inadequately flood-
proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
   (C)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters.
      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage.
      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
      (6)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for structures
and their contents in the town by fulfilling the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program.
   (D)   Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To protect human life and health.
      (2)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects.
      (3)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
      (4)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
      (5)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in floodplains.
      (6)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood
blight areas.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A ZONE. Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding is
runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A zones,
floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant
threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE, Zones A1-A30,
Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM. The definitions are presented
below:
      (1)   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no base
flood elevation or depths are shown.
      (2)   ZONE AE AND A1-A30. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood elevations are
shown within these zones. (Zone AE is on new and revised maps in place of Zones
A1-A30.)
      (3)   ZONE AO. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.
      (4)   ZONE AH. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between one and
three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are
shown within this zone.
      (5)   ZONE AR. Areas that result from the decertification of a previously
accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of
being restored to provide base flood protection.
      (6)   ZONE A99. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of an under-
construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of special flood
hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction of a protection
system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to consider it complete for insurance
rating purposes. Zone A99 may only be used when the flood protection system has
reached specified statutory progress toward completion. No base flood
elevations or depths are shown.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure with a floor area
400 square feet or less that is located on the same parcel of property as the
principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal initial
investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have
minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached
garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is
connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls, is new construction.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the 1% annual chance flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BOUNDARY RIVER. The part of the Ohio River that forms the boundary between
the Kentucky and Indiana.
   BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of a boundary river.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the regular
program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to
develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding
might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to,
schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or
hazardous waste.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including
but not limited to:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a structure or any
addition to a structure;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more than
180 days;
         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences, construction
of roads, or similar projects;
         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes,
dams, channel improvements, and the like;
         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling
operations;
         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
         (g)   Storage of materials; or
         (h)   Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing
roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent
structures.
   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter
walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls), pilings, or
columns (posts and piers).
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A certified statement that verifies a structure's
elevation information.
   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The first phase under which a community participates in
the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the community's first floodplain ordinance.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA)
has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic report
provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FBFM
(where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area acknowledged by a community as being
susceptible to inundation by water from any source. (See FLOOD.)
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory flood plus two
feet at any given location in the SFHA. (See FREEBOARD.)
   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake, or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory
flood. The floodplain includes both the floodway and the fringe districts.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited
to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in
flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in
any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage. Floodplain management regulations are also referred to
as floodplain regulations, floodplain ordinance, flood damage prevention
ordinance, and floodplain management requirements.
   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING). A method of protecting a structure that
ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with walls that
are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated debris impact
forces.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for non-
residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or above
the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional engineer or
architect.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently
carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood.
   FRINGE. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.
   HARDSHIP (as related to variances of this chapter). The exceptional hardship
that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The
McCordsville Public Works Commission requires that the variance is exceptional,
unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial
hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations,
physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors
likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these
problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even
if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURES. Any structures individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and
Structures.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially
damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to
bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local flood
damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation,
relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All renewal and new
business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after June 1,
1997, will include ICC coverage.
   LETTER OF FINAL DETERMINATION (LFD). A letter issued by FEMA during the
mapping update process which establishes final elevations and provides the new
flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD initiates the six-month
adoption period. The community must adopt or amend its floodplain management
regulations during this six-month period unless the community has previously
incorporated an automatic adoption clause.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A general term used to refer to the several
types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by
letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter of Map Revision
(LOMR), and Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F). The definitions are
presented below:
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment by letter to the currently
effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a SFHA
through the submittal of property specific elevation data. A LOMA is only
issued by FEMA.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the currently
effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones, delineations,
and elevations.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An official revision by
letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA's determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the
BFE and excluded from the SFHA.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.
   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest elevation described among the following:
      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure.
      (2)   The top of the basement floor.
      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of
the structure.
      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or
pillars.
      (5)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement,
below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure provide any
resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:
         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic
flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters by
providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows) in a
minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has more than one enclosed area,
each shall have openings on exterior walls;
         (b)   The total net area of all openings shall be at least one square
inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; the bottom of all such
openings shall be no higher than one foot above the exterior grade or the
interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher; and
         (c)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parking of
vehicles and building access.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a
willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market
will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified appraisal,
replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value), or
adjusted assessed values.
   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to
people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of mitigation
is twofold; to protect people and structures, and to minimize the cost of
disaster response and recovery.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the Federal Government and the
private insurance industry.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF 1929. As corrected in 1929 is a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within
the floodplain.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced after the effective date of the community's first floodplain
ordinance.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.
   NON-BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of any river or stream other than
a boundary river.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88). As adopted in 1993 is a
vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, canalization,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its propensity to snare
or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being
carried downstream.
   ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the
letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See REGULATORY FLOOD.
   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a community's FEMA
map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood elevations, floodplain
boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and planimetric features. These
changes typically occur as a result of structural works or improvements,
annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas, or correction to base
flood elevations or SFHAs.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE.  Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community's participation in the NFIP
where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and
higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations
determined in a FIS.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is acceptable
to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at any location is
as defined in §
152.04 of this chapter. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known by the term BASE
FLOOD, ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD, and 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SECTION 1316. That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as
amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be provided
for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a duly
constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to
be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that
intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in
flood-prone areas.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdiction of the
town subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the Town of
McCordsville are generally identified as such on the Hancock County, Indiana
and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated December 4, 2007 as well
as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date. (These areas are shown
on a FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO).
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction  of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred substantial loss
or substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not include improvements of structures to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code requirements or any alteration
of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structures continued designation as a historic structure.
   SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP because
the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain management
regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
Shaded X zones shown on recent FIRMs (B Zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood). Unshaded X Zones (C Zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.
   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FIRM that reflects the severity or type
of flooding in the area.
   ZONE A. See definition for A ZONE.
   ZONE B, C, AND X. Areas identified in the community as areas of moderate or
minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area. However,
buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated rainfall
coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is available in
participating communities but is not required by regulation in these zones.
(Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and C.)
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.03 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and known flood prone areas within the
jurisdiction of the town.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.04 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.
   This chapter's protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best
available regulatory flood data is listed below.
   (A)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for the
studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the Town of McCordsville shall be as
delineated on the 1% annual chance flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study
of Hancock County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas and the corresponding Flood
Insurance Rate Map dated December 4, 2007 as well as any future updates,
amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
with the most recent date.
   (B)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for each
of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the Town of McCordsville, delineated as
an A Zone on the Hancock County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance
Rate Map dated December 4, 2007 as well as any future updates, amendments, or
revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most
recent date, shall be according to the best data available as provided by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area
from the subject site is greater than one square mile. Whenever a party
disagrees with the best available data, the party needs to replace existing
data with better data that meets current engineering standards. To be
considered, this data must be submitted to the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources for review, subsequently approved.
   (C)   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of identification
on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits of
any watercourse in the community's known flood prone areas shall be according
to the best data available as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater
than one square mile.
   (D)   Upon issuance of a Letter of Final Determination (LFD), any more
restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall be utilized
for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing all
previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.05 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.06 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally
altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within the SFHA shall
hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.07 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.08 DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND ELEVATIONS.
   (A)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped floodplain
(SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation provided on
the profiles shall govern.
   (B)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood
elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated accordingly.
   (C)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is above the
base flood elevation and not located within the floodway, that site shall be
considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied.
The property owner shall be advised to apply for a LOMA.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.09 INTERPRETATION; WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter
all provisions shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements.
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   (B)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.
Therefore, this chapter does not create any liability on the part of the Town
of McCordsville, the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, or the State of
Indiana, for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.20 DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Town Council hereby appoints the Public Works Commissioner to administer
and implement the provisions of this chapter and is herein referred to as the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.21 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following:
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen
fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing. Specifically the following information is required:
   (A)   Application stage.
      (1)   A description of the proposed development.
      (2)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately
locate property and structure(s) in relation to existing roads and streams.
      (3)   A legal description of the property site.
      (4)   A site development plan showing existing and proposed development
locations and existing and proposed land grades.
      (5)   Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD 88 or NGVD.
      (6)   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any non-residential
structure will be floodproofed.
      (7)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development. A hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering study is required and any watercourse changes submitted to DNR for
approval and then to FEMA as a Letter of Map Revision. (See § 152.22(B)(6) for
additional information.)
   (B)   Construction stage.
      (1)   Upon establishment/placement of the lowest floor, before framing
continues, to include any approved floodproofing, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NAVD
88 or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, as built.
The certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same.
When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure the certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer
or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of
the floodproofing certification shall be at the applicant's risk. (The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and floodproofing
elevation survey data submitted.) The applicant shall correct deficiencies
detected by such review before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure
to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall
be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
      (2)   Any work undertaken prior to submission of the elevation
certification shall be at the applicant's risk. The Floodplain Administrator
shall review the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation survey data submitted.
The applicant shall correct any deficiencies detected by the review. Failure to
submit the elevation certification or failure to make correction required shall
be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
   (C)   Finished construction. Upon completion of construction, a FEMA
elevation certificate, Form 81-31, which depicts all finished construction, is
required to be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project
includes a floodproofing measure, a FEMA floodproofing certificate, Form 81-65,
is required to be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.22 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter,
which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      (2)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and complete
substantial damage determinations.
      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects subject to
§
152.39 and §
152.41(A) of this chapter, and maintain a record of such authorization (either
copy of actual permit/authorization or floodplain analysis/regulatory
assessment).
      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have been
received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit. Copies
of such permits/authorizations are to be maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit.
      (5)   Maintain and track permit records involving additions and
improvements to residences located in the floodway.
      (6)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain Coordinator
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of
such notifications to FEMA.
      (7)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local
permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Change (LOMC),
copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization, and floodplain analysis and
regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal permit documents,
and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing data for all buildings constructed
subject to this chapter.
      (8)   Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Change (LOMC) or Physical
Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA maps of the
community.
      (9)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
      (10)   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance.
      (11)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in
accordance with §
152.21.
      (12)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new or
substantially improved structures have been floodproofed in accordance with §
152.21.
      (13)   Stop work orders:
         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator, work on any
building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall immediately cease.
         (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner
of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work, and
shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
      (14)   Revocation of permits:
         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit or approval,
issued under the provisions of the chapter, in cases where there has been any
false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application
or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit upon
determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the
structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in
conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 152.35 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all SFHAs and known flood prone areas the following provisions are
required:
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces.
   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage below the FPG.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, utility meters, and other service facilities shall be located at/
above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and
telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities
may be located below the FPG.
   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (G)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (H)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure
that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the
requirements of new construction as contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.36 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required:
   (A)   Building protection requirement. In addition to the requirements of §
152.35, all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood
damage below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the
following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of any structure having a floor area
greater than 400 square feet.
      (2)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure where the
cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the
existing structure (excluding the value of the land).
      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure where the
costs of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the value of the
land) before damage occurred.
      (4)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days.
      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to returning the existing
manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed
to avoid flood damage.
      (6)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss structure.
      (7)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure with a
previous addition or improvement constructed since the community's first
floodplain ordinance.
   (B)   Residential structures. New construction or substantial improvement of
any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor;
including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood
elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of §
152.36(D).
   (C)   Non-residential structures. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (or
manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation) or be
floodproofed to or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be
used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of
§
152.36(D). Structures located in all A Zones may be floodproofed in lieu of
being elevated if done in accordance with the following:
      (1)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account
flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures, and impacts
from debris or ice. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in §
152.22(B)(12).
      (2)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention
and without an outside source of electricity.
   (D)   Elevated structures.
      (1)   New construction or substantial improvements of elevated structures
shall have the lowest floor at or above the FPG.
      (2)   Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by foundation
and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed to
preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls. Designs must meet the following minimum criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings located in a minimum of two
exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area).
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one foot above
the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening,
whichever is higher.
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions.
         (d)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
         (e)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
         (f)   The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be at an
elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.
   (E)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or nonresidential
structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in accordance with the
following:
      (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep
before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with either the
Standard or Modified Proctor Test method, which shall be retained in permit
file.
      (2)   The fill shall extend ten feet beyond the foundation of the
structure before sloping below the BFE.
      (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is
used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
      (5)   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be at or
above the FPG.
   (F)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following
requirements:
      (1)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on
a site outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a
flood:
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in §
152.36(D).
         (c)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame
or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
      (2)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on
a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been
substantially damaged by a flood:
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the lowest floor
of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in §
152.36(D).
         (c)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame
or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
      (3)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:
         (a)   Be on site for less than 180 days; or
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (defined as being on
its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions); or
         (c)   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes as stated earlier
in this section.
   (G)   Accessory structures. Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such structures must meet
the following standards:
      (1)   Shall not be used for human habitation.
      (2)   Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials.
      (3)   Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
      (4)   Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to or above the FPG.
      (6)   Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in §
152.36(D).
   (H)   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. All above ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral
movement.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.37 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the SFHA and/
or limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.
   (F)   All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of SFHA
for pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency responders).
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.38 CRITICAL FACILITY.
   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible,
located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new critical facilities
shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site. Floodproofing and
sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be
displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above
the FPG shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.39 STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   Located within SFHAs, established in §
152.04, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and has erosion potential. If the site is in an
identified floodway, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant
to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications,
to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1 a permit for
construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources is
required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any excavation,
deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the floodway. This
includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading, clearing and
paving and the like undertaken before the actual start of construction of the
structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial additions/improvements to
existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26
allows construction of a non-substantial addition/ improvement to a residence
in a non-boundary river floodway without obtaining a permit for construction in
the floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. Please note that
if fill is needed to elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior
approval for the fill is required from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.)
   (B)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until a
permit or letter of authorization (when applicable) has been issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in
the floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway or letter of
authorization has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources,
the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit,
provided the provisions contained in §§
152.35 through
152.42 of this chapter have been met. The floodplain development permit cannot
be less restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by
the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. However, a community's more
restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence.
   (C)   No development shall be allowed, which acting alone or in combination
with existing or future development, that will adversely affect the efficiency
of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway. This adverse affect is
defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory flood of at least
0.15 of a foot as determined by comparing the regulatory flood elevation under
the project condition to that under the natural or pre-floodway condition as
proven with hydraulic analyses.
   (D)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including
levees) the Floodplain Administrator shall submit the data and request that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per
mapping standard regulations found at 44 C.F.R. 65.12.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.40 STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FRINGE.
   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit provided the
provisions contained in §§
152.35 through
152.42 of this chapter have been met. The key provision is that the top of the
lowest floor of any new or substantially improved structure shall be at or
above the FPG.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.41 STANDARDS FOR SFHAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND/OR
FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.
   (A)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile:
      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the drainage area
upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along
with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources for review and comment.
      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
either a permit for construction in a floodway permit (including letters of
authorization) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 1%
annual chance flood elevation and the recommended flood protection grade has
been received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
      (3)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper permit
for construction in a floodway permit (including letters of authorization) or
floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development, a
floodplain development permit may be issued provided the conditions of the
floodplain development permit are not less restrictive than the conditions
received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the provisions
contained in §§
152.35 through
152.42 of this chapter have been met.
   (B)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile:
      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the drainage area upstream
of the site is less than one square mile, the Floodplain Administrator shall
require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the limits of
the floodplain and 1% annual chance flood elevation for the site.
      (2)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in §§
152.35 through
152.42 of this chapter have been met.
   (C)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and will not increase flood damages
or potential flood damages.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.42 STANDARDS FOR FLOOD PRONE AREAS.
   All development in known flood prone areas not identified on FEMA maps, or
where no FEMA published map is available, shall meet applicable standards as
required per §§
152.35 through
152.42.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
VARIANCE PROCEDURES
§ 152.55 DESIGNATION OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
   The McCordsville Public Works Commission shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.56 DUTIES OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
   The Public Works Commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the
Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Commission may appeal such decision
to the Hancock County Circuit Court.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.57 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   In passing upon such applications, the Commission shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter; and
   (A)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
   (B)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
   (C)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
   (D)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
   (E)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
   (F)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
   (G)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
floodplain management program for that area.
   (H)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
   (I)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment of
transport of the floodwaters at the site.
   (J)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.58 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause.
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship.
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
   (B)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to §§
152.39 or
152.41(A) of this chapter may be granted.
   (C)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §§
152.39 or
152.41(A) of this chapter will require a permit from the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources.
   (D)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of §
152.36, may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot of
1/2 acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the flood protection grade.
   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (F)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration of any
structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the flood protection grade and the
elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of
the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation (see § 152.59).
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or
the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request (see § 152.59).
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.59 VARIANCE NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows the lowest
floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade shall be
given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the flood
protection grade will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
      (2)   Such construction below the flood protection grade increases risks
to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain
Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a
manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.60 HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and
the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of
the structure.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.61 SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
   Upon the consideration of the factors listed in §§
152.55 through
152.61, and the purposes of this chapter, the McCordsville Public Works
Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or
failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit or
conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. All
violations shall be considered a common nuisance and shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $2,500.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the violation
continues to exist.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall inform the owner that any
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
      (2)   Nothing herein shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 021114A, passed 2-11-2014)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Title
   
153.002   Purpose and authority
   
153.003   Exempt subdivisions
   
153.004   Definitions
Primary Plat
   
153.015   Sketch plan
   
153.016   Submission of plat
   
153.017   Primary plat procedure
Secondary Plat
   
153.030   General provisions
   
153.031   Phasing
   
153.032   Secondary plat submission
   
153.033   Financial guarantees
   
153.034   Technical Review Committee procedure
   
153.035   Plan Commission procedure
   
153.036   Recording a final plat
   
153.037   Completion affidavit
   
153.038   Bond funds
Design Principles and Standards
   
153.050   General provisions
   
153.051   Open space standards
   
153.052   Street tree standards
   
153.053   Geometric street standards
   
153.054   Street standards and requirements, general
   
153.055   Block standards
   
153.056   Lot standards
   
153.057   Easements
   
153.058   Additional provisions for non-residential subdivisions
   
153.059   Soil limitations and natural features
Improvements and Installations
   
153.070   Improvements and installations
   
153.071   General provisions
   
153.072   Streets
   
153.073   Drainage and sanitary sewage disposal
   
153.074   Water system
   
153.075   Monuments and markers
   
153.076   Utilities adjacent to right-of-way
   
153.077   Erosion control
   
153.078   Dry hydrants
   
153.079   Culverts and private drives
Modifications and Exceptions
   
153.090   Intent
Administration
   
153.100   Amendment
   
153.101   Enforcement
   
153.102   Recording of plats
   
153.103   Effect
   
153.104   Appeal
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall hereafter be known and cited as the McCordsville,
Indiana Subdivision Control Ordinance.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.002 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Purpose. This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
      (1)   To assist the orderly and efficient development of the Town of
McCordsville, Indiana;
      (2)   To provide for the coordination of new thoroughfares with existing
and planned thoroughfares;
      (3)   To promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents
of the county;
      (4)   To ensure the coordination with, and extension of, community
facilities and utilities; and
      (5)   To secure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing
uniform procedures and standards.
   (B)   Authority. This chapter is hereby adopted by the town pursuant to its
authority under the laws of the State of Indiana, I.C. 36-7-4 et seq. Whenever
codes cited in this chapter refer to Indiana Code where the state statute has
been amended or superseded, this chapter shall be deemed amended in reference
to the new or revised Indiana Code.
   (C)   Waiver of requirements. The Plan Commission is hereby authorized to
waive any or all requirements of this chapter when a literal enforcement of
this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship and when the waiver will not
be contrary to the public interest.
   (D)   Jurisdictional area.  This chapter shall apply to all incorporated
land within the Town of McCordsville, Indiana.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.003 EXEMPT SUBDIVISIONS.
   The following kinds of division of existing parcels of land are herein
called exempt divisions. These divisions are exempt from the platting
provisions of this chapter. Exempt division must be one of the following types
of division:
   (A)   A division of land for the sale or exchange of tracts to correct
errors in an existing legal description, provided that no additional building
sites other than for accessory buildings are created by the division;
   (B)   A division of land pursuant to an allocation of land in the settlement
of a decedent's estate or a court decree for the distribution of property;
   (C)   A division of land for the acquisition of street right-of-way, or
easement;
   (D)   A division of land for the sale or exchange of additional tracts
between adjoining land owners, provided that no additional building sites other
than for accessory buildings are created by the division; and/or
   (E)   A division of land into cemetery plats for the purpose of burial of
corpses.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCEPTED SCALES. One inch equals 50 feet, one inch equals 100 feet, and/or
one inch equals 200 feet.
   AGRICULTURAL PURPOSE. The use of a tract of land for agricultural purposes
only, including farming, dairying, pasturing, agriculture, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry.
   BUILDING LINE. A line drawn parallel to a lot line at a distance equal to
the depth of the minimum required yard for the zone in which the lot is
located, as established by the Zoning Ordinance.
   COMMISSION. McCordsville Advisory Plan Commission.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  A document, consistent with the requirements the
Indiana Code that is a compilation of policy statements, goals and objectives,
standards, maps, and statistical data for the physical, social, and economic
development of the community.
   CONSTRUCTION PLAN(S). The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat
that show the specific location and design of improvements to be installed for
the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of this chapter as a
condition of approval of the plan.
   CROSSWALK. A strip of land dedicated to public use which is reserved across
a block to provide pedestrian access to adjacent areas.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner to specific persons, the general
public, corporations, utilities, or others, for the purpose of providing
services or access to the property.
   EROSION CONTROL PLANS.  Written description and site of pertinent
information concerning erosion control measures, as defined in the General
Permit Related to Stormwater Runoff Associated with Construction Activities, as
provided for in 327 I.A.C. 15-5 and the McCordsville Stormwater Ordinances.
   FEASIBILITY REPORT. A written report prepared by a professional engineer or
land surveyor pertaining to the suitability of the site for various types of
water and sewer systems, for drainage retention or dispersion, and the subsoil
conditions for various methods of street construction.
   INCIDENTAL IMPROVEMENTS. A physical improvement, facility or fixture
together with its associated public right-of-way limited to: asphalt surfacing,
street lights, sidewalks, multi-use paths, monuments and markers, and
landscaping.
   LOT. A contiguous area of land separated from other areas of land by a
separate description (including a recorded deed, a subdivision plat or record
of survey map, or by metes and bounds) for purpose of sale, lease, transfer of
ownership, or separate use.
   LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE. A lot having frontage on two or more non-intersecting
streets.
   MAINTENANCE BOND. A bond furnished to the town by a developer that
guarantees all subdivision improvements against the defective workmanship or
materials for a given period of time.
   NO ACCESS EASEMENT. Public easement along a public right-of-way across which
access to the property is not permitted.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to, or sufficient
proprietary interest in the land, or their legal representative.
   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. Any guarantee which may be accepted in lieu of a
requirement that certain improvements be made before the Commission approves
the secondary plat, including by way of illustration but not limitation,
performance bonds, escrow agreements, deposit agreements, and other similar
collateral or surety arrangements approved as valid and enforceable by the
county.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A large-scale unified development meeting
the requirements of this chapter. Generally a planned unit development provides
design flexibility (e.g. mixed use) for a parcel or parcels to be developed as
a single entity which does not correspond in size of lots, layout, bulk or type
of buildings, density, lot coverage, and required open space to the regulations
established in any zoning district of this chapter.
   PRIMARY PLAT. The primary plat, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-700 series, is the
plat and plans upon which the primary approval of a proposed subdivision is
based.
   PRIVATE DRIVE OR STREET. Any street which is privately owned and maintained
that is used to provide vehicular access to more than one property or dwelling
unit.
   RESERVE STRIP. An area of land adjacent to a public right-of-way which is
retained in ownership by the subdivider for the purpose of denying access to
the adjacent land.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Property occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
trail, utility transmission line, or other public utility or facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY, APPARENT. All that area lying adjacent to and including the
public road which is being used and occupied by the public and public
utilities, and the area of maintenance by county or city government. The
apparent right-of-way is subordinate to dedicated rights-of-way of record. The
limits of the apparent right-of-way shall be defined as the greater of any of
the following:
      (1)   The existing fence of long standing;
      (2)   The edge of existing utilities;
      (3)   Field occupation lines, meaning plowed or tilled ground;
      (4)   Existing woody vegetation, which may signify evidence of prior
fence location; or
      (5)   If none of the above exists, the edge of the traveled road surface,
and the adjacent area of maintenance by a county or city road department.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY, DEDICATED. Property conveyed to a public/governmental entity,
by a private source, for public use and benefit. For the dedicated property to
be valid, a public body must accept the property.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY, PLANNED. The intended right-of-way where future road
improvements are anticipated. Property within a planned right-of-way is often a
mix of public and private land.
   SECONDARY PLAT. The secondary plat, pursuant to IC 36-7-4-700 series, is the
plat document of a subdivision meeting all of the requirements of the town
prepared in a recordable form.
   SEWAGE DISPOSAL REPORT. A report of the suitability of the soil for on-lot
septic systems, based on a mechanical analysis, soil classification, or other
methods as determined acceptable by the Commission and the County Health
Department.
   SKETCH PLAN. A sketch plan of a proposed subdivision used to show the Plan
Commission the location, proposed street and lot layout, and many other
significant features of the proposed subdivision.
   STREET. A partially or fully improved public thoroughfare, including a road,
highway, drive, lane, avenue, place, boulevard, and any other thoroughfare that
affords vehicular access to abutting property.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person or other entity which initiates proceedings to create
a subdivision.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, parcels, sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of sale, transfer, gift, or lease which results in one or more new
building sites, and including subdivisions requiring any new street or
extension of local governmental facilities or the creation of any public
improvements.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
PRIMARY PLAT
§ 153.015 SKETCH PLAN.
   Prior to the submission of a subdivision plat, the subdivider should submit
a sketch plan and consult informally with the Technical Review Committee. This
will enable the subdivider to become familiar with the general requirements and
conditions which might affect the subdivision and thus avoid unnecessary
revisions. The sketch plan should be in draft form with sufficient detail for
review and comments.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.016 SUBMISSION OF PLAT.
   At least 30 days prior to the regular meeting of the McCordsville Advisory
Plan Commission, the subdivider shall submit a written application for primary
plat approval together with the following:
   (A)   Primary plat. A primary plat based on a survey in conformance with the
Minimum Standards for the Competent Practices of Land Surveying administered by
the Indiana State Board of Registration for Land Surveyors, or as provided for
in 865 I.A.C. 1-12. Ten copies of the primary plat drawn on 24 inches by 36
inches materials at an accepted scale and encompassing all contiguous parcels
of property owned by or under the control of the subdivider and showing the
following:
      (1)   The proposed name for the subdivision;
      (2)   The location by civil township, section, township and range, or by
other legal description;
      (3)   The name and address of the subdivider;
      (4)   The name, address and registration number of the surveyor;
      (5)   The scale (including a graphic scale), north arrow, and date;
      (6)   The boundary line of the subdivision;
      (7)   The boundary lines of adjacent tracts of unsubdivided or subdivided
land, showing ownership where possible;
      (8)   Existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts;
      (9)   Topographic contours at a minimum of two-foot intervals;
      (10)   All existing permanent features either natural or manmade that may
influence the design of the subdivision, such as watercourses, tree groves,
swamps, sewers, water mains, culverts, utility lines, and fire hydrants. Where
underground utilities exist within or adjacent to the tract, the approximate
location, size, and direction of flow, if applicable, shall be indicated;
      (11)   The location, width, and names of all existing or prior platted
streets or other public ways, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and
other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, permanent
easements, and section and corporate lines on or within 200 feet of the
subdivision;
      (12)   The layout of all proposed and existing lots with appropriate
dimensions including the minimum lot areas in square feet for the smallest lot
(s) in the subdivision and the proposed front yard setback lines;
      (13)   The layout of streets, widths of rights-of-ways, proposed cross
sections of roadways, and also the widths of cross-walkways and easements;
      (14)   Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved
for public use or set aside for use of property owners in the subdivision; and
      (15)   The dedicated right-of-way and, if applicable, the planned right-
of-way. In the event that neither the dedicated right-of-way, nor the planned
right-of-way is known, the apparent right-of-way may be used for a temporary
substitute.
   (B)   Watershed map. A watershed map using USGS contour information and
showing:
      (1)   The delineation of the drainage area in which the subdivision is
located; and
      (2)   The location of drainage courses or reaches within the drainage
area.
   (C)   Drainage plan. A drainage plan in conformance with the county drainage
regulations showing:
      (1)   Natural watercourses, marshes, and the like;
      (2)   Existing drainage facilities, culverts and the like; and
      (3)   The proposed drainage plan for the subdivision and analysis of
existing drainage facilities to the nearest watercourse showing culverts,
retention ponds, and the like.
   (D)   Feasibility report. A feasibility report in conformance with the
town's sewage disposal and drainage regulations including but not limited to
the following:
      (1)   The feasibility of connecting to an existing sewerage system and
water supply, as determine by the Town of McCordsville or Indianapolis Water,
respectively. This portion of the study shall include the distance to the
nearest public sewer, its capacity and present load, and its capacity to handle
the additional sewage load created by the subdivision. The same information
shall be submitted for water supply;
      (2)   A study of the storm water drainage of the area showing a method of
dispersion or retention and the adequacy of downstream facilities. This study
shall give consideration to both water entering the subdivision from adjacent
land and water within the boundaries of the subdivision; and
      (3)   A preliminary report on the type(s) of street construction based on
the specifications outlined in this chapter.
   (E)   Preliminary erosion control plan. A preliminary erosion control plan
following the guidelines as required by the general permit for construction
activities, as provided for in 327 I.A.C. 15-5. The erosion control measures
shall be in accordance with standards and specifications in the State Handbook
for Erosion Control in Developing Areas including, but not limited to the
following:
      (1)   Soil areas which, according to the soil maps and interpretations
prepared by the U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service, are subject to erosion by
wind or by water; and
      (2)   A proposed plan for adequately controlling erosion during
construction, and stabilizing these areas after construction. These erosion
control measures shall be in accordance with standards and specifications on
files in the County Soil and Water Conservation District office and consistent
with the general permit for construction activity administered by the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management, as provided for in 326 I.A.C. 15-5.
   (F)   Fee. The submission of the primary plat shall be accompanied by a fee
established in the Official Fee Schedule for the town.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.017 PRIMARY PLAT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Pre-application meeting required. A primary plat shall only be filed
after the petitioner has met with the Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee, to discuss the request.
   (B)   Staff procedure. Upon receipt of an application for primary plat
approval, the Administrative Officer shall review the application for technical
conformity with the standards fixed in this chapter. Within 30 days after
receipt of the application, the Administrative Officer shall announce the date
for a hearing before the Plan Commission, and shall provide for notice in
accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-706. After the staff has announced a date for a
hearing before the Plan Commission, it shall:
      (1)   Notify the applicant in writing;
      (2)   Give notice of the hearing by publication in accordance with I.C.
5-3-1; and
      (3)   Provide for due notice to interested parties, consistent with
Indiana State Statute, at least ten days before the date set for the hearing.
   (C)   Technical Review Committee procedure. The Technical Review Committee
shall review the primary plat and make a report to the Plan Commission within
15 days after the date the application was filed. If the Technical Review
Committee finds that the primary plat has been prepared in accordance with the
terms of this chapter, they shall forward a report so stating to the Plan
Commission for consideration. If the Technical Review Committee finds that the
primary plat has not been prepared in accordance with the terms of this
chapter, they shall return the plat to the subdivider with a written
specification of the items of nonconformance and shall submit a copy of the
same to the Plan Commission.
   (D)   Plan Commission procedure.
      (1)   Approval. If, after the hearing, the Plan Commission determines
that the application and plat comply with the standards of this and all other
applicable ordinances, it shall make written findings and a decision granting
primary approval to the plat. Upon approval of the primary plat, the Plan
Commission will indicate upon each copy that it has been approved. One copy
shall be returned to the subdivider along with a written statement indicating
the action taken by the Plan Commission. If approved with conditions, a written
copy of the conditions shall accompany each copy of the approved plat. As a
condition of primary approval, the Plan Commission may specify:
         (a)   The manner in which public ways shall be laid out, graded and
improved;
         (b)   A provision for water, sewage, and other utility services;
         (c)   A provision for lot size, number and location;
         (d)   A provision for drainage design; and
         (e)   A provision for other services, as specified in this chapter.
      (2)   Disapproval. If, after the hearing, the Plan Commission disapproves
the plat, it shall make written findings that set forth its reasons and a
decision denying primary approval. If disapproved, the Plan Commission shall
return to the subdivider three copies of the primary plat marked "Disapproved
by the McCordsville Plan Commission," along with a written statement indicating
the reason or reasons for its disapproval.
      (3)   Continuation. The Plan Commission may also refer a plat back to the
Technical Review Committee for review or study on a specific technical matter.
   (E)   Public Works Commission procedure. No subdivision shall be approved
nor shall an improvement location permit be issued for land zoned for
residential or non-residential use unless the working drain for each lot in the
subdivision and each proposed structure outlets into a regulated drain. All
subdivision plats shall dedicate to the town, for drainage purposes, all
regulated drains, drain tile, storm sewers, retention ponds and drainage
ditches which have side slopes steeper than five to one. Upon receipt of a
subdivision application, the Administrative Officer shall refer the application
to the McCordsville Public Works Commission or its agents to review the
preliminary plat and determine that the property will be adequately drained and
that adjoining properties and/or downstream areas will not be adversely
affected by the planned development of the property. If the Public Works
Commission finds that adjacent or intervening landowners decline to cooperate
in providing these connections, and that the connections required by this
section cannot therefore be made, the Public Works Commission may waive the
requirement if it determines that other adequate provisions have been made to
discharge the working drains.
   (F)   Subsequent approvals (if necessary). Subsequent approval will be
required of the engineering proposals pertaining to water supply, storm
drainage, sewerage and sewage disposal, grading and gradients, roadway widths,
and the surfacing of streets by the Town Council, where concerned, prior to the
approval of the secondary plat by the Plan Commission.
   (G)   Approval of primary plat does not constitute approval of a secondary
plat. Approval of a primary plat shall not constitute approval of a secondary
plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout
submitted on the primary plat as a guide to the preparation of the secondary
plat. Approval of the primary plat shall terminate two years after the date of
approval unless further extended by the Plan Commission upon written request of
the subdivider, and by filing 60 days prior to the expiration of the approval
and by payment of a filing fee established by the McCordsville Plan Commission.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
SECONDARY PLAT
§ 153.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conformance with primary plat required. The secondary plat shall not
be considered for approval until the action taken by the Plan Commission on the
required primary plat has been completed, nor shall secondary approval be
granted prior to the expiration of the appeal period provided for in I.C. 36-7-
4-707(c). When the secondary plat submitted does not substantially conform to
the approved primary plat, the subdivider shall not file an application for
secondary plat approval until the primary plat has been amended in accordance
with the same procedure required for primary plat approval.
   (B)   Construction plan(s) required. Construction drawings are to be
submitted for subdivisions with the secondary plat. The construction drawings
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   All drainage with invert and top of casting elevations, sizes,
length of pipe, drainage profile, existing and proposed tile, drains, culverts,
bridges, appropriate high and low water elevations of lakes and streams, flood
plains and all wooded areas;
      (2)   Street information, including right-of-way width, type of material
to be used, cross-sections, slope of pavement, all stationing, curve data,
street profiles, curbs and gutters, and location and description of street
signs;
      (3)   All information required by the McCordsville Public Works
Commission or its agents consistent with the McCordsville stormwater management
ordinances;
      (4)   Topography with a minimum contour interval of two feet and site-
grading plan for the entire subdivision;
      (5)   The title, name, address, signature, and registration number of the
professional engineer and/or surveyor, and the date, including revision dates;
      (6)   A final erosion control plan, following the guidelines as required
by the general permit for construction activities, as provided for in 327
I.A.C. 15-5. The erosion control measures shall be in accordance with standards
and specifications in the State Handbook for Erosion Control in Developing
Areas. The plan shall be submitted to the County Soil and Water Conservation
District per the requirements of the McCordsville Stormwater Management
Ordinance.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.031 PHASING.
   The subdivider may request secondary plat approval for all or any portion of
the approved primary plat, provided that submission of a secondary plat
covering only a portion of the area contained in the approved primary plat may
be permitted by the Plan Commission only after consideration of the effect of
the continuity of roads, utilities and services.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.032 SECONDARY PLAT SUBMISSION.
   (A)   Pre-application meeting required. A subdivision shall only be filed
after the petitioner has met with the Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee, to discuss the request.
   (B)   Submission. At least 15 days prior to the regular meeting of the Plan
Commission, the subdivider shall submit for final plan approval the original
drawing(s) on a material approved by the Town Engineer, at an appropriate scale
with the scale clearly indicated and a graphic scale for reference, and five
prints of the plat. The secondary plat shall be accompanied by a fee as
established in the town Official Fee Schedule.
   (C)   Materials. The secondary plat shall include:
      (1)   The name of the subdivision;
      (2)   The location by section, township and range, and the legal
description of the property platted;
      (3)   The name and certification of the land surveyor preparing or
certifying the plat, as set out in the appendices to this chapter;
      (4)   The scale, shown graphically and numerically, and the date and
north arrow;
      (5)   The boundary of the plat, based on a boundary survey conforming
with the Minimum Standards for the Competent Practice of Land Surveying
administered by the State Board of Registration of Land Surveyors, as provided
in 865 I.A.C. 1-12, having an unadjusted mathematical closure of 1:10,000, with
angular and lineal dimensions;
      (6)   The exact locations, width and name of all streets within and
adjoining the plat, and the exact location and width of all alleys and
crosswalks;
      (7)   True angles and distance to the nearest established street lines or
official monuments, which shall be accurately described in the plat. Also the
locations of the subdivision corner points and the location of the elevation
benchmarks;
      (8)   Municipal, township, county or section lines, or previously platted
land accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles;
      (9)   The radius angle of intersection, tangent length, length of curve,
point of curvature and point of tangency for curves, radii, internal angles,
points and curvatures, tangent bearings, and lengths of all arcs;
      (10)   All easements for rights-of-way provided for public services and
utilities;
      (11)   All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths;
      (12)   Accurate location of all monuments;
      (13)   Accurate outlines of any area, other than public ways to be
dedicated, reserved for public or semipublic use with the purposes indicated
thereon, and for any areas to be reserved for the use of all property owners;
      (14)   Building setbacks, accurately shown with dimensions which are not
in conflict with the Zoning Ordinance;
      (15)   Acknowledgment, by the owner and as required by law, of the
adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets, other public areas, and
utility and drainage easements;
      (16)   Each secondary plat submitted to the Plan Commission for approval
shall carry a certificate signed by the owner after Technical Review Committee
and Plan Commission approval but before recording;
      (17)   A notarized statement indicating that the applicant is the owner
of the land to be subdivided and that the subdivision shown on the recording
plat is made with his or her free consent;
      (18)   The proper form for the acceptance of dedications by the Town
Council;
      (19)   The proper form for the approval of the Plan Commission;
      (20)   Restrictive covenants regulating the use and development of the
lots shall be lettered on the secondary plat or made a part thereof, subject to
the approval of the Plan Commission. The protective covenants shall include any
clause required by this chapter;
      (21)   A note on the plat as follows: “Dedicated R/W in this subdivision
consists of           acres; and       linear feet as measured along the
centerline. Open space in this subdivision consists of        acres;” and
      (22)   The dedicated right-of-way and, if applicable, the planned right-
of-way. In the event that neither the dedicated right-of-way, nor the planned
right-of-way is known, the apparent right-of-way may be used for a temporary
substitute.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 041216-A, passed 4-12-2016)
§ 153.033 FINANCIAL GUARANTEES.
   Financial guarantees shall be required for all proposed incidental
improvements not completed prior to signing off of the plat by the McCordsville
Town Council and for all completed improvements as required by this chapter.
   (A)   Maintenance bond. A maintenance bond shall be required prior to the
signing of a secondary plat by the Town Council. It shall:
      (1)   Run to the McCordsville Town Council;
      (2)   Be in an amount equal to 25% of the cost, as estimated by the
McCordsville Town Council, of all improvements and installations as required by
this chapter;
      (3)   Be with surety satisfactory to the McCordsville Town Council;
      (4)   Warrant the workmanship and all materials used in the construction,
installation and completion of the improvements, and installations to be of
good quality and have been constructed and completed in a workmanlike manner in
accordance with the standards, specifications and requirements of this chapter
and the satisfactory plans and specifications therefore submitted and
satisfactory to the McCordsville Town Council;
      (5)   Provide that for a period of not less than 36 months for
incidentals and erosion control, and a period of not less than 60 months for
all other dedicated infrastructure after the installations and improvements
have been completed or are accepted for public maintenance by the Town Council,
the applicant will, at his or her own expense, make all repairs to the
improvements and installations or the foundations thereof, which may become
necessary by reason of improper workmanship or materials; and
      (6)   Bear an "A" rating or better as ranked by a reputable insurance
rating firm to the satisfaction of the McCordsville Town Council.
   (B)   Performance bond.  A performance bond shall be required prior to the
signing of the secondary plat by the McCordsville Town Council. It shall:
      (1)   Run to the McCordsville Town Council;
      (2)   Be in an amount equal to 125% of the cost, as estimated by the
McCordsville Town Council, of all incidental improvements and installations as
required by this chapter. All improvements and installations as required by
this chapter, except for incidental improvements, shall be completed and
approved prior to the signing of the secondary plat by the McCordsville Plan
Commission. The incidental improvements shall be completed within 12 months
from the date of the recordation of the plat with the exception of sidewalks
and asphalt surfacing which shall be completed within 36 months from the date
of the recordation of the plat.
      (3)   Be with surety satisfactory to the McCordsville Town Council; and
      (4)   Be valid and effective until the improvements are installed to the
satisfaction of the Town Council, at which time all required maintenance bond
(s) shall be posted.
   (C)   Cash bond or other negotiable securities. Cash bond or other
negotiable securities acceptable and assigned to the Town Council may be posted
with the Council in lieu of a performance bond.
   (D)   Exceptions. The Town Council may waive the provisions of this section
upon the recommendation of the County Surveyor, Town Engineer, or County
Environmental Health Specialist.
   (E)   Release.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions set forth above, a performance bond
or performance surety required above, may be reviewed on an annual basis and
released to the extent determined by the Town Engineer that the required
installations and improvements have been completed to the satisfaction of the
Town Engineer.
      (2)   Any performance bond or performance surety required above shall be
released upon completion of the installation, to the satisfaction of the Town
Engineer, of any required installation and/or improvements for which such bond
or surety was required.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 090815,
passed 9-8-2015)
§ 153.034 TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE PROCEDURE.
   Upon receipt of an application for secondary plat approval, the Technical
Review Committee shall review the secondary plat and make a report to the Plan
Commission within 15 days after the final filing date. If the Technical Review
Committee finds that the secondary plat has been prepared in accordance with
the terms of this chapter, they shall forward a report so stating to the Plan
Commission for consideration. If the Technical Review Committee finds that the
secondary plat has not been prepared in accordance with the terms of this
chapter, they shall return the plat to the subdivider with a written
specification of the items of nonconformance and shall submit a copy of the
same to the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.035 PLAN COMMISSION PROCEDURE.
   The Plan Commission shall, upon the filing of an application for secondary
plat approval, review the secondary plat along with the accompanying data, hear
the report of the Technical Review Committee, and determine whether or not the
secondary plat meets all minimum requirements and standards of this chapter and
of all other applicable ordinances of the town. The Plan Commission shall then
take one of the following actions on the secondary plat within 30 days after
its submission or a mutually agreed upon extension.
   (A)   Approval.  The Plan Commission shall authorize the Plan Commission
officers to sign the secondary plat only after the Administrative Officer has
determined that the secondary plat meets the minimum requirements of this
chapter and all applicable ordinances in the town. Upon final approval of the
secondary plat, indicated by signature of the officers, the officers shall
direct the Administrative Officer to post the secondary plat to a Town Council
agenda following receipt of all items indicated in §
153.036.
   (B)   Conditional approval.  If the Plan Commission determines that upon the
satisfactory completion of one or more specified conditions consistent with the
requirements, standards, and specifications of this chapter, the secondary plat
would comply with the terms of this chapter, the Plan Commission may give
conditional approval to the plat. Conditional approval of a secondary plat may
include a construction agreement which is acceptable to the Plan Commission and
would permit the subdivider to proceed with the installation of improvements
prior to recording. Written notice of the conditional approval shall constitute
formal authorization to the subdivider to construct and install all or a part
of the required improvements, subject to inspection and acceptance procedures
required by this chapter. The subdivider shall furnish sufficient evidence to
the Plan Commission of the satisfactory completion of the conditions before the
plat will be deemed “final approval for record.” Upon final approval of the
secondary plat, the Plan Commission shall indicate upon each copy that it has
been approved. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, along with the
written statement indicating the action taken by the Plan Commission. A written
copy of the conditions shall accompany each copy of the approved secondary
plat.
   (C)   Disapproval. Should the Plan Commission decide to disapprove the plat,
written notice of the action, together with reasons therefor, shall be
transmitted to the subdivider. The action shall also be entered on the official
records of the Plan Commission, provided that nothing contained therein shall
prejudice the subdivider’s ability to make reapplication for secondary plat
approval according to the terms of this chapter.
   (D)   Continue. Should the Plan Commission have a question regarding a
specific technical aspect of the plat which had not previously been studied by
the Technical Review Committee, the Plan Commission may refer to the plat along
with a detailed statement of the question to the Technical Review Committee for
a finding.
   (E)   Final approval of a secondary plat not acceptance of dedications.
Final approval of a plat by the Plan Commission shall not be construed as an
acceptance by the public of the offer of dedication of any street improvement,
way, place, structure, utility improvements, or open space improvement, within
the areas shown upon the plat unless the acceptance is endorsed by the Town
Council upon the original tracing of the secondary plat.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014)
§ 153.036 RECORDING A FINAL PLAT.
   After the Plan Commission officers have affixed their signatures to the
original tracing and the subdivider has completed the required improvements and
installation, provided financial guarantees as required by town ordinances, and
met all other requirements of this chapter, the Administrative Officer shall
place the secondary plat on the next Town Council agenda for acceptance of
dedication. Following acceptance of dedication the subdivider shall record the
plat with the County Recorder within one year. If not recorded within this
time, the approval shall be null and void, unless further extended by the Plan
Commission upon written request of the subdivider, filed with the Plan
Commission 60 days prior to the expiration of the approval and by payment of a
filing fee established by the Plan Commission. The subdivider shall pay the
recording fee, and file with the Plan Commission four prints of the approved
secondary plat, including restrictive covenants, as recorded. One reproducible
print of the secondary plat, as recorded, shall be filed and retained in the
office of the Planning and Building Department. For multi-family or non-
residential, until the prints have been so filed, no occupancy permit shall be
issued for any lot shown upon the plat. For single-family residential, until
the prints have been so filed, no improvement location permit, occupancy
permit, or other permits shall be issued for any lot shown upon the plat.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 041216-A,
passed 4-12-2016)
§ 153.037 COMPLETION AFFIDAVIT.
   Upon the acceptance of the improvements and installations by the Town
Council, the applicant shall obtain a completion affidavit from the Town
Engineer stating that the required improvements and installations have been
installed in compliance with specifications of this chapter and have been
accepted for public maintenance by the Council, subject to the terms of the
maintenance bond provided by the applicant, and shall file the completion
affidavit with the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.038 BOND FUNDS.
   Any funds received from the financial guarantees required by this chapter
shall be used only for the purposes of making the improvements, installations
or repairs for which the guarantees were provided, in accordance with the
standards, specifications and requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS
§ 153.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   In determining whether an application for approval shall be granted, the
Plan Commission shall determine if the plat conforms to the principles and
standards required in this chapter, which shall be deemed as the minimum; and
whenever the applicable requirements of other town ordinances are higher or
more restrictive, those requirements shall control any application for plat
approval.
   (A)   Natural features.  In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be
shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic
spots, or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and
value to the proposed development.
   (B)   Pollution prevention. Due consideration shall be given to the
prevention of air and stream pollution, proper treatment and disposal of refuse
and other waste, and the elimination of other blighting characteristics.
   (C)   Design. The subdivision layout shall be of a character that protects
the health, safety, and general welfare of the county and its residents. In
designing a street system, the subdivider shall be guided by the following
principles:
      (1)   Adequate vehicular and pedestrian access shall be provided to all
parcels;
      (2)   Local or residential street systems shall be designed to minimize
through-traffic movement, but street connections into and from adjacent areas
may be required;
      (3)   Local street patterns shall provide reasonable direct access to the
primary circulation system;
      (4)   Local circulation systems and land development patterns shall not
conflict with the efficiency of bordering arterial and/or collector routes;
      (5)   Elements in the local circulation system should be designed with
the least amount of interruptions possible in order to function effectively and
safely;
      (6)   Traffic generators within residential areas shall be considered in
the design of the circulation pattern;
      (7)   Planning and construction of residential streets shall clearly
relate to their local function;
      (8)   Local streets shall be designed to discourage excessive speeds;
      (9)   Pedestrian-vehicular conflict points shall be minimized;
      (10)   The number of intersections shall be minimized;
      (11)   Local streets shall be related to the topography;
      (12)   All subdivisions shall be designed so as to facilitate the most
advantages development of the entire neighboring area by protecting and
enhancing the stability, character, and environment of the area;
      (13)   All residential subdivisions shall provide specialized open space
as defined in this chapter, that encourage frequent use, attention, and the
presence of people through placement and design. Where possible, the natural
terrain, drainage, and vegetation of a site shall be preserved;
      (14)   Streets shall extend existing streets into and through the
development. Reserve strips adjoining street rights-of-way for the purpose of
preventing access are prohibited;
      (15)   Streets and development sites should be designed to protect and
preserve stands of significant trees and vistas from high ground or to water;
and
      (16)   Pedestrian and bike paths shall be designed to connect with
similarly planned or existing local facilities. Streets, pedestrian paths, and
bike paths shall contribute to a system of fully connected and interesting
routes to all destinations. Their design should encourage pedestrian and
bicycle use by being small and spatially defined by buildings, trees, and
lighting, and by discouraging high speed traffic.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.051 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS.
   Open space uses are permitted on land designated as open space within a
residential subdivision.
   (A)   Conservation requirement. To protect and preserve the small town
atmosphere of McCordsville, all residential subdivisions are required to
designate at least 25% of the land for open space uses.
   (B)   Open space uses. The uses shall maintain unobstructed views into the
open space and preserve the rural atmosphere of the community.
      (1)   Nuisance avoidance. Open space uses shall not create a nuisance to
adjoining properties due to fire hazard, electrical disturbance, noise,
vibration, air pollution, heat and glare, water pollution, and waste matter.
      (2)   Siting.  Due to the site specific nature of the relationship of
open space areas to surrounding residential uses, the appropriateness of open
space uses within a project shall be determined during the subdivision approval
process.
      (3)   Written commitments.  Written commitments shall be made regarding
the uses permitted within the open space.
   (C)   Structures and parking areas. Structures and parking areas associated
open space uses shall not cover more than 20% of the lot. Parking areas shall
be screened from adjoining residential lots through low walls or landscaping
with evergreen or densely deciduous shrubs.
      (1)   Walls and fences. Walls and fences shall be made of stone, wrought
iron, or wood and should not exceed 3.5 feet in height.
      (2)   Hours of operation. The hours of operation for outdoor activities
of open space uses shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
      (3)   Open space types. Open space uses include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Equine facilities. A building located on the premises that is
used by residents of the Town for stabling, riding lessons, or training equine;
or an trail for which to ride equine.
         (b)   Private recreation facilities. A private recreation facility
includes, but is not limited to a course consisting of a large landscaped area
for playing golf. The facility may also include a golf club house, equipment
storage buildings, and other related structures.
         (c)   Playground. Playgrounds provide sunny and shaded play areas for
children as well as open shelter with benches for parents. Playgrounds may be
built within parks or squares or may stand alone within a residential block.
Playgrounds are recommended to be between 10,000 and 15,000 square feet in
size. Trees shall be planted along the perimeter of a playground at a spacing
of 15 to 40 feet on center depending upon the characteristics of the tree. A
minimum of 35% of the trees must be shade trees.
         (d)   Plaza. A plaza is an open area adjacent to, or part of, a civic
building or facility. Plazas function as gathering place and may incorporate a
variety of non-permanent activities such as vendors and display stands. Limited
parking is also permitted. Plazas shall be paved in brick or other type of
pavers or crushed stone. Plazas shall be level, stepped, or gently sloping
(less than 3% grade). The size of the plaza depends upon the building or
facility design. Sizes may range from 2,000 to 30,000 square feet. The
horizontal length or width of the plaza shall not be greater than three times
the height of the surrounding buildings. Plazas may be left unplanted. If
planted, the trees should form a frame to the plaza space or for the structure
which the plaza serves. Spacing shall be a minimum spacing of ten feet on
center to a maximum or 25 feet on center. A minimum of 35% of the trees must be
shade trees.
         (e)   Square. Squares are areas for passive recreational use. Squares
shall be bounded by streets on a minimum of three sides or 75% of their
perimeter. Squares are encouraged to be entirely bounded by streets. They may
range in size from 200 square feet to one acre. Squares may be entirely or
partially paved in crushed gravel, brick pavers, or similar material. Trees
shall be planted parallel to all rights-of-way at a minimum spacing of ten feet
on center to a maximum or 30 feet on center. If provided, internal plantings
shall be in geometric layouts. A minimum of 35% of the trees must be shade
trees.
         (f)   Parks and recreation facilities. Parks may be designed for
passive and/or active recreational use. Parks shall be bounded by streets on a
minimum 50% of their perimeter and range in size from one to three acres. The
maximum park size may exceed three acres if through design, the park creates a
central open space that services an entire neighborhood or group of
neighborhoods or incorporates physical features that are an asset to the
community (i.e. significant stands of trees, lakes, and the like) Trees shall
be planted parallel to all perimeter rights-of-way a minimum spacing of 15 feet
on center to a maximum or 30 feet on center. A minimum of 35% of the trees must
be shade trees.
         (g)   Greenway corridors. Greenway corridors are open spaces designed
to incorporate natural settings, such as creeks and significant stands of trees
within neighborhoods. Greenway corridors differ from parks or squares in that
their detailing is natural (i.e. informally planted) except along rights-of-way
and may contain irregular topography. Greenway corridors may be used for
certain active non-motorized recreational uses such as walking, jogging, or
bicycling. Trees shall not be planted in any rights-of-way. Interior areas
shall remain natural. A minimum of 35% of the trees must be shade trees.
   (D)   Open space ownership. Open space shall remain undivided and may be
owned and managed by a homeowners association, the town, or a recognized land
trust or conservancy.
      (1)   Dedication to the town.
         (a)   Dedication of open space. The town shall have the first and last
offer of dedication and the first and last offer for purchase of open space
(including easements) in the event that the open space land is to be conveyed.
Dedication shall take the form of fee simple ownership. The town may, but shall
not be required to, accept open space provided:
            1.   Such land is accessible to the residents of the town;
            2.   There is no cost of acquisition other than any costs
incidental to the transfer of ownership, such as title insurance; and
            3.   The town agrees to and has access to maintain such lands, or a
satisfactory maintenance agreement is reached between the developer, property
owner, and the town.
         (b)   Acceptance of dedication. Where the town accepts dedication of
open space that contains improvements, the town may require the posting of
financial security to ensure structural integrity of the improvements for a
term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. The
amount of financial security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of the
improvements and installation.
      (2)   Homeowners Association. The open space and associated facilities
may be held in common ownership by homeowners association. The association
shall be formed and operated under the following provisions:
         (a)   The developer shall provide the Plan Commission a description of
the association, including its bylaws and methods for maintaining the open
space.
         (b)   The association shall be organized by the developer and shall be
operated with a financial subsidy by the developer before the sale of any lots
within the development.
         (c)   The homeowners association shall be professionally managed.
         (d)   Membership in the association is automatic and mandatory for all
purchasers of homes therein and their successors.
         (e)   The association shall be responsible for maintenance of
insurance and taxes on open space, enforceable by liens placed by the town on
the association.
         (f)   The members of the association shall share equitably the costs
of maintaining and developing the open space.
         (g)   In the event of a proposed transfer of open space or the
assumption of maintenance of open space by the homeowners association to the
town, notice of such action shall be given to all property owners within the
development by the homeowners association.
         (h)   The association shall administer common facilities and properly
and continually maintain the open space.
         (i)   The homeowners association may lease open space land to any
other qualified person or corporation, for operation and maintenance of open
space, but such a lease agreement shall provide:
            1.   That the residents of the development shall at all times have
access to the open space contained therein.
            2.   That the open space to be leased shall be maintained for the
purposes set forth in this chapter; and
            3.   That the operation of open space facilities may be for the
benefit of the subdivision residents only, or may be open to the residents of
the town, at the election of the developer and/or homeowners association, as
the case may be.
            4.   The lease shall be subject to the approval of the homeowner's
association board and any transfer or assignment of the lease shall be further
subject to the approval of the homeowner's association board. Lease agreements
so entered upon shall be recorded with the County Recorder within 30 days of
their execution and a copy of the recorded lease shall be filed with the Plan
Commission.
      (3)   Transfer of easements to a private conservation organization. An
owner may transfer easements to a private, nonprofit organization, among whose
purpose it is to conserve open space and/or natural resources, provided that:
         (a)   The organization is a bona fide conservation organization with
perpetual existence;
         (b)   The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper
reverter or retransfer in the event that the organization becomes unwilling or
unable to continue carrying out its functions; and
         (c)   A maintenance agreement acceptable to the owner is entered into
by the developer and the organization.
   (E)   Open space maintenance standards.
      (1)   Responsibility. The owner of the open space shall be responsible
for raising all monies required for operations, maintenance, or physical
improvements to the open space through annual dues, special assessments, and
the like.
      (2)   Failure to maintain an open space. In the event that the
association or any successor organization shall, at any time after
establishment of a development containing open space, fails to maintain the
open space in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the development
plan, the town may serve written notice upon the owner of record, setting for
the manner in which the owner of record has failed to maintain the open space
in reasonable condition. Failure to adequately maintain the undivided open
space in reasonable order and condition constitutes a violation of this
chapter. The town is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal service or
by United States mail, to the owner or occupant, as the case may be, of any
violation, directing the owner to remedy the violation(s) within 20 days.
      (3)   Unpaid bills. Should any bill(s) for maintenance of open space by
the town be unpaid by August 1 of each year, a late fee of 15% shall be added
to such bills and a lien shall be filed against the premises in the same manner
as other municipal claims.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.052 STREET TREE STANDARDS.
   All street trees and plantings on or in the public right-of-way shall
require the approval of the Public Works Commissioner or his or her designee.
The town shall have control of all street trees, shrubs and other plantings now
or hereafter planted or allowed to grow within the right-of-way of a designated
street tree corridor, and shall have the power to maintain, remove, and replace
such trees, shrubs, and other plantings. Nothing contained within this section
shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the town, its officers or
employees, nor to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to
keep any tree, shrub or plant within a designated street tree corridor on his
or her property or under his or her control in such condition as to prevent it
from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any
roadway, alley or public right-of-way within the town.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.  The purpose of this section is to establish
policies, regulations, and standards necessary to ensure that the town will
realize benefits provided by street trees and plantings. These provisions are
intended to regulate the planting, maintenance, protection and removal of trees
and shrubs on or within the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Location. Right-of-way plantings shall only be permitted within street
tree corridors designated by the town. All street trees and plantings shall be
planted under the supervision of the Public Works Commissioner, or his or her
designee.
   (C)   Resolution of conflicts between street trees and infrastructure.  In
the event that sidewalks or curbs are damaged by tree roots, every effort shall
be made to correct the problem without removing or otherwise damaging the tree.
Corrective action shall only be carried out by the Public Works Commissioner,
or his or her designee. Corrective action may include alteration of sidewalk
and/or curb construction, or alteration or removal of the tree itself.
   (D)   Minimum spacing requirements. A minimum distance of 30 linear feet
shall be required between street trees located along the same side of the
street. All street trees shall be a minimum of three feet from an existing or
planned pedestrian way, unless otherwise permitted by the Public Works
Commissioner.
   (E)   Harming street trees prohibited.  It shall be a violation of the
provisions of this chapter for any person to abuse, destroy or mutilate any
street tree, shrub or planting within a street tree corridor designated by the
town. This includes, but is not limited to: attaching or placing a rope or wire
(other than that used to support a young or broken tree), chain, sign, poster,
handbill to or on any tree growing in a public place. Nor may anyone cause any
wire charged with electricity to be placed or attached to any such tree. Nor
may anyone cause or allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is
harmful to trees to come in contact with their roots, trunks or leaves. In no
instance, shall anyone other than the Public Works Commissioner, or his or her
designee, perform any arboricultural work on any plant material within the
public right-of-way without the express written permission of the Public Works
Commissioner, or his or her designee.
   (F)   Street tree specifications. Refer to §
154.119, of the McCordsville Zoning Ordinance, as amended from time to time.
   (G)   Prohibited street trees. Refer to §
154.119, of the McCordsville Zoning Ordinance, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.053 GEOMETRIC STREET STANDARDS.
   (A)   Geometric street standards. All dedicated and designated rights-of-way
shall conform to the following minimum standards. In the event that an area as
designated so as to require the incorporation of street trees, the alternate
street sections shall apply rather than the typical street sections.
   Table 1: Geometric Street Standards
Geometric Street Standards
Classification Minimum ROW Dimension (ft.) Minimum Road Width (ft/ No. of Lanes
                                           lanes)
Geometric Street Standards
Classification      Minimum ROW Dimension  Minimum Road Width (ft/ No. of Lanes
                    (ft.)                  lanes)
Arterial
   Major Arterial140                    68                      4
   Minor Arterial97                     56                      4
Collector
   Major Collecto75                     36                      2
   Minor Collecto65                     30                      2
Local
   Local Collecto54                     30                      2
   Local Street  54                     30                      2
*Local Collectors differ from Local Streets in that the pavement is thicker.
 
   Table 2: Cul-de-sac Terminus Diameter Requirements
Cul-de-sac Dimensions
Classification Minimum ROW Dimension (ft.) Radius (ft.)
Cul-de-sac Dimensions
Classification             Minimum ROW Dimension (ft.) Radius (ft.)
Residential*
   Local, 8 or fewer lot80                          50
   Local, more than 8 lo100                         60
Non-Residential
   All roads            120                         70
Other
   Crosswalks           10                          -
   Utility Easements    15                          -
*Number of lots at cul-de-sacs shall not include lots with property lines
abutting the intersecting street.
 
   Figure 1: Typical Major Arterial Roadway Cross Section
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-36.jpg]
   Figure 2: Typical Minor Arterial Roadway Cross Section
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-38.jpg]
   Figure 3: Typical Major Collector Roadway Cross Section
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-40.jpg]
   Figure 4: Typical Minor Collector Roadway Cross Section
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-42.jpg]
   Figure 5: Typical Local-Collector or Local Roadway Cross Section
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-44.jpg]
   (B)   Alternative geometric street standards.  Improvements proposed within
a designated street tree corridor shall be designed to the minimum
specifications as illustrated by the figures. In no instance shall a street
tree be planted or allowed to grow within the public right-of-way in an area
other than a designated tree corridor.
   Figure 6: Typical Alternative Major Arterial Roadway Cross Section with Open
Drainage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-46.jpg]
   Figure 7: Typical Alternate Major Arterial Roadway Cross Section with Curb/
Gutter, and Left Turn Lane
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-48.jpg]
   Figure 8: Typical Alternate Major Arterial Roadway Corridor with Curb and
Gutter, and Planted Median
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-50.jpg]
   Figure 9: Typical Alternate Minor Arterial Roadway Cross Section
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-52.jpg]
   Figure 10: Typical Alternate Major Collector Roadway Cross Section
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-54.jpg]
   Figure 11: Typical Alternate Minor Collector Roadway Cross Section
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-56.jpg]
   Figure 12: Typical Alternate Local-Collector or Local Roadway Cross Section
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-58.jpg]
   Figure 13: Proposed Parkway Cross Section
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-60.jpg]
   Figure 14: Proposed Alternate Parkway Cross Section
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-62.jpg]
   (C)   Intersection standards.
      (1)   Number of streets at an intersection. No more than two streets
shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the Plan
Commission.
      (2)   Spacing. Intersections of major streets shall be at least 800 feet
apart and any street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall
not be permitted. Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing
street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersection on
the opposite side of the street.
      (3)   Angle. All streets shall intersect at 90° whenever possible. In no
instance shall two streets intersect at less than 80° onto arterial or
collector or local streets.
      (4)   Horizontal curves. To insure adequate site distance, when the
street centerline deflects more than 10°, connections shall be made by
horizontal curves. The minimum centerline radius for local residential streets
shall be 150 feet and for all other streets shall be 400 feet.
      (5)   Tangent. A tangent of at least 100 feet shall be introduced between
reversed curves on local and collector streets.
      (6)   Visibility. Clear visibility, measured along the center line of the
street, shall be provided for at least 600 feet on all arterial streets, 400
feet on collector streets, and at least 200 feet on all local streets.
      (7)   Maximum vertical grade. The maximum vertical grade for all streets
shall not exceed 5%. The minimum vertical grade of all streets shall be 0.4%.
      (8)   Maximum cul-de-sac length. The maximum length cul-de-sac street
shall be 1,300 feet measured along the center line from the intersection at
origin through the center of the circle to the end of the right-of-way. The
origin of a cul-de-sac shall be defined as the centerline of the first street
intersected by the cul-de-sac. Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly
circular shape with dimensions consistent with Table 2, Cul-de-sac Terminus
Diameter Requirements, unless the Plan Commission approves an equally safe and
convenient form of space instead of the required turning circle.
      (9)   Acceleration and deceleration lanes.  At an intersection of a
subdivision local or collector street with an arterial or major collector
street or road, the Town Engineer on behalf of the Plan Commission may require
the subdivider to install improvements such as, but not limited to,
acceleration and deceleration and/or passing lanes along the arterial or
collector street.
      (10)   Turn lanes and traffic signals. At a nearby intersection of an
arterial or collector roadway, the Town Engineer on behalf of the Plan
Commission may require turn lanes and/or traffic signals.
      (11)   Arterial and collector improvements.  On arterial and collector
roadways adjacent to a proposed development or redevelopment, the Town Engineer
on behalf of the Plan Commission, may require the roadway to be improved to the
standard set by the typical cross section.
   (D)   Pedestrian route standards. Sidewalks at least five feet wide are
required on both sides of the street in all subdivisions, except where a
subdivision is adjacent to a collector (major or minor) or arterial (minor or
major) street, in which case a multi-use pathway is required on the north and
east sides of the road as specified and a sidewalk is required on the west and
south sides of the road as specified. On US 36, the multi-use pathway shall be
excluded and the road shall have sidewalks on both sides of the road. Sidewalk
and multi-use pathway connectivity shall be considered and exceptions granted
as consistent with connectivity and any plan established by the Parks Board.
All other standards for sidewalks shall conform to the Hancock County
Subdivision Control Ordinance. Additionally, any multi- use paths identified in
the Parks and Recreation Master Plan are hereby incorporated into this chapter
by reference. Furthermore, the town may increase/decrease the width of any
sidewalk or multi-use pathway at its discretion, and/or replace a sidewalk with
a multi-use path, or vice versa, without being considered non-compliant with
this chapter.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.054 STREET STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS, GENERAL.
   All streets shall be constructed in conformance with the McCordsville,
Indiana Town Standards. Improvements for streets shall conform to the rules,
regulations, and design specifications as set forth and established by the
McCordsville Public Works Committee as adopted.
   (A)   Number of access points.
      (1)   Subdivisions with fewer than five lots. In subdivisions with fewer
than five lots, shared driveways are encouraged to minimize access points along
existing roadways.
      (2)   Subdivisions with five or more lots. Subdivisions with more than
five lots shall construct a new road for access to the proposed lots rather
than creating driveway cuts for each proposed lot directly onto existing roads.
      (3)   Subdivisions with more than ten lots. Subdivisions with more than
ten lots shall provide more than one entrance into the subdivision for public
safety and improved circulation. Where it is not feasible to provide more than
one access point due to physical constraints or the size of the lot, at least
one easement shall be platted to an adjoining parcel that is likely to develop.
The easement shall provide future right-of-way for road extensions and utility
connections into the adjoining parcel.
   (B)   Connectivity of adjacent subdivisions. Adjacent subdivisions shall
connect to one another.
   (C)   Half streets, stub streets, and dead-end streets. Half streets
encouraged, especially where essential to the reasonable development of the
subdivision in conformity with other requirements of these regulations, and
where the Town Council finds it will be proper to require the dedication of the
other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is
adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be
planned within the tract. A temporarily dead-ended street shall be permitted in
any case in which a street is proposed to be and should logically be extended
but is not yet constructed. An adequate easement for a turnaround shall be
provided for any temporary dead-end street which extends 200 feet or more in
length. The easement shall be automatically vacated to abutting property owners
when the dead-ended street is legally extended.
   (D)   Street names.  No street names may be used which will duplicate or be
confused with the names of existing streets. All street names shall include a
directional element to position the street appropriately within the north-south
and east-west grid covering the county. The streets which are logical
extensions or continuations of, or obviously in alignment with any existing
streets, either constructed or appearing on any validly recorded plat, shall
bear the names of the existing streets.
   (E)   Proposed rights-of-way. Rights-of-way for proposed streets shall be
extended to the boundary lines of the proposed subdivision so that a connection
can be made to all adjacent properties unless the extension is not feasible
because of topography or other physical conditions, or unless, in the opinion
the Plan Commission, the extension is not necessary or desirable for the
coordination with existing streets or the most advantageous development of
adjacent tracts. In any event, no subdivision shall be designed so as to create
or perpetuate the land-locking of adjacent undeveloped land.
   (F)   Nonconforming streets abutting or within a proposed subdivision. In
subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform to the
minimum right-of-way dimensions as established by this chapter, the subdivider
shall dedicate additional width along either one or both sides of the streets
of inadequate width so as to bring them up to standards, provided the area to
be used for widening is owned by the subdivider or under his or her control.
   (G)   Restrictive covenants. The following provisions shall be required as a
provision of the restrictive covenants of all secondary plats to which they
apply:
      (1)   No fence, wall, hedge, tree or shrub planting which obstructs sight
lines and elevations between two and one-half and eight feet above the street
shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular
area formed by the street right-of-way lines and a line connecting points 40
feet from the intersection of the local or collector street lines, and 75 feet
from the intersection of arterial streets, or in the case of a rounded property
corner, from the intersection of the street right-of-way lines extended.
      (2)   The same sight line limitations shall apply to any lot within ten
feet of the intersection of a street right-of-way line with the edge of the
driveway pavement or alley line. No driveway shall be located within 70 feet of
the intersection of two street lines. No drainage structures shall be located
within driveway limits.
      (3)   No sump pump drains or other drains shall outlet onto the street.
      (4)   No trees shall be planted in the right-of-way.
      (5)   No vehicle shall be parked on a public street for more than 24
hours, unless otherwise permitted to do so.
      (6)   Snow removal for the subdivision internal streets shall be the
responsibility of the developer or homeowner's association.
      (7)   The maintenance of all irrigation or sprinkler systems installed in
the right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the individual homeowner or
developer. The town assumes no responsibility for maintenance or damage of any
kind.
      (8)   Each homeowner (lot owner) shall be responsible for constructing a
five-foot wide concrete sidewalk of 4,000 psi concrete, four inches thick,
sloped toward the street with expansion joints each 48 feet along the entire
street frontage of their respective lot. The sidewalk shall be constructed
prior to completing finish lot grading. The sidewalk shall be located one foot
inside the street right-of-way line, (not on the lot) and parallel to the
street right-of-way line.
      (9)   All public sidewalks shall comply with all Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA), as amended, requirements and in the situation of a
conflict between ADA rules, covenants or other regulations, the ADA shall
govern.
      (10)   Unless provided by the local municipality, the homeowner's
association shall negotiate with and procure trash pick-up and curbside
recycling services from one provider for all of the owners in the subdivision.
      (11)   The homeowner's association may employ a managing agent or a real
estate management company to assist with the management, administration,
operation, and maintenance of the subdivision.
   (H)   Pipe underdrains. Pipe underdrains will be used on both sides of the
street. The minimum slope of the pipe shall be 0.4%.
   (I)   Concrete. All concrete used for construction of streets, curbs and
gutters, sidewalks and other related items shall have a minimum compressive
strength of 4,000 psi with the appropriate air entrainment, which shall be
consistent with industry standards, and a slump not to exceed four inches.
Stone shall be used for coarse aggregate.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.055 BLOCK STANDARDS.
   (A)   Length and width.  Block length and width or acreage within bounding
streets shall be designed to accommodate the size of the lot required in the
area by this chapter and to provide for convenient access, circulation control,
and safety of street traffic. Blocks that are unreasonably large or small will
not be approved. The maximum block length shall be 1,200 feet. In the design of
blocks longer than 800 feet, the Commission may specify the provision of
pedestrian crosswalks near the center, or wherever most useful to facilitate
pedestrians' circulation to a school, park, recreation area, shopping center,
or other significant neighborhood destination.
   (B)   Residential blocks. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to
accommodate two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where reverse frontage
lots bordering a freeway, arterial street or flood plain are used.
   (C)   Block shape.  No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made,
but blocks must fit easily into the overall plan of the subdivision and their
design must evidence consideration of lot planning, traffic flow, and public
areas.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.056 LOT STANDARDS.
   Subdivision lots shall be adequate for the type of development and land use
proposed, and shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (A)   Lot lines. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles
or radial to the street line.
   (B)   Lot dimensions. The lot size, width, depth, shape, grade, location and
orientation, shall be in proper relation to street and block design to existing
and proposed topographical conditions.
   (C)   Depth to width ratio. The depth to width ratio of any single-family
residential lot shall not be greater than three to one respectively. The width
is to be measured where the lot contiguously abuts the right-of-way of a
street. This standard shall apply to platted lots only.
   (D)   Setbacks. The minimum yard size, or setback lines, required for each
lot shall be in conformance with the requirements of the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.
   (E)   Road frontage.  Every lot or parcel shall have sufficient frontage and
access to a public street designated, designed and improved in accordance with
the terms of this chapter.
   (F)   Corner lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently larger than interior
lots to allow maintenance of setback lines on both streets.
   (G)   Double-frontage lots. Double frontage lots are prohibited with the
exception of the need to buffer residential development from adverse influences
or to minimize the number of intersections with arterial streets and highways.
A no-access screen planting buffer strip of ten feet shall be provided along
the lot lines adjoining the adverse influence or arterial street.
   (H)   Lots abutting a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream.  Lots
abutting a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream shall have additional
minimum width or depth as required to provide an adequate building site and
afford the minimum usable area required for front, rear, and side yards.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.057 EASEMENTS.
   Adequate areas of suitable size and location shall be allocated for utility
easements. As a general principle, the easements shall be at least 15 feet in
width, shall provide reasonable continuity from block to block and shall be
located at rear lot lines and alongside and front lot lines when deemed
necessary. The Plan Commission may require the reservation of a utility
easement at least ten feet in width, along the front yard line and parallel to
the adjoining street right-of-way.
   (A)   Subdivisions traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or
stream. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse drainage way, channel
or stream, adequate areas for storm water or drainage easements shall be
allocated for the purpose of widening, deepening, sloping, improving or
protecting the watercourses in accordance with the requirements of the
McCordsville Public Works Commission or its agents, or the Hancock County
Drainage Board if the ditch is maintained by the Hancock County Surveyor.
   (B)   Placement. Whenever practicable, the subdivider shall be encouraged to
design for the placement of utility lines underground, following the required
standards and specifications established by each utility company. The location
of each underground utility system shall be shown by appropriate easement lines
on the proposed plat.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.058 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   It is recognized that the subdivider, in creating non-residential
subdivisions, faces unique problems of lot design not normally encountered in
residential subdivisions. For this reason, the initial emphasis of the Plan
Commission shall be upon street layout and block arrangement. Generally, the
procedural requirements shall be for the owner to follow the regular procedure
outlined in these regulations. However, the subdivider need show only two lots
along with the street and block layout. Then from time to time, as prospective
buyers or users express interest in lots sized to their required
specifications, the owner shall submit an amendment to the approved recorded
subdivision plat for consideration. Regular procedural requirements of the Plan
Commission following the receipt of a final subdivision plat shall then apply,
except those streets that have been built by following an approved set of plans
on the previously approved secondary plat shall not have to be rebuilt because
of the adoption of new criteria by the county. This shall also apply to storm
drainage facilities within the subdivision unless runoff characteristics have
been changed by the newly proposed improvements or unauthorized existing
improvements.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.059 SOIL LIMITATIONS AND NATURAL FEATURES.
   Land with soils which are designated unsuitable for urban development, such
as flood plains and very poorly drained organic (muck) soils, characterized by
seasonal high water table at or near the surface, ponding, or frequent to
occasional flooding, shall not be platted for urban development or used for
nonagricultural structures. The condition of soils, such as being unsuitable
for urban development, shall be determined by soil survey data furnished by the
U.S. Department of Agriculture and Soil Conservation assisting the County Soil
and Water Conservation District.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
IMPROVEMENTS AND INSTALLATIONS
§ 153.070 IMPROVEMENTS AND INSTALLATIONS.
   Subdivision improvements shall be designed, furnished and installed by the
subdivider in accordance with requirements of this chapter, state and county
road standards, and other requirements of the state and county, and whenever
the applicable requirements of any other governmental unit are higher or more
restrictive, those requirements shall control any application or plat approval.
No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the Plan Commission unless the
following improvements have been completed as herein specified and required, or
the subdivider provides a financial guarantee as specified by this chapter.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.071 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Submission of construction drawings prior to construction. After Plan
Commission approval of the primary plat and prior to any construction in the
subdivision, the subdivider shall submit copies of the construction drawings
for streets and drainage facilities to the town at least 45 days before
construction is to begin.
   (B)   supervision and construction. Supervision and inspection of
construction of all required improvements shall be under the direction of the
Town Council. All phases of construction are to be inspected on a regular
basis. Notice is to be given to the offices of the McCordsville Public Works
Commission or its agents and the Town Engineer 24 hours in advance.
   (C)   As-built plans required.  A set of mylar "as-built" or "record"
drawings shall be submitted to the McCordsville Public Works Commission and
Town Engineer after the subdivision street and drainage construction is
complete. In addition, as each portion or section of a subdivision or project
is platted, the developer and/or builder shall provide to the Town Manager, a
digital representation of all aspects of said portion or section a digital
format using the Auto-Cad software or such other format as may be agreed to by
the Town Manager after consultation with the town's consulting engineers.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.072 STREETS.
   Streets shall be installed in compliance with the following minimum
standards and requirements:
   (A)   Sub-base, base and pavement standards. The minimum standards for
street construction shall be in accordance with the Town Standards and the
Standard Specifications of the State Department of Highways, current edition,
and all applicable up-to-date revisions to each edition, or subsequent
superseding edition thereafter referred to as the "Standard Specifications,"
unless otherwise required by this chapter. Copies of the Standard
Specifications are on file in the office of the Town Engineer. The minimum
thickness of sub-base, base, and pavement shall be as follows:
      (1)   The preparation of sub-grade for street pavements shall be
according to the following provisions:
         (a)   Unless otherwise provided, the sub-grade shall be prepared per
the Town Standards. During sub-grade preparation and after its completion,
adequate drainage shall be provided at all times to prevent water from standing
on the sub-grade. Sub-grades shall be so constructed to have as nearly as
possible uniform density throughout. After compaction and final grading, the
sub-grade shall be finished with a roller weighing not less than ten tons. At
areas not accessible to the roller, the required compaction shall be obtained
with mechanical tamps or vibrators. All soft yielding or otherwise unsuitable
material which will not compact properly shall be removed. Any holes or
depressions resulting from the removal of the unsuitable material shall be
filled with satisfactory material and compacted so as to be in conformance with
the surrounding sub-grade surface. No placement of pavement shall be permitted
on un-inspected or unapproved sub-grade and at no time when the sub-grade is
frozen or muddy. No hauling shall be done nor equipment moved over the sub-
grade when it is in a condition that would cause undue distortion to result. If
these conditions are present the sub-grade shall be protected with adequate
plank runways, mats or other satisfactory means if hauling is done thereon;
         (b)   All utility excavations under the pavement shall be backfilled
with Grade B borrow and construction shall conform to Section 211 of the
Standard Specifications or compacted thoroughly by other means. The gradation
for "B" borrow will be limited to nominal sizes greater than ½ inch;
         (c)   All sub-grade for streets shall be proof-rolled per the Town
Engineer and tested by an independent testing laboratory, if so directed by the
Town Engineer, and the cost of this testing shall be paid for by the
subdivider.
      (2)   Rigid pavement specifications. The provisions for construction of
rigid pavement shall be as follows:
         (a)   For local and cul-de-sac streets, a six-inch plain concrete
pavement, as set out in division (3)(a) below shall be used, or four inches of
compacted #53 stone on four inches of #2 stone on lime stabilized sub-grade per
the Town Standards;
         (b)   For collector streets, an eight-inch reinforced concrete
pavement, or six inches of compacted #53 stone on four inches of #2 stone on
lime stabilized sub-grade per the Town Standards.
      (3)   Rigid pavement construction. The provisions for construction of
rigid (plain concrete) pavement construction shall be as follows:
         (a)   At the time of placement of the concrete, the sub-grade shall be
properly dampened just prior to the placement where it has become dry, where
the surface has been removed by final grading, or for any other reason it has
not been properly dampened. Concrete pavement shall be in accordance with
Section 500 of the Standard Specifications or any subsequent amendments
thereto. Concrete shall be finished by machine or vibratory screed except on
widened portions, intersections or other places where hand-finishing will be
permitted. Weakened plane or dummy, transverse, or contraction joints shall be
placed not to exceed 20-foot spacing. Closer spacing to average 15 feet will be
encouraged. Transverse contraction joints may be of formed or sawed dummy
groove, ribbon or pre-molded strip type, and shall be 1/4 the pavement depth.
When transverse joints are to be formed by sawing, care must be taken to
prevent the formation of cracks due to contraction of the slab. All transverse
joints shall be sawed within eight hours after the placing of the concrete.
Expansion joints, with 1/2-inch preformed joint filler, shall be placed at
every catch basin and manhole in line of the pavement. The location of manholes
and the like in the pavement shall determine the exact location of the joints.
All joints shall extend through curbs to the full width of the pavement;
         (b)   Whenever the width between forms of the pavement under
construction is greater than 13 feet, longitudinal joints shall be constructed
so as to divide the pavement into strips not to exceed 13 feet each. This shall
be accomplished by a deformed key plate installed prior to the depositing of
the concrete;
         (c)   The method of curing shall be a white pigmented curing compound
type 2, complying with AASHTO M 148, and shall be applied in one or two
applications as directed by the Town Engineer. When applied in two
applications, the second shall follow the first within 30 minutes.
      (4)   Timing for surface. A surface may be placed at a later time, but
not to exceed either of the following:
         (a)   When 80% of the subdivision lots have homes built on them; or
         (b)   A three-year period, starting from the date of placing the
asphalt intermediate. A financial guarantee in accordance with this chapter
shall be posted to insure the performance of the placing of the asphalt
surface. If the above requirements are not met, then the McCordsville Town
Council or its agents shall not allow issuance of any building permits until
the asphalt surface is placed and accepted.
      (5)   Sampling and testing. All sampling and testing shall be paid by the
contractor.
   (B)   Special requirements for non-residential subdivisions. The special
requirements for non-residential subdivisions are where streets are designed to
serve non-residential subdivisions or sites, or other developments requiring
service by many heavy vehicles, the minimum pavement thickness will be that for
a collector street. The asphalt mixture type for industrial and commercial
subdivisions shall be Type C.
   (C)   Temporary gravel construction. Temporary gravel construction shall be
required at the entrance to a construction site to prevent sediment from being
tracked from a site onto a public or private roadway.
   (D)   Concrete curbs and gutters required. With the exception of alleys,
concrete curbs and gutters shall be required for all streets. A slightly
different curb and gutter configuration may be permitted at the discretion of
the Town Council. When curbs and gutters are built in conjunction with concrete
pavement, expansion and contraction joints should be placed at the same
locations as in the pavement slab, and the curb and gutter shall be tied to the
pavement by 1/2-inch round deformed bars at about three-foot intervals.
Otherwise concrete curb and gutter expansion joints should be placed at the
ends of all returns and at intervals not to exceed 100 feet. Contraction joints
shall be installed at 20-foot spacing. The curb and gutter shall be cured by
keeping the concrete moist for three days, or cured by the use of a white
membrane-forming material.
   (E)   Sidewalks. All streets shall have sidewalks on both sides of the
street with the exception of sides of street where a multi-use path is
constructed or otherwise required. Industrial parks may also be exempt from
this provision. Where required, the sidewalk shall extend along the entire
street frontage of each respective lot and shall be constructed prior to
completing finish lot grading. The sidewalk shall be located one foot inside
the street right-of-way line (not on the lot), and parallel to the street
right-of-way line. All sidewalk design and construction shall comply with the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), as amended. The lot owner is responsible
for the repair and maintenance of the sidewalk for the initial one year from
completion of residence. Thereafter, the homeowner's association shall be
responsible for maintenance and upkeep of the sidewalk except for any damage
done by the adjoining lot owner.
   (F)   Drainage swales.  No new subdivision street shall have drainage swales
unless specifically allowed by an approved drainage plan. Swales shall be
placed along existing county roads as follows:
      (1)   Twenty-four-foot long corrugated (non-spiraled) pipe or plastic
pipe shall be placed at all driveways and sized according to the calculated
amount of storm water flow, but not less than 12 inches in diameter. The
minimum cover over any culvert will be 12 inches.
      (2)   Culverts shall be placed or extended under the roadway where
necessary. The size of the culvert shall be according to the calculated amount
of storm water flow, but not less than 12 inches in diameter. All culverts
shall extend from right-of-way to right-of-way unless otherwise permitted by
the Town Council. All culvert pipe that is banded together shall receive a
minimum of a 12-inch band with eight-inch long bolts. All culverts shall have
applicable end sections, unless waived by the Town Council.
      (3)   Swales having a grade of 3%, 4% or 5% shall have a gutter
consisting of sod, or if in excess of 5%, shall have a gutter consisting of
concrete.
   (G)   Sign installation. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to
provide and install all required signs including street signs, stop signs,
warning signs, speed limits and any other regulatory signs as may be deemed
necessary by the Town Council. All sign materials and installation procedures
shall meet the requirements of the latest edition of the State Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices and the Town Standards. The location and type
of all signs in a subdivision shall be identified in construction drawings and
presented to the Town Engineer for approval. The subdivider shall also prepare
and submit the necessary ordinance(s) to permit installation of all regulatory
signs for approval by the Town Council.
   (H)   Inspection. The Town Engineer shall collect, in advance of the first
inspection, a fee to inspect all matters required by this section regarding the
installation of streets. The inspection shall include storm sewers,
underdrains, road sub-grade, curbs, stone grade, asphalt, final inspection and
inspection after five years. Inspection fees, including fees for subsequent
inspections, shall be as prescribed by the Town of McCordsville Official Fee
Schedule.
   (I)   Street lights. In developments having a density equal to or greater
than 0.5 units per acre the developer shall install or have installed with the
street construction, street lights adequate to light all road intersections,
curves, cul-de-sacs and entrances in the development in compliance with the
following standards:
      (1)   The street light spacing shall be in compliance with the following
minimum foot candle requirements. Street lights in general shall be on property
lines and staggered on opposite sides of the street.
         (a)   Residential entrances: 1.2.
         (b)   Residential streets: 0.5.
         (c)   Public or private parking lots: 1.2.
         (d)   Park areas with playgrounds or walking/biking trails: 0.5.
      (2)   All lighting components shall be of utility quality columns and
fixtures with photovoltaic devices conforming to ANSI standard C136.10.
Developments are encouraged to integrate decorative designs where practical.
      (3)   The luminary fixture shall be environmentally friendly, have a 150
watt high-pressure sodium lam and have a globe made of acrylic or non-yellowing
material excluding glass and must have a canopy.
      (4)   All equipment, including but not limited to the light column,
luminaire and additional fixtures shall remain the property of the developer or
homeowner's association who shall be responsible for all the maintenance of the
equipment as well as all operational cost of the equipment.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.073 DRAINAGE AND SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   In order to insure the maintenance of a properly designed and installed
drainage system, the following divisions shall be required as a provision of
the restrictive covenants of all secondary plats and shall be included in all
deeds written relative to the plats. The proposed owner shall sign and the
signed copy of this covenant shall be filed with the Town Engineer.
   (A)   Maintenance of swales and ditches required. Drainage swales, or
ditches, along dedicated roadways and within the right-of-way, or on dedicated
drainage easements, are not to be altered, dug out, filled in, tiled, or
otherwise changed without the written permission of the Public Works
Commission. Property owners must maintain these swales as sodded grassways or
other non-eroding surfaces. Water from roofs or parking areas must be contained
on the property long enough so that the drainage swales or ditches will not be
damaged by the water. Driveways may be constructed over these swales or ditches
only when appropriate sized culverts are installed as set out in this chapter.
   (B)   Altering, changing, or damaging drainage swale prohibited. Any
property owner altering, changing, or damaging these drainage swales or ditches
will be held responsible for the action and will be given ten days notice by
registered mail to repair the damage, after which time, if no action is taken,
the Public Works Commission will cause the repairs to be accomplished, and the
bill for the repairs will be sent to the affected property owner for immediate
payment.
   (C)   The locations of the fire hydrants and valves shall be approved by the
Fire Marshall.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.074 WATER SYSTEM.
   A water distribution system shall be designed and constructed by the
subdivider to provide adequate water service for all lots in the proposed
subdivision. A subdivision plat shall not be considered for final approval
until improvement plans for a water system by one of the following methods have
been submitted:
   (A)   A permanent water distribution system including all pipes, fire
hydrants, valves, and other appurtenances shall be provided, and the
distribution system shall be connected with an approved public or private water
system in accordance with the satisfactory plans and specifications therefore.
   (B)   If the area proposed to be platted is not so located with regard to an
adequate public or group water supply system, before any structure on any lot
therein is occupied, an individual water supply system for the lot shall be
constructed and installed in accordance with the satisfactory plans and
specifications therefore. In no case will any part of the private water system
be located closer than 15 feet to a property line or within 50 feet of a
private sewage disposal system.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.075 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   Monuments and markers shall be installed by the subdivider of any
subdivision of land. Where monuments as, defined below, cannot readily be set,
survey points must be marked by a drill hole, cut cross, notch, railroad spike,
or other similar permanent mark and referenced to any nearby objects such as
building foundations, concrete head walls and the like.
   (A)   Permanent markers.  Permanent monuments and markers shall be
consistent with the Minimum Standards for Competent Practice of Land Surveying
administered by the Indiana State Board of Registration for Land Surveyors, as
provided in 865 I.A.C. 1-12.
      (1)   Timing of installation. All monuments and markers shall be
installed within 30 days after acceptance of the streets by the Town Council,
or installation of the asphalt surface, whichever occurs last.
      (2)   Dimensions. Permanent monuments and markers set shall be 5/8-inch
diameter or larger iron or steel rebar, copper welds, Harrison monuments or
pipes weighing a minimum of one pound per foot and at least 30 inches in
length.
      (3)   Location. The markers shall be installed at:
         (a)   The perimeter plat corners;
         (b)   The beginning and end of the center lines of all streets;
         (c)   The center line intersections of all streets and cul-de-sacs;
         (d)   The radius point of cul-de-sac;
         (e)   The center line point of curvature and point of tangency of all
street curves;
         (f)   The intersection of all street and alley right-of-way lines;
         (g)   All the points where lot lines intersect street or alley right-
of-way lines;
         (h)   All angles formed by the intersection of lot lines;
         (i)   All perimeter lot corners; and
         (j)   All points required to delineate the location or extent of
reservations, easements, or dedications not otherwise defined.
   (B)   Other monuments. Other monuments may be used if they are made of
material of similar durability, which includes an element that can be found by
a device capable of detecting ferrous or magnetic objects. All monuments,
except those set in streets, shall have a substantial plastic or metal cap
permanently affixed thereto showing the registered land surveyor's professional
license number and/or the name or identification number of the land surveying
firm or government agency.
   (C)   Existing benchmarks, monuments or triangulation stations. All U.S.,
state, county, or other official benchmarks, monuments, or triangulation
stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise position.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.076 UTILITIES ADJACENT TO RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   No utilities shall be installed adjacent to and parallel with a right-of-way
within an area closer than three feet to the curb of any street.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.077 EROSION CONTROL.
   The subdivider shall provide for erosion control per the McCordsville
Stormwater Ordinances and consistent with the General Permit for Construction
Activity administered by the State Department of Environmental Management, as
provided for in 327 I.A.C. 15-5, using the specifications in the Indiana
Handbook for Erosion Control in Developing Areas. The erosion control plan must
be submitted to the County Soil and Water Conservation District.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.078 DRY HYDRANTS.
   The McCordsville Advisory Plan Commission shall require installation of dry
hydrants in subdivisions with detention facilities. The hydrants shall be
installed consistent with standards maintained by the County Soil and Water
Conservation District.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.079 CULVERTS AND PRIVATE DRIVES.
   Culverts or bridges installed as part of private drives shall be of adequate
design to support firefighting apparatus.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
§ 153.090 INTENT.
   The McCordsville Advisory Plan Commission is hereby authorized and empowered
to grant modifications and exceptions to the terms of this chapter as will not
be contrary to the public interest, where owning to special conditions, fully
demonstrated on the basis of the facts presented, strict compliance with
specific provisions of the chapter will result in extreme practical
difficulties or undue misuse of property.
   (A)   In the exercise of this authorization the Plan Commission shall grant
a modification or exception only upon the determination that:
      (1)   The grant will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and
general welfare of the county;
      (2)   The grant will not adversely affect the reasonable development of
adjacent property;
      (3)   The grant is justified because of topographic or other special
conditions unique to the property involved, in contradistinction to mere
inconvenience or financial disadvantage; and
      (4)   The grant is consistent with the objectives of this chapter and
will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.
   (B)   A written application for modifications or exceptions shall be
submitted by the subdivider indicating the specific section of this chapter
under which the modifications or exception is sought and stating the grounds on
which it is requested.
   (C)   After the application has been docketed for hearing, proper
publication of notice has been published, and due consideration has been given,
the Plan Commission shall render a decision which shall be:
      (1)   Recorded in the minutes of the Plan Commission, which minutes shall
include the reasoning on which the modification or exception was approved or
disapproved;
      (2)   Transmitted to the subdivider and applicable governmental units in
accordance with the terms of this chapter;
      (3)   Attached with conditions as will, in the Plan Commission's
judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the requirements, standards,
and specifications of this chapter so modified or excepted; and
      (4)   Attached with any covenants or other legal provisions as will, in
the Plan Commission's judgment, assure general conformity to and achievement of
the subdivision plan.
   (D)   Before any modification or exception shall be granted, the Plan
Commission shall determine that satisfactory provision and arrangement has been
made concerning the following, where applicable:
      (1)   Ingress and egress to the property and proposed structures thereon
with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety, convenience, and
access in case of fire or catastrophe;
      (2)   Automotive and pedestrian traffic flow with reference to adequacy,
circulation ability and function within the broader planning unit;
      (3)   Off-street and on-street parking and loading areas with reference
to the needs of adjoining land use;
      (4)   Utilities, with reference to locations, availability and
compatibility;
      (5)   Clear identification of property for land records;
      (6)   Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions and
character of materials.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.100 AMENDMENT.
   In accordance with state statutes, the Town Council may introduce and
consider amendments to this chapter as proposed by the Council, the Plan
Commission, or by a citizen's petition. Any proposed amendment shall be
referred to the Plan Commission for public hearing, consideration, and report
before any final action is taken by the Town Council.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.101 ENFORCEMENT.
   No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the County
Recorder's office or have any validity until it shall have been approved in the
manner prescribed by this chapter.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.102 RECORDING OF PLATS.
   All plats of a subdivision, after the same have been submitted and approved,
as provided in this chapter, shall be copied upon a book of plats of the county
and shall be filed and kept by the county among the county records.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.103 EFFECT.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter shall not be repealed by the passage of this chapter except where
the repeal is specifically designated by ordinance, but the ordinance with the
more restrictive applicable provisions shall be the ordinance that applies.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.104 APPEAL.
   Any person feeling aggrieved at any action of the Plan Commission or
Commission Staff, or lack of action of the Plan Commission or Commission staff,
upon a proposed plat or replat, may apply in writing to the Plan Commission,
prior to the next regular meeting, for modification of the action complained
of, or lack of action, on the proposed plat or replat. The application shall be
considered by the Plan Commission at a time and in a manner as it may
determine, but within 90 days following the regular meeting.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation, and upon conviction, shall be fined.
(Ord. 121410A, passed 1-11-2011)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Title
   
154.002   Purpose and authority
   
154.003   Application and interpretation
   
154.004   Adoption and amendments
   
154.005   Definitions
Administration
   
154.020   Summary of authority
   
154.021   General administration
   
154.022   Administrative bodies and officials
   
154.023   Board of Zoning Appeals
   
154.024   Technical Review Committee
   
154.025   Architectural Review Committee
Zoning Districts
   
154.040   Official Zoning Map
   
154.041   Establishment of zoning district classifications
Specific Use Standards
   
154.060   Accessory use and structure standards, general
   
154.061   Temporary use and structure standards, general
   
154.062   Accessory dwelling unit standards
   
154.063   Daycare home standards
   
154.064   Amateur radio and television and radio receiver antennas
   
154.065   Park and recreation facility accessory uses and structures
   
154.066   Multi-family dwelling accessory uses and structures
   
154.067   Drive-thru establishments
   
154.068   Twenty-four hour business establishments
   
154.069   Fire arm/gun sales
   
154.070   Sexually oriented uses
   
154.071   Facilities for the mentally ill and developmentally disabled
   
154.072   Multi-family residential subdivisions
   
154.073   Home occupation standards
   
154.074   Telecommunications facility standards
   
154.075   Industrial operation standards
   
154.076   Land use requirements
   
154.077   Farm animals
   
154.078   Outdoor dining
   
154.079   Property identification
   
154.080   Public art
Overlay Districts
   
154.090   Establishment and general standards
   
154.091   Highway corridor overlay
   
154.092   Airport overlay
   
154.093   Town center overlay
   
154.094   Mt. Comfort Road and Broadway corridor overlay (MCR-OL)
Development Standards
   
154.110   Introduction and application
   
154.111   Bulk use standards
   
154.112   Height standards
   
154.113   Architectural design standards
   
154.114   Parking standards
   
154.115   Loading standards
   
154.116   Entrance/drive standards
   
154.117   Sight visibility standards
   
154.118   Fence and wall standards
   
154.119   Landscaping standards
   
154.120   Buffering and screening standards
   
154.121   Exterior lighting standards
Sign Standards
   
154.140   Sign standards
   
154.141   Prohibited signs
   
154.142   Exempt signs
   
154.143   General sign standards
   
154.144   Sign design and construction requirements, general
   
154.145   Temporary signs
   
154.146   Signs for ground floor uses
   
154.147   Signs for upper-floor uses
   
154.148   Sign design and construction requirements, by type
Planned Unit Developments
   
154.160   Purpose, intent, uses, and standards
   
154.161   General application requirements
   
154.162   Planned unit development ordinance
   
154.163   Development plan
   
154.164   Written commitments
   
154.165   Covenants
   
154.166   Modifications
   
154.167   Expiration, abandonment, and extensions
Nonconforming Situations
   
154.180   Nonconforming situations
   
154.181   Nonconforming status
   
154.182   Nonconforming lots of record
   
154.183   Nonconforming structures
   
154.184   Nonconforming site features
   
154.185   Nonconforming uses
   
154.186   Nonconforming signs
Procedure and Permits
   
154.200   Petition and permit application types
   
154.201   Notice of public hearing
   
154.202   Variance
   
154.203   Special exception
   
154.204   Appeal process and procedures
   
154.205   Zoning Map amendment (rezoning)
   
154.206   Improvement location permit
   
154.207   Temporary use permit
   
154.208   Development plan review
   
154.209   Written commitments
   
154.210   Certificate of occupancy
   
154.211   Food truck permits
Enforcement and Penalties
   
154.225   General Provisions
   
154.226   Construction process violations
   
154.227   Immediate public risk violations
   
154.228   Violation procedures
   
Appendix A: Official Schedule of Uses
   
Appendix B: Bulk Use Standards Matrix
   
Appendix C: Lighting Drawings
   
Appendix D: Official Parking Schedule
   
Appendix E: Sign Standards Matrix
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall hereafter be known and cited as the McCordsville,
Indiana Zoning Ordinance ("Ordinance").
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.002 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the
use and development of land within the jurisdiction of the Town of McCordsville
Advisory Plan Commission. The intent of this chapter is to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the citizens of McCordsville, Indiana. More
specifically, this chapter is intended to:
      (1)   Secure adequate light, air, and convenience of access;
      (2)   Provide safety from fire, flood, and other dangers;
      (3)   Plan for the future development and redevelopment of the town to
the end that:
         (a)   The community grows with adequate public ways, utilities,
health, education, and recreation facilities;
         (b)   The needs of agriculture, industry and business be recognized in
future growth;
         (c)   Residential areas provide healthful surroundings for family
life;
         (d)   The growth of the community is commensurate with and promotes
the efficient and economical use of public funds.
   (B)   Authority. This chapter is hereby adopted by the town pursuant to its
authority under the laws of the State of Indiana, I.C. 36-7-4 et seq. Whenever
codes cited in this chapter refer to Indiana Code where the state statute has
been amended or superseded, this chapter shall be deemed amended in reference
to the new or revised Indiana Code.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.003 APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Jurisdiction.  The provisions, standards and regulations of this
chapter shall apply to all land within the Town of McCordsville, Indiana.
   (B)   Applicability. No structure shall be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, altered, converted, or enlarged; nor shall any structure
or land be used or existing use be expanded, except in full compliance with all
of the provisions of this chapter and after the lawful issuance of all permits
and certificates required by this chapter. This chapter, unless otherwise
noted, shall apply to all public, private, and institutional development with
the following exceptions:
      (1)   Renovations of buildings in existence as of the effective date of
this chapter; and
      (2)   All improvement location permits, variances, special exceptions,
planned unit developments, and plats approved prior to the effective date of
this chapter.
   (C)   Minimum requirements. The provisions of this chapter are designed to
encourage the establishment and maintenance of reasonable community standards
for the physical environment. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
people at large.
   (D)   Conflicting provisions.
      (1)   Zoning ordinance provisions. If two or more provisions within this
chapter conflict, or are otherwise inconsistent with one another, then the
provision which is most restrictive, or imposes higher standards, shall govern.
      (2)   Public provisions.  These regulations are not intended to interfere
with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or
other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these
regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of
law, those provisions which are more restrictive or impose higher standards
shall govern.
      (3)   Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate
any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided
that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or regulations than any easement, covenant, or other private
agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
Where the provisions of the easement, covenant, or private agreement or
restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or impose higher
standards than the requirements of these regulations or the determinations of
the Town Council, Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals as appropriate in
enforcing these regulations, and the private provisions are not inconsistent
with these regulations or determinations hereunder, then the private provisions
shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations, or the determinations
made there under. Private provisions shall only be enforced privately.
   (E)   Severability. If any part or provision of these regulations or
application thereof to any property owner(s) or circumstances is judged invalid
by any court of competent jurisdiction, the judgment having been rendered shall
not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the
application thereof to other property owner(s) or circumstances. The Town
Council hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these
regulations even without any part, provision or application. Failure to enforce
any portion of this code on any particular occasion shall not be deemed a
waiver of any other or the same or similar provision enforced on any other
occasion.
   (F)   Saving provision.  Except as expressly provided for herein, this
chapter shall not be construed as either:
      (1)   Abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any
preexisting ordinance;
      (2)   Discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing
or about to accrue;
      (3)   Affecting the liability of any property owner(s), firm, or
corporation;
      (4)   Waiving any right of a participating jurisdiction under any section
or provision existing at the time of the effective date of this chapter; or
      (5)   Vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any property owner(s),
firm, or corporation, by lawful action of the participating jurisdictions or
administrative bodies thereof.
   (G)   Exclusion. Nothing in this chapter or in any rules, regulations or
orders issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to restrict or regulate
or to authorize any unit of government, Town Council, Plan Commission or Board
of Zoning Appeals now or hereafter established, to restrict or regulate the
exercise of the power of eminent domain by the state or by any state agency, or
the use of property owned or occupied by the state or any state agency.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.004 ADOPTION AND AMENDMENTS.
   For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety, and general
welfare, the Town Council, on recommendation of the Plan Commission, may from
time to time amend the text of this chapter and/or the Zoning Map incorporated
by reference herein. Public hearings on all proposed amendments shall, at a
minimum, be held in the manner prescribed by state statute.
   (A)   Amendments. The following process and decision criteria shall apply to
the amendment of this chapter:
      (1)   Process. In accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-602, as amended from time
to time, the participating legislative body may amend or partially repeal the
text of this chapter or they may amend the Zoning Map of this chapter as
follows:
         (a)   Text amendments. The Town Council or the Plan Commission may
initiate a proposal to amend or partially repeal the text of this chapter
according to the procedures set forth in I.C. 36-7-4-602(b) and the adopted
Plan Commission Rules and Procedures.
         (b)   Map amendment (rezoning). The Town Council, the Plan Commission,
or at least 51% of the affected property owners may initiate an application to
change the Zoning Map according to the procedures of I.C. 36-7-4-602(c), the
adopted Plan Commission Rules and Procedures, and the requirements of §§
154.020 through
154.025, Administration, of this chapter.
      (2)   Decision criteria. In its review of a text or map amendment
proposal, the Plan Commission and Town Council shall consider the following,
which are consistent with I.C. 36-7-4-603:
         (a)   The most recently adopted McCordsville Comprehensive Plan;
         (b)   Current conditions and the character of the structures and uses
in each district;
         (c)   The most desirable use for which the land in each district is
adapted;
         (d)   The conservation of property values throughout the Plan
Commission's jurisdiction; and
         (e)   Responsible development and growth.
   (B)   Effective date. This chapter shall become effective on the date in
which it is adopted by the Town Council.
   (C)   Repealer. The Zoning Ordinance of Hancock County, Indiana adopted as
Ordinance 2007-1B and all amendments thereto, and it's associated Zoning Map
and any revisions to either are hereby repealed. This McCordsville, Indiana
Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map shall replace the repealed ordinance and map.
In addition, Ordinance No. 071007, an ordinance: (1) limiting drive-thru
service establishments as a special exception in the Town of McCordsville; (2)
limiting pylon signs and other non-monument types of signs as a special
exception in the Town of McCordsville; (3) defining "twenty-four hour
business"; and (4) amending Title XV, Chapter 156, of the Hancock County Code,
adopted by the Town of McCordsville on July 10, 2007 is hereby repealed.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT. To intentionally stop the use or development of a property for
a continuous period of time.
   ABUTTING.  Having a common border, including being separated from such a
common border by a right-of-way, street, alley, easement, body of water, or
other feature. In some cases, where specified by this chapter, abutting also
includes lots or other features within a specific vicinity.
   ACCESS POINT. A driveway or other means of physical connection for the
movement of vehicles or persons between a property and an adjacent property or
street.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that is subordinate to a primary structure
in area, extent, and/or purpose; contributes to the comfort, convenience, or
necessity of occupants of the primary structure; does not alter or change the
character of the property; and is located on the same lot as the primary
structure.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is secondary to a primary use in area, extent,
and/or purpose; contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of
occupants of the primary use; does not alter or change the character of the
property; and is located on the same lot as the primary use.
   ACRE. A land area equal to 43,560 square feet.
   ACRE, GROSS. The total area within a parcel of land.
   ACRE, NET.  The usable or cultivatable portion of an acre of land; a
remaining area expressed in acres after the dedication of land for: public
rights-of-way; the reservation of common areas such as tennis courts, swimming
pools, clubhouses, and the like; or the preservation of open space, on which
housing or commercial structures may be built.
   ACT. The Indiana Tall Structure Act I.C. 8-21-10, as amended from time to
time.
   ADDITION. Any construction that increases the size of a structure in terms
of site coverage, floor area, volume, and/or height.
   ADDRESS. The number or other designation assigned to a housing unit,
business establishment, other structure, or lot for the purposes of mail
delivery, emergency services, and general identification.
   ADJACENT. See ABUTTING.
   ADJOINING. See ABUTTING.
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. The individual or group responsible for the
implementation and enforcement of this chapter.
   ADMINISTRATIVE/PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. An office establishment primarily
engaged in overall management and general supervisory functions, such as
executive, personnel, finance, legal, and sales activities.
   ADULT USES.  See SEXUAL ORIENTED BUSINESS.
   AGRICULTURAL CROP PRODUCTION. An operation which consists of the following
uses, individually or in combination: the production of grain or livestock;
stables; forest or tree production; pasture; setting aside land in a government
set-aside reserve program; a farmstead; uses accessory to agricultural
operations on the site; or, uses accessory to agricultural operations in the
area. The phrase AGRICULTURAL CROP PRODUCTION includes the phrase TREE FARM,
and may include the phrase ROADSIDE STAND.
   AGRICULTURAL FARM IMPLEMENT SALES OR SERVICE. An operation that focuses on
the sale or service of farm implements to the public wherein the primary use is
engaged in the sale or rental of large farm implements, farm tools, machinery,
grain, tack, animal care products and farm supplies. The phrase FARM IMPLEMENT
SALES AND SERVICE also includes food sales and farm machinery repair services
that are incidental to a primary use whether located on-site if grown on-site
or off-site if grown off-site.
   AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY, CAFO. The term concentrated animal feeding operation
(CAFO) as defined by the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) under the USEPA Clean Water Act (CWA) and administered by the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) as sources of point sources of
pollution and subject to permit requirements under 327 I.A.C. 15-15, as amended
from time to time.
   AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY, CFO. The term confined feeding operation (CFO) shall
be as defined in I.C. 13-11-2-40, as amended from time to time.
   AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS SALES, DISTRIBUTION, AND STORAGE.  A primary use
engaged in the sale or rental of farm tools and equipment, grain, tack, animal
care products, and farm supplies. This excludes the sale of large farm
implements, such as tractor and combines, but does include food sales and farm
machinery repair services that are incidental to the primary use.
   AGRICULTURE. Farming, including dairying, pasturage, apiculture,
aquaculture, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, forestry and
animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary incidental uses, all of which
are directly related to the production of food. The operation of any incidental
uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities.
Agriculture shall not include stock yards, the commercial feeding of garbage or
offal to swine or other animals, or the raising of animals for medical tests or
other experiments.
   AGRICULTURE STRUCTURE. A structure located on a farm and designed and
constructed to house farm implements, livestock, hay, grain, fruit, and/or
other agricultural products, supplies, and equipment used by the operators of
the farm. An agriculture structure shall not include dwellings or structures
used for the processing, treating, or packaging of agricultural products, or by
the public.
   AIRPORT. Any area of land designed and used for the landing and take-off of
aircraft, including all necessary facilities for the housing and maintenance of
aircraft.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION, ESTABLISHED. The established elevation of the highest
point on the landing area, which is 862 feet above mean sea level (MSL).
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure, tree, object, or use of land which penetrates
the airspace reserved herein for passage of aircraft or is otherwise hazardous
to the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport.
   AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT. The point established as the approximate geographic
center of the airport landing area.
   AIRPORT ZONING MAP. The map showing height restriction zones for the
airport. The Airport Zoning Map was adopted with the height ordinance for
property in the vicinity the Airport, also known as Ordinance 1975-10D, and is
made part of this section and the Official Zoning Map by reference.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way, whether improved or not, other than a street,
road, crosswalk, or easement, that provides secondary access for the abutting
property.
   ALTERATION. Any change, addition, or modification in construction or use of
an existing structure or property.
   AMATEUR RADIO TOWER. A free-standing or building-mounted structure,
including any base, tower or pole, antenna and appurtenances, intended for
airway communication purposes by a person holding a valid amateur radio license
from the Federal Communications Commission.
   AMEND OR AMENDMENT. Any repeal, modification, or addition to a regulation;
or any new regulation.
   AMPHITHEATER. An open-air venue for spectator sports, concerts, rallies, and
theatrical performances.
   ANIMAL. Any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, excluding human
beings.
   ANIMAL CLINIC OR HOSPITAL.  An establishment for the treatment, care,
observation or treatment of small domestic animals. This facility may have
indoor or outdoor kennels.
   ANIMAL GROOMING FACILITY. An establishment primarily engaged in providing
pet care services, such as grooming and training, but does not include
veterinary care or overnight boarding.
   ANIMAL KENNEL. A facility whereby five or more dogs, cats, or other domestic
animals over the age of four months are kept, raised, cared for, trained, sold,
bred, boarded, shown, treated, or groomed either for commercial or non-
commercial purposes. The phrase ANIMAL KENNEL may include DOGGY DAYCARE
FACILITIES.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. A facility used to care for and house lost, stray, homeless,
abandoned, or unwanted animals; including those found running at-large or
otherwise subject to impoundment consistent with applicable laws. The phrase
ANIMAL SHELTER includes facilities for adoption, emergency medical treatment,
and cremation.
   ANIMAL STABLES.  The use of any structure with stalls or compartments and/or
land where animals, excluding dogs and cats, are sheltered and fed.
   ANIMAL, DOMESTIC. Any animal that has been adopted by human beings to live
and breed in a tame condition. A domestic animal differs from a wild animal in
that a wild animal means any animal not actually confined or cultivated by
humans.
   ANIMAL, EXOTIC. Any animal not customarily confined or cultivated by man for
domestic or commercial purposes but rather kept as a pet for display.
   ANIMAL, FARM. Any animal that customarily is raised for profit on farms and
has the potential of causing a nuisance outside of rural areas or if not
properly maintained. Examples of FARM ANIMALS include, but are not limited to
cows, sheep, goats, pigs, chickens, llamas, and the like. Exotic or wild
animals shall not be considered FARM ANIMALS.
   ANIMAL, PET STORE. A retail sales facility primarily involved in the sale of
domestic animals, such as cats, dogs, fish, birds, and reptiles as well as
domestic pet accessories. For the purpose of administering and enforcing this
chapter, the phrase pet shop shall not include the retail sale of exotic or
farm animals, nor the sale of animals for laboratory or other commercial
purposes.
   ANIMAL, RIDING STABLE. The use of any structure with stalls or compartments
and/or land where large animals are sheltered and fed and rode either by owners
or involved with riding lessons.
   ANIMAL, VETERINARY. An establishment for the treatment, care, observation or
treatment of large animals by a licensed veterinarian. A veterinary facility
may include indoor and outdoor areas.
   ANIMAL/ANIMAL PRODUCTS PROCESSING.  The processing or treatment of animals
and animal material as a raw resource for refinement as food and non-edible
products.
   ANTENNA. Any communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of wireless communications
service.
   ANTIQUE SHOP. A retail store specializing in the sale of antiques.
   APARTMENT. A dwelling unit in a structure, arranged, intended, designed, or
occupied on a rental basis for the housing of a single family, an individual,
group of individuals, or other single housekeeping unit.
   APPAREL, ALTERATIONS/TAILORING. A commercial business specializing in the
custom creation, alteration, and/or tailoring of apparel intended for human use
on a custom order basis for individuals or businesses.
   APPLIANCE REPAIR SHOP. A commercial business specializing in the repair of
home appliances and related accessories.
   APPLIANCE STORE. A commercial business specializing in home appliance retail
and the sale of home appliance accessories.
   APPLICANT. The owner, owners, or legal representative of real estate who
make application for action affecting the property.
   APPLICATION. The completed form or forms, together with any other required
materials, exhibits, and fees required of an applicant consistent with the
procedures established by this chapter.
   APPURTENANCE. A minor element of a larger structure, such as a bay window,
stairs, light post, and the like.
   ARCADE. A type of indoor commercial amusement/recreation establishment where
more than four amusement machines are available to the public.
   ARCHERY RANGE. A facility designed and/or used for target practice with bows
and arrows.
   ARTERIAL ROAD. See STREET, ARTERIAL.
   ARTERIAL STREET. See STREET, ARTERIAL.
   ASSEMBLY FACILITY. A building or portion of a building in which facilities
are provided for group civic, educational, political, professional, religious,
cultural, or social functions.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A residential facility where assistance with daily
activities, such as dispensing medication, dressing, grooming, and bathing are
provided for the aged or infirm, or any other reasonably independent person in
need of nursing care; and which does not contain equipment for surgical care or
for treatment of disease or injury, and is not primarily designed for patients
being treated for mental illness or alcohol or drug addiction.
   ATHLETIC FIELD. A wide stretch of open land used for outdoor games such as
baseball, basketball, football, or soccer.
   AUCTION FACILITY. A building or property used for the storage of goods and
materials that are to be sold on the premises by public auction, and for the
sale of the said goods and materials by public action on an occasional basis
only.
   AUDITORIUM. A public or commercial facility where an audience sits and
enjoys a performance. Auditoriums are generally small than theaters and used
for live performances. For the purposes of administering and enforcing this
chapter, the term auditorium does not include the term amphitheater or phrase
sexually oriented businesses.
   AUTO ORIENTED USES, LARGE SCALE. Uses such as sales and service of
automobiles, motorcycles and/or recreational vehicles, and others listed under
the heading of Auto-Oriented Uses, Large Scale by the Official Schedule of Uses
included in this chapter. This does not include any uses, such as auto repair
shops or gas stations, listed under the headings of auto-oriented uses medium
or small scale.
   AUTO ORIENTED USES, MEDIUM SCALE. Uses such as auto repair and body work,
vehicle detailing/auto accessory sales and installation, oil change/lube shops,
and others listed under the heading of Auto-Oriented Uses, Medium Scale by the
Official Schedule of Uses included in this chapter. This does not include any
uses listed under the headings of auto-oriented uses large or small scale.
   AUTO ORIENTED USES, SMALL SCALE. Uses such as gas stations, car washes, and
others listed under the heading of Auto-Oriented Uses, Small Scale by the
Official Schedule of Uses included in this chapter. This does not include any
uses listed under the headings of auto-oriented uses large or medium scale.
   AUTOMOBILE PARTS SALES.  The use of any structure and/or property for the
display and sale or new or used parts for motor vehicles. This does not
including any salvage yard or the storage of inoperable vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. The use of a structure or property for the repair of
motor vehicles, including noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, recreational
vehicles and boats; including, but not limited to, the sale installation and
servicing of equipment and parts. Automobile repair includes muffler shops,
auto repair garages, tire sales and installation, wheel and brake shops, body
and fender shops, and similar repair and service activities, but excludes
dismantling or salvage.
   AUTOMOTIVE PARTS STORE. A commercial business specializing in the retail
sales of automotive parts and which does not typically offer repair services
on-site, except as an incidental use to the principle use. For the purposes of
administering and enforcing this chapter, the phrase automotive parts store
shall not include salvage yards or the outside storage of inoperable vehicles.
   AUTOMOTIVE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SALES OR SERVICE. Any principle use of a
premise for one or more of the following purposes: (a) sale or lease of new
recreational vehicles; (b) purchase and sale of second hand recreational
vehicles; (c) buying of second hand recreational vehicles for the purpose of
remodeling, taking apart or rebuilding or selling the same, or the buying
selling of parts of second hand recreational vehicles or tires, or the
assembling of second hand recreational vehicles parts; or (d) repair and
servicing of recreational vehicles provided the repair and servicing is
conducted as an accessory use secondary to the principle use. For the purposes
of administering and enforcing this chapter, the phrase automotive recreational
vehicle sales and service shall not include salvage yards or the outside
storage of inoperable vehicles.
   AUTOMOTIVE SALES OR LEASE. Any principal use of a premise for one or more of
the following purposes: (a) sale or lease of new motor vehicles; (b) purchase
and sale of second hand motor  vehicles; (c) buying of second hand motor
vehicles for the purpose of remodeling, taking apart or rebuilding or selling
the same, or the buying selling of parts of second hand motor vehicles or
tires, or the assembling of second hand motor vehicles parts; or (d) repair and
servicing of motor vehicles provided the repair and servicing is conducted as
an accessory use secondary to the principal use. For the purposes of
administering and enforcing this chapter, the phrase automotive sales or lease
shall not include salvage yards or the outside storage of inoperable vehicles.
   AUTOMOTIVE STORAGE. A facility whereby automobiles may securely be stored
for an unspecified amount of time on a contract basis. For the purposes of
administering and enforcing this chapter the phrase automotive storage does not
include establishments where automobiles are available as rentals.
   AUTOMOTIVE, MAJOR REPAIR. Any principle use of a premise for one or more of
the following purposes: (a) muffler repair or installation; (b) brake repair or
installation; (c) shock replacement; (d) transmission repair; (e) tire
recapping; (f) motor overhaul; or (g) body or fender repair work, but excluding
the dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles, or the storage of inoperable,
damaged or wrecked vehicles, other than those awaiting immediate repair.
   AUTOMOTIVE, MINOR REPAIR. Any principle use of a premise for one or more of
the following purposes: (a) tune-ups; (b) oil changes; (c) sale and
installation of lubricants, tires, batteries; or (d) other minor maintenance
operations, but excluding major repairs.
   AUTOMOTIVE, TRUCK, OR BUS RENTAL, SALES OR SERVICE. Any principal use of a
premise for one or more of the following purposes: (a) sale or lease of new or
used automobiles, trucks and buses; or (b) repair and servicing of motor
vehicles provided the repair and servicing is conducted as an accessory use
secondary to the principal use.
   AWNING. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, metal, or glass designed and
intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, and
which projects from a wall or roof of a structure over a window, walk, or door.
Awnings include those that may be retracted or folded against the face of a
supporting building.
   BAKERY, COMMERCIAL.  A principle use for one or more of the following
purposes: (a) preparation of large quantities of baked goods for sale or
distribution; or (b) on-site storage of delivery vehicles with or without a
loading dock(s), in which the baked goods are intended for off-site
distribution and consumption.
   BAKERY, RETAIL. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of
baked products for consumption on- or off-site, wherein the products are
prepared either on- or off-site.
   BALCONY. A platform that projects from the wall of a building and is
surrounded by a railing or parapet.
   BANK. A facility for the custody, loan, or exchange of products, typically
money. Also included is the extension of credit and facilitating the
transmission of funds.
   BANNER. A sign composed of a logo or design on a lightweight material either
enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame and secured or mounted to allow
motion caused by the atmosphere.
   BANQUET HALL. A building, facility, room, or portion thereof, which is
rented, leased or otherwise made available to any person or group for a private
event or function, that is not open to the general public, whether or not a fee
is charged. A catering facility differs from a banquet hall in that a catering
facility is typically where the food is prepared whereas a banquet hall is
typically where catered food is intended to be consumed. In the event that a
facility both prepares and serves the food, it shall be considered a catering
facility.
   BAR. A building or part thereof where, in consideration for payment
therefore, liquor, beer, wine or any combination thereof are served primarily
for consumption on the premises, with or without food. The term BAR includes
the term TAVERN, but shall not be interpreted to include the phrase "package
liquor store."
   BARBER SHOP. Any establishment or place of business within which the
practice of cutting hair is engaged in or carried on by one or more employees.
The term BARBER SHOP may include a facility where apprentices are trained under
regulations of the Board of Health.
   BASE STATION. A station located at a specific site that is authorized to
communicate with mobile stations. The term includes all radio transceivers,
antennas, coaxial cables, power supplies, and other electronics associated with
a station.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a building located below the first level, a
majority of the height of which is located below the average finished grade of
the building perimeter.
   BATCHING PLANT.  A facility for the manufacture or mixing of concrete,
cement, and concrete and cement products, including any apparatus, equipment,
and uses incidental to such operations.
   BEAUTY SALON. Any commercial establishment or place of business wherein
cosmetology is offered or practiced, for compensation, on a regular basis. The
term BEAUTY SHOP may include a facility where apprentices are trained under
regulations of the Board of Health.
   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. A property providing overnight
accommodations to guests operated by an owner and/or operator, with premises
designed primarily as a commercial enterprise; a dwelling occupied by a family
and used incidentally to provide accommodation and meals to transient
travelers, including tourist homes. For the purposes of administering and
enforcing this chapter the phrase bed and breakfast establishment does not
include boarding house, rooming house, domiciliary hostel, group home, hotel or
motel.
   BERM. A man-made mound of earth of definite height and width used for
landscaping and screening purposes.
   BICYCLE, SALES, RENTAL OR SERVICE. A principle use of a premise for one or
more of the following purposes: (a) purchase and sale of new and used non-
motorized bicycles; (b) buying of used bicycles for the purpose of remodeling,
taking apart or rebuilding; or (c) repair and servicing of bicycles.
   BILLIARD HALL. A business establishment containing more than six billiard
tables for use by patrons.
   BLOCK. Property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two
nearest intersecting streets (either crossing or terminating), railroad right-
of-way, lake, river, stream, or other physical boundary.
   BOARD. The McCordsville Board of Zoning Appeals.
   BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. The McCordsville Board of Zoning Appeals
established consistent with the 900 Series of I.C. 36-7-4.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building or part of a building that contains accommodation
facilities for lodging for definite periods of time, typically with meals
served from a single kitchen. Boarding houses do not include bed and
breakfasts, multi-family dwellings, hotels, or motels.
   BOAT OR BOAT TRAILER SALES OR SERVICE. A principle use of a premise for one
or both of the following purposes: (a) purchase and sale of new and used boats
and boat trailers; or (b) on-site repair of boats or boat trailers.
   BOAT STORAGE FACILITY. A structure or area designed for the indoor or
outdoor storage of watercraft or marine equipment.
   BOND.  See SURETY.
   BOOKSTORE. A retail establishment that, as its primary business, engages in
the sale, rental, or other charge-for-use of books, magazines, newspapers,
greeting cards, postcards, videotapes, computer software and/or any other
printed or electronically conveyed media. For the purposes of administering and
enforcing this chapter, the phrase book store shall not include sexually
oriented businesses.
   BOTTLE GAS STORAGE AND DISTRIBUTION. The storage and distribution of bottle
gasses including propane, carbon dioxide, helium, oxygen and other commercially
used gases.
   BOTTLING FACILITY. An industrial enterprise whose output is the bottling of
beverages, alcoholic or non-alcoholic, for distribution.
   BOWLING ALLEY. An establishment that devotes a majority of its gross floor
area to bowling lanes, equipment, and playing areas. A bowling alley may
include other incidental uses, such as a pro shop, other recreation activities,
a restaurant, or a bar.
   BREWERY, INDUSTRIAL BREWERY OR DISTILLERY. An industrial facility utilized
primarily for the brewing or distilling of alcoholic beverages to be
distributed commercially. This facility may also serve as a temporary storage/
distribution center for wholesale goods produced on-site as an incidental use.
   BREWERY, MICRO-BREWERY. A facility for the production and packaging of malt
beverages for distribution, retail, or wholesale, on- or off-premise, with a
typical capacity of not more than 15,000 barrels per year. A micro-brewery
establishment may be comprised of other complimentary uses such as a standard
restaurant, bar, or combination thereof.
   BUFFER. A strip of land, a fence, and/or area of landscaping between one use
and another designed and intended to separate and screen those uses.
   BUFFER LANDSCAPING. Any trees, shrubs, walls, fences, berms, or related
landscaping features required by this chapter as part of a buffer.
   BUFFER YARDS. An area adjacent to front, side and/or rear property lines,
measured perpendicularly from adjacent property lines and/or right-of-way
lines, intended to screen incompatible uses from each other. Buffers yards are
also used to help maintain existing trees or natural vegetation; to block or
reduce noise, glare or other emissions; and to maintain privacy. Buffer yards
are in addition to (separate from) front, rear, or side yard setbacks.
   BUILDING CODE. The locally adopted Indiana Building Code establishing and
controlling the standards for constructing mechanical equipment, all forms of
permanent structures, and related matters within the Town of McCordsville. Also
referred to in this chapter as the McCordsville Building Code.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. See STRUCTURE HEIGHT.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person responsible for the enforcement of the
McCordsville Building Code.
   BUILDING PERMIT. An official certification issued by the Building Official
authorizing the construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion,
reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, demolition, moving, or
repair of a building or other structure.
   BUILDING SUPPLY STORE. A large warehouse-style establishment that offers
retail and wholesale site development, building, and hardware supplies,
including various basic hardware lines, such as tools, builder's hardware,
plumbing and electrical supplies, paint and glass, housewares and household
appliances, and garden supplies and cutlery. A lumberyard may be included as an
incidental use to the building supply retail sales.
   BUILDING, ATTACHED. A building that is structurally connected to another
building by a foundation, wall, or roof line.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building which is surrounded by open space and located
on the same lot as another building.
   BUILD-TO LINE. A line parallel to the front property line indicating the
distance from the front property line at which primary structures must be
built. A built-to line is neither a minimum nor a maximum, but rather a
specific requirement.
   BUS/MASS TRANSIT TERMINAL. A centralized and/or primary community facility
for the transient housing or parking of motor driven buses, and the loading and
unloading of passengers.
   BUSINESS. A commercial endeavor to engage in the purchase, sale, lease,
barter, or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, and/or the provision of
services.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. A geographic area used for commerce and the operation of
a business or businesses.
   BUSINESS/FINANCIAL SERVICES OFFICE. Any office where the primary occupation
is concerned with such federal or state-regulated businesses as banking,
savings and loans, loan companies, and investment companies.
   BZA.  See BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   CAMPGROUND. Any public or private site, lot, field, or tract of land
designed with facilities for short term and/or seasonal occupancy by
recreational vehicles and other camping equipment, but not including mobile
homes.
   CAMPUS. An area of land constituting and making up the grounds of an
institution, such as a college or university, a business complex, or a
manufacturing park.
   CAR WASH. The use of a property for the washing and cleaning of passenger
vehicles, recreational vehicles, or other light duty equipment.
   CARPORT. A permanent structure, which includes a roof and roof-supports but
not enclosed by walls, which is used as an accessory to a dwelling unit for the
purpose of providing shelter to one or more vehicles.
   CATERING FACILITY. A facility primarily engaged in the preparation of food
on a custom order basis for individuals or businesses. For the purposes of
administering and enforcing this chapter, the phrase CATERING FACILITY shall
include RESTAURANT. A catering facility differs from a banquet hall in that a
catering facility is typically where the food is prepared whereas a banquet
hall is typically where catered food is intended to be consumed. In the event
that a facility both prepares and serves the food, it shall be considered a
catering facility.
   CEMETERY. Land used or dedicated to the burial of the dead, including
crematoriums and mausoleums.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate issued by the town certifying that a
newly constructed or modified structure and/or property is completed in its
entirely and is in complete compliance with all applicable regulations of the
town, and therefore may be occupied.
   CHANGE OF USE PERMIT. See IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.
   CHILD CARE CENTER. As defined by I.C. 12-7-2-28.4, as amended from time to
time; child care center means a non-residential building where at least one
child receives child care from a provider: (a) while unattended by a parent,
legal guardian, or custodian; (b) for regular compensation; and (c) for more
than four hours but less than 24 hours in each of ten consecutive days per
year, excluding intervening Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.
   CHILD CARE HOME.
      (1)   As defined by I.C. 12-7-2-28.6, as amended from time to time, child
care home means a residential structure in which at least eight children, or at
least four children under 12 months of age, (not including the children for
whom the provider is a parent, stepparent, guardian, custodian, or other
relative or any child) at any time receive child care from a provider: (a)
while unattended by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian; (b) for regular
compensation; and (c) for more than six hours per day but less than 24 hours
per day for ten consecutive days, excluding intervening Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays.
      (2)   Consistent with state law, the phrase CHILD CARE HOME shall include
CLASS I CHILD CARE HOMES and CLASS II CHILD CARE HOMES.
      (3)    A child who is:
         (a)   A relative of a provider;
         (b)   Under the custody or guardianship of a provider; or
         (c)   At least 14 years of age and does not require child care;
is not a child described under division (1) above.
   CHILD CARE HOME, CLASS I.
      (1)   As defined in I.C. 12-7-2-33.7, as amended from time to time, Class
I Child Care Home means a child care home that serves any combination of full-
time and part-time children, not to exceed at any one time 12 children plus
three children who are enrolled in at least full-day kindergarten.
      (2)   A child:
         (a)   For whom a provider of care in the child care home is a parent,
stepparent, guardian, custodian, or other relative and who is at least seven
years of age; or
         (b)   Who is at least 14 years of age and does not require child care;
shall not be counted in determining whether the child care home is within the
limit set forth in division (1) above.
      (3)   Except as provided in I.C. 12-17.2-5-6.3(b), the addition of three
school age children may not occur during a break in the school year that
exceeds four weeks. A child: (a) for whom a provider of care in the child care
home is a parent, stepparent, guardian, custodian, or other relative and who is
at least seven years of age; or (b) who is at least 14 years of age and does
not require child care; shall not be counted in determining whether the child
care home is within the limit set forth above.
   CHILD CARE HOME, CLASS II.  As defined by IC 12-7-2-33.8, as amended from
time to time, Class II Child Care Home means a child care home that serves more
than 12 children but not more than any combination of 16 full-time and part-
time children at any one time. A child: (a) for whom a provider of care in the
child care home is a parent, stepparent, guardian, custodian, or other relative
and who is at least seven years of age; or (b) who is at least 14 years of age
and does not require child care; shall not be counted in determining whether
the child care home is within the limit set forth above.
   CHILD CARE HOME, INSTITUTION. As defined in I.C. 12-7-2-29, as amended from
time to time, a child caring institution means an establishment that: (a)
operates under a license issued under I.C. 31-27; (b) provides for delivery of
mental health services that are appropriate to the needs of the individual; and
(c) complies with the rules adopted under I.C. 4-22-2 by the Department of
Child Services.
   CHILDREN'S HOME.  A facility that houses not more than ten children which
are either: (a) in need of service under I.C. 31-34.1; or (b) children who have
committed a delinquent act under I.C. 31-37-2.2, I.C. 31-37-2.3, or I.C. 31-37-
2.5, as amended from time to time.
   CHURCH. See RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION OR OTHER PLACE OF WORSHIP.
   CIRCUS OR CARNIVAL.  A temporary outdoor amusement center, bazaar, or fair,
either involving use of special purpose equipment or conducted by professional
operators, or both, and where activities include such things as rides,
exhibitions, food service, sales, or small-scale games.
   CLINIC. Any facility in which human patients are admitted for medical,
psychiatric, surgical, or dental study or treatment on an out-patient only
basis, and in which the services of at least two physicians or dentists are
provided.
   CLUB. Public or private facilities owned or operated by a person or group of
people for social, educational, or recreational purposes, but not primarily for
profit nor to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
The term CLUB shall include the term LODGE.
   COLLECTION CENTER, DONATIONS AND RETAIL SALES. Buildings and facilities
owned and operated by a group to enable the collection of donated goods and the
retail selling of household goods donated to the group. It should be noted that
this use does not denote a primary use as a for-profit business and is
primarily geared toward philanthropic or job training efforts.
   COLLECTION POINT, RECYCLING. A site where individuals bring household
recyclable materials to either drop off without compensation, or, to redeem the
materials for monetary compensation. Beyond any limited sorting, no other
processing of the materials takes place at the site. All materials are stored
completely within an enclosed structure while awaiting periodic shipment to a
processing facility. While these collection points may be developed as
freestanding sites, they typically are incidental uses sharing the site of a
larger principle use, such as a discount store. Possible structures for this
type of operation are recycling containers such as igloos "reverse vending
machines", trailers, or similar structures.
   CMU. Concrete masonry unit.
   COLLECTOR ROAD. See STREET, COLLECTOR.
   COLLECTOR STREET. See STREET, COLLECTOR.
   COLLEGE. See UNIVERSITY.
   COLLOCATION. The placement or installation of wireless facilities on
existing structures that include a wireless facility or a wireless support
structure, including water towers and other buildings or structures. The term
includes the placement, replacement, or modification of wireless facilities
within an approved equipment compound.
   COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. See BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL USES. An occupation, employment, or enterprise that
is carried on to provide recreational services for profit by an owner, lessee,
or licensee.
   COMMISSION.  McCordsville Advisory Plan Commission.
   COMMON AREA. Land within a development which is not individually owned or
dedicated to the public, but which is designed and intended for the use,
enjoyment, and maintenance of the property owners within that development or
other specific area. The common area may include complimentary structures and/
or other improvements.
   COMMON OWNERSHIP. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity,
partnership, or unincorporated association, including ownership by different
corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations
with at least one common stockholder, partner, or associate.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE EXCHANGE. A telecommunications facility that houses
one or more computer systems and related equipment dedicated to building,
maintaining, and/or processing data. Such a facility would likely include a
telephone service exchange, a data center, and a server farm.
   COMMUNITY CENTER. A building available to the public for community
activities, meetings, banquets, projects, gatherings, and the similar
functions.
   COMPATIBLE. Having harmony and consistency in design, function, and/or
appearance.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A document, consistent with the requirements the Indiana
Code that is a compilation of policy statements, goals and objectives,
standards, maps, and statistical data for the physical, social, and economic
development of the community.
   CONCRETE/ASPHALT PRODUCTION FACILITY. A facility where raw materials are
processed into concrete or asphalt for sale and/or immediate use. Facilities
typically include all necessary equipment for both transport and application of
the finished product.
   CONDITION OF APPROVAL. Stipulations or provisions set forth as a
prerequisite for approval of an application.
   CONDOMINIUM. Real estate lawfully subject to the I.C. 32-25 series, the
Horizontal Property Law, by the recording of condominium instruments, in which
undivided interests in the common areas and facilities are vested in the
condominium unit owners.
   CONFECTIONERY, COMMERCIAL. Buildings and facilities operated to manufacture
confectionery items for distribution, wherein some goods may be sold on-site
through an incidental retail component of the facility, such as a candy
factory.
   CONFECTIONERY, RETAIL. Buildings and facilities operating and engaged in
confectionery retail to the general public with limited on-site production of
goods, such as a candy shop.
   CONFERENCE CENTER. A facility used for service, business and professional
organizations for seminars and training activities. Conference centers may
include limited accommodations for conference attendees, such as sleeping,
dining, and exercise. Conference centers are not typically designed to be
utilized by the general public for any purpose.
   CONFINED FEEDING. See CFO AND CAFO.
   CONTIGUOUS. See ABUTTING.
   CONTRACTOR, COMMERCIAL. A facility used primarily as an office, showroom and
storage facility for a person who executes the construction or improving of
buildings; a person or company that performs specific tasks such as electrical
or plumbing work in construction projects; or a person or company hired to
maintain existing facilities like air conditioning systems or grounds keeping.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Any disturbance to the land that results in a change
in the topography, or the existing soil cover, both vegetative and non-
vegetative; any disturbance of an acre or more of land. Examples of
construction activity include, but are not necessarily limited to: clearing,
grading, filling, excavating, construction of a new structure, enlargement of a
structure, or conversion of a structure.
   CONTINUUM OF CARE FACILITY. A facility for the elderly or aged, where
different levels of living and care are provided for a cost. Such facilities
may include age-restricted housing units (55 years +), retirement homes,
assisted living, nursing homes, and the like. These facilities shall not have
occupants that require security restraint, equipment for surgical care or for
the treatment of disease or injury, and are not primarily designed for mental
patients or alcoholics.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. A facility comprised of a small retail establishment that
offers for sale a limited line of groceries, convenience goods, tobacco
products, periodicals, and other household products. This facility may offer
the sale of automobile fuels, oils, and accessories, without any repair
service.
   COUNTRY CLUB. A facility functioning as a private club, having set
membership fees. This facility may offer a variety of recreational sports and
fitness facilities and is typically an incidental use to a golf course. This
facility may or may not be located in conjunction with a housing development.
   COUNTY. Hancock County, Indiana.
   COVENANTS. Private and legal restrictions of various kinds on the usage of
lots, typically within a subdivision and applied by the subdivider, that are
recorded with the plat and deed. Covenants are enforceable in civil court by
interested or affected parties.
   CO-WORKING SPACE. A commercial establishment functioning as an office for
those who are self-employed or working for different employers. The space shall
offer communal office equipment and features, and space for creative thought,
knowledge and ideas to be shared.
   CRAFT/FABRIC STORE. Any business that produces on the premises articles for
sale of artistic quality or handmade workmanship, or businesses that primarily
sell items and materials used in the creation of crafts and other such
handiwork.
   CROP PROCESSING AND STORAGE.  The processing of harvested crops, as well as
the storage of both the raw and processed crops. Processing includes any or all
of the following or similar activities as they relate to crop produce:
cleaning, shelling, drying, cooking, and packaging.
   CROP PRODUCTION. The production and management of agricultural crops,
including planting, cultivation, and harvesting.
   CUL-DE-SAC. See STREET, CUL-DE-SAC.
   CURB CUT. The providing of vehicular ingress and/or egress between property
and an abutting public street.
   DANCE/MARTIAL ARTS STUDIO. An establishment where patrons learn and/or
practice dance or martial arts.
   DATA PROCESSING CENTER. Facilities where employees process electronic data,
including data entry, storage, conversion, or analysis; subscription and credit
card transaction processing; telephone sales and order collection; mail order
and catalogue sales; and mailing list processing.
   DAY CARE CENTER. See CHILD CARE CENTER.
   DAY CARE HOME. See CHILD CARE HOME.
   DECIDUOUS TREE. See TREE, DECIDUOUS.
   DECK. A platform, either freestanding or attached to building that is
supported by pillars or posts.
   DEDICATION. The intentional setting apart of land or interests in land for
use by Town of McCordsville.
   DELI (DELICATESSEN). An establishment where food is sold for consumption
either on or off premises, excluding groceries and supermarkets.
   DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre.
   DENSITY, GROSS. The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of
dwelling units in a development or area by the gross size of the area (in
acres), including all non-residential land uses, rights-of-way, streets, and
other features included in the area.
   DENSITY, NET. The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of
dwelling units in a development or area of the actual tract of land (in acres)
upon which the dwelling units are located, or proposed to be located, including
common open space and excluding non-residential uses, rights-of-way, and
streets.
   DEPARTMENT STORE, LARGE SCALE. A large retail establishment with an
extensive assortment of goods and services and which is organized into separate
departments for the purpose of buying, promotion, customer service, and
control; a store which sells products at prices lower than those asked by
department stores and other traditional retail outlets; or establishments that
specialize in such merchandise as jewelry, electronic equipment, or electrical
appliances. The phrase DEPARTMENT STORE includes the phrase DISCOUNT STORE.
Such uses are typically 60,000 square feet in gross floor area and greater.
   DEPARTMENT STORE, MEDIUM SCALE. A mid-size retail establishment with an
extensive assortment of goods and services and which is organized into separate
departments for the purpose of buying, promotion, customer service, and
control; a store which sells products at prices lower than those asked by
department stores and other traditional retail outlets; or establishments that
specialize in such merchandise as jewelry, electronic equipment, or electrical
appliances. The phrase DEPARTMENT STORE includes the phrase DISCOUNT STORE.
Such stores shall be less than 60,000 square feet in gross floor area.
   DEPARTMENT STORE, SMALL SCALE. A small retail establishment with an
extensive assortment of goods and services and which is organized into separate
departments for the purpose of buying, promotion, customer service, and
control; a store which sells products at prices lower than those asked by
department stores and other traditional retail outlets; or establishments that
specialize in such merchandise as jewelry, electronic equipment, or electrical
appliances. The phrase DEPARTMENT STORE includes the phrase DISCOUNT STORE.
Such stores shall be less than 10,000 square feet in gross floor area.
   DESIGN. A planned arrangement of forms, shapes, massing, colors, and
materials intended to serve a useful purpose or be decorative or artistic. The
essence of a design resides not in the elements individually, nor in their
method of arrangement, but in the total ensemble that awakens some sensation in
the observer's mind.
   DESIGNATED ENFORCEMENT ENTITY. The McCordsville Board of Zoning Appeals.
   DETACHED STRUCTURE. A building that has no structural connection with the
primary structure.
   DETENTION AREA. An area that is designed to capture specific quantities of
stormwater and to gradually release the stormwater at a sufficiently slow rate
to avert flooding.
   DEVELOPER. An individual, partnership, corporation (or agent thereof), or
other entity that undertakes the responsibility for land development,
particularly the designing of a subdivision plat or site development plan
showing the layout of the land and the public improvements involved therein. In
as much as the subdivision plat is merely a necessary means to the end of
assuring a satisfactory development, the term DEVELOPER is intended to include
the term SUBDIVIDER, even though the personnel involved in successive stages of
the project may differ.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
including but not limited to: (1) construction, reconstruction, or placement of
a structure or any addition to a structure; (2) installing a manufactured home
on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing recreational
vehicle on a site for more than 180 days; (3) installing utilities, erection of
walls and fences, construction of roads, or similar projects; (4) construction
of flood control structures such as levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements,
and the like; (5) mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling
operations; (6) construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts; (7)
storage of materials; or (8) any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
   DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Dimensioned plans showing the entire on-site distribution
of all elements for a proposed construction project, which would normally
include architectural, engineering, landscape architectural, lighting and
signage plans.
   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.  Regulations provided by this chapter that provide
specific conditions for the development and use of buildings and property.
   DISTRIBUTION CENTER.  A facility that stores inventory and ships finished
goods to customers for a specific geographic area. Its stock is replenished on
a periodic basis by manufacturing plants or other distribution centers, and it
may process customer returns but typically lacks production capabilities. In
general, distribution centers do not sell items directly to the public.
   DISTRICT. An area with common social, physical, economic, or land use
characteristics.
   DOMESTIC PETS. Animals commonly used as household pets, protection,
companions, and for the assistance of disabled persons. Domestic pets shall
include animals that are cared for and treated in a manner acceptable for pet
dogs, cats, and birds. Domestic pets shall include, but not be limited to,
dogs, cats, parakeets, parrots, finches, spiders, guinea pigs, hamsters,
gerbils, rats, mice, rabbits, aquarium fish, pot belly pigs, ferrets, and
snakes if cared for in the manner described above.
   DORMITORY. A structure specifically designed to provide sleeping and living
quarters for long-term stay by students of a college, university, or other
institution. A common kitchen and common gathering rooms may also be provided.
   DRAINAGE. The outflow of water or other fluids from a site through either
natural or artificial means.
   DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All facilities, channels, and areas which serve to convey,
filter, store, and/or receive stormwater, either on a temporary or permanent
basis.
   DRIP LINE. An imaginary vertical line that extends from the outermost
branches of a tree's canopy to the ground.
   DRIVE, PRIVATE.  See STREET, PRIVATE.
   DRIVE-THRU SERVICE. An opening or openings in the wall of a building or
structure designed and intended to be used to provide for sales and/or service
to patrons, who remain in their vehicles, products that are used or consumed
off-site.
   DRIVE-THRU/DRIVE-UP FACILITY. A small scale establishment developed so that
its retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach
or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor
vehicle, rather than within a building or structure.
   DRIVEWAY. A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking
space, garage, dwelling, or other structure.
   DRIVEWAY, COMMON. An access shared by adjacent property owners.
   DRIVING RANGE. An area equipped with distance markers, clubs, balls, and
tees for practicing golf drives and putting, which may or may not include a
snack-bar and pro-shop, but does exclude golf courses and miniature golf
courses.
   DRY CLEANERS/COMMERCIAL LAUNDERER. A large scale establishment that cleans
fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel, or articles of any sort by immersion and
agitation in volatile solvents, and all related processes. Commercial cleaners
typically serve businesses and clean uniforms, generally with the cleaners
picking up and delivering the clothing to its business clients.
   DRY CLEANERS/LAUNDROMAT. An establishment that allows for individuals to
walk-in and drop off/pick up clothing fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel, or
other articles that have been cleaned at some other location.
   DUMPSTER.  A receptacle container that has a hooking mechanism that allows
it to be raised and dumped into a sanitation truck, including dumpsters for
trash, compacted materials, and recycling.
   DUPLEX. See DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof on a permanent foundation, used
primarily as a place of abode for one or more human beings, typically for a
period of time not less than 30 days.
   DWELLING SITE. A site within a manufactured home park and/or mobile home
park with required improvements and utilities that is leased for the long term
placement of manufactured homes and/or mobile homes.
   DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively
for use as living quarters for only one family, and including eating, lawful
cooking, sleeping space and sanitary facilities reserved solely for the
occupants thereof. The phrase DWELLING UNIT includes MOBILE DWELLINGS, MODULAR
DWELLINGS and MANUFACTURED DWELLINGS but does not include recreational
vehicles.
   DWELLING, ACCESSORY.  A separate and complete secondary dwelling unit
established in conjunction with and clearly subordinate to another dwelling
that which serves as the primary use and/or structure on the property.
   DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling unit which does not share a common wall with
any other dwelling.
   DWELLING, FARM. A single-family dwelling that is located on, and used in
connection with farm operations.
   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit which is designed and
fabricated in one or more modules at a location other than the home site, by
assembly-line type production techniques or by other construction methods
unique to an off-site manufacturing process; bearing a label certifying that it
is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Law of 1974; and built after January 1, 1981, and a minimum
950 square feet of main floor area (exclusive of garages, carports, and open
porches).
   DWELLING, MOBILE HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections
which in traveling mode is eight feet wide or more in width and 40 or more feet
in length, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as
a dwelling unit.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A structure designed for and occupied by three or
more families or other single units of housekeeping, with the number of
families and housekeeping units in residence not exceeding the number of
dwelling units provided.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A structure designed for and occupancy by one
family or other single unit of housekeeping and therefore including no more
than one dwelling unit.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A structure designed for occupancy by two families or
other single units of housekeeping and therefore including no more than two
dwelling units; a dwelling comprised of two attached units situated side-by-
side or on two separate floors.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner to specific persons, the general
public, corporations, utilities, or others, for the purpose of providing
services or access to the property.
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. See SCHOOL.
   EGRESS. An exit.
   ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION TOWER. A structure that physically supports high
voltage overhead power lines. The term does not include a utility pole.
   ELECTRONICS STORE. An establishment that has for sale goods relating to
technology having electrical, digital, magnetic, wireless, optical,
electromagnetic, or similar capabilities. For the purposes of administering and
enforcing this chapter the phrases "department store" and "discount store" are
exclusive of the phrase "electronics store," meaning that they are not intended
to be one and the same.
   ELEVATION. One of the faces, for example the front, side, or rear, of a
building.
   EMERGENCY RESPONSE FACILITY. An outpost station that serves as an office of
operation for police, fire, and/or rescue services. Such stations include
personnel, equipment, vehicles, and training facilities.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES FACILITY OR STATION. A facility providing operational
space for essential fire, police, and/or other emergency response services
within and around the town.
   EMPLOYMENT SERVICE. An establishment that seeks and identifies available
jobs for patrons seeking employment.
   EQUIPMENT COMPOUND. The area that:
      (1)   Surrounds or is near the base of a wireless support structure; and
      (2)   Encloses wireless facilities.
   EQUIPMENT SALES AND RENTAL. Establishments primarily engaged in the sale or
rental of tools, trucks, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and
similar industrial equipment.
   EQUINE SERVICES. Operations involved in the shelter and care of horses, as
well as breeding, training, and for giving lessons, including stables, stud
farms, and other related uses.
   EQUIPMENT, MECHANICAL.  Equipment installed for a use appurtenant to the
primary use. Such equipment may include heating and air conditioning equipment,
solar collectors, parabolic antennas, and power generating devices.
   EROSION. The detachment, movement, and wearing away of soil and rock
fragments by flowing surface or subsurface water or by wind.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance
by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground
or overhead gas, electrical, telephone, sewer, or water transmission or
distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduit cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants,
street signs, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by
public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public
health, safety, or general welfare, but not including buildings.
   EVERGREEN TREE. See TREE, EVERGREEN.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of this chapter.
   EXPANSION OF AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   EXPLOSIVE MANUFACTURING AND STORAGE. The manufacture and storage of any
chemical compound, mixture, or device of which the primary and common purpose
is to function by explosion with substantially simultaneous release of gas and
heat, the resulting pressure being capable of producing destructive effects.
   EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION. Illumination of a sign that is affected by an
artificial source of light not contained within the sign itself.
   FABRICATION FACILITY. An establishment where employees and machinery are
used to assemble product components created offsite.
   FAÇADE. The portion of any exterior elevation on a building, extending from
grade level to the top of the parapet, wall, or eaves for the entire width of
the building.
   FAIRGROUNDS. An area of land used for agricultural related office buildings,
animal shows and judging, carnivals, circuses, community meeting and
recreational facilities, concerts, food booths and stands, games, rides,
rodeos, sales and auctions, storage, and theaters.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single
housekeeping unit and therefore using common facilities for cooking,
sanitation, and gathering. A family does not include any society, club,
fraternity, sorority; or group living in a boarding house, hotel, motel, bed
and breakfast facility, lodging house, rooming house, or club; any group of
individuals whose association with each other is seasonal or any individuals
who are in a group living arrangement as a result of criminal activity.
   FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME. See CHILD DAY CARE HOME.
   FARM (CONFINED FEEDING). Any livestock operation that meets one or more of
the following characteristics: (1) any confined feeding of at least 300 cattle,
or 600 swine or sheep, or 30,000 fowl, such as chickens, ducks and other
poultry; (2) any animal feeding operation utilizing a waste lagoon or holding
pits; (3) any animal feeding operation where the operator elects to come under
the provisions of I.C. 13-18-10; or (4) any animal feeding operation that is
causing a violation of I.C. 13-18-10 as determined by the Stream Pollution
Control Board. See also CONFINED FEEDING.
   FARM (DWELLING). See DWELLING, FARM.
   FARM (GENERAL). An property or area exceeding 20 acres in size that is used
for agriculture (such as the production and storage of vegetables, fruit trees,
or grain, as well as the raising of farm animals, such as poultry or cattle, on
a limited basis). A farm shall include all related structures and the  storage
of equipment and materials used on-site for the farm operation. A farm shall
not include the commercial raising of animals, confined feeding, or the
commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals.
   FARM ANIMALS. Animals commonly used for transportation, food, skins, and
other by-products. Farm animals include, but are not limited to, horses,
cattle, pigs, sheep, goats, mules, donkeys, miniature horses, miniature
donkeys, camels, emu, ostrich, llamas, alpacas, rabbits, mink, fox, buffalo,
chickens, turkeys, quail, pheasants, and other animals or fowl of similar
characteristics.
   FARM EQUIPMENT SALES AND SERVICE. An establishment that services farm
implements, as well as offers for sale new and used farm implements.
   FARMER'S MARKET. A periodic market held in an open area or under a structure
where groups of individual sellers holding the proper town permit offer for
sale to the public such items as fresh produce, seasonal fruits, fresh flowers,
arts and crafts items, and food and beverages (but not to include second-hand
goods) dispensed from vehicles or temporary stands located on-site.
   FAST FOOD RESTAURANT. See RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD.
   FBFM .  Flood Boundary and Floodway Map; an official map delineating the
floodway, floodway fringe, 100-year floodplain, and 500-year floodplain which
is prepared in conjunction with a flood insurance study.
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FENCE. Any structure, solid or otherwise, which is a barrier and is used as
a boundary or means of protection, confinement, or concealment.
   FENCE, BARBED-WIRE. One or more strands of wire or other material having
intermittent sharp points of wire or metal that may puncture, cut, tear, or
snag persons, clothing, or animals.
   FENCE, STOCKADE. A fence constructed of vertical wood strips, with no
intervening spaces, providing a complete visual barrier.
   FERTILIZER SALES, DISTRIBUTION, AND STORAGE. An establishment that stores,
distributes, and sells fertilizers primarily for agricultural crop production
use.
   FHBM. Flood Hazard Boundary Map.
   FINAL PLAT. See PLAT, SECONDARY.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. A facility such as a bank or credit union, concerned
with providing federal or state regulated banking, savings, loans and/or
investments. For the purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, the
term financial institution does not include payday loan establishments.
   FINISHED FLOOR AREA. See FLOOR AREA, FINISHED.
   FIREWORKS SALES. A permanent establishment where the primary business is the
retail sale of devices defined as fireworks by the State of Indiana.
   FIRM. Flood Insurance Rate Map; the official map on which FEMA has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and risk premium zones.
   FITNESS CENTER. A facility where passive or active exercise and related
activity is performed for the purpose of physical fitness, improved circulation
or flexibility, and/or weight control. A fitness center may provide facials and
other skin care treatments, massage, exercise, yoga, and other wellness related
activities with or without such equipment or apparatus as an incidental use(s).
   FLAT ROOF. The silhouette formed by a roof line. While the name infers a
roof with no pitch, the actual roof structure is required to have a slope for
drainage purposes. The roof line can be stepped or flat in appearance by using
architectural elements such as cornices, mansards, and parapets.
   FLEA MARKET. An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or
structure where goods are offered for sale to the general public by individual
sellers from open or semi-open facilities or temporary structures. The phrase
flea market shall not include informal garage or yard sales.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Any area located within the floodplain, including the
flood fringe and floodway.
   FLOODLIGHT. Reflector type light fixture that produces unshielded and
undirected illumination.
   FLOODPLAIN. The relatively flat area or low land adjoining the channel of a
river or stream which has been or may be covered by the regulatory flood. The
floodplain includes the channel, floodway, and floodway fringe. Floodplain
boundaries are to be determined by using the Floodway-Flood Boundary Maps of
the Federal Insurance Administration/Federal Emergency Management
Administration (FEMA).
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently
carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulation flood of any river or
flooding stream.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE.  Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the
floodway. The floodway fringe is not necessary for carrying and discharging
peak flood flow, but is subject to flooding.
   FLOOR AREA.  The sum of all horizontal surface areas of all floors of all
roofed portions of a building enclosed by and within the surrounding exterior
walls or roofs, or to the centerline(s) of party walls separating such
buildings or portions thereof. Floor area of a building shall exclude exterior
open balconies and open porches.
   FLOOR AREA, FINISHED. That portion of floor area constructed, completed, and
usable for living purposes with normal living facilities which includes
sleeping, dining, cooking, working, entertainment, common space linking rooms,
areas for personal hygiene, or combination thereof. Floor area or portion
thereof used only for storage purposes and not equipped for the facilities
mentioned above shall not be considered finished floor area. The finished floor
area of a primary structure does not include a garage, carport, deck,
unfinished storage, patio, or open porch.
   FLOOR AREA, GROUND. That portion of finished floor area located on the first
(or nearest ground level) floor of the dwelling unit.
   FLORIST, RETAIL. An indoor facility whose primary purpose is to offer for
sale fresh or artificial flowers and related products and services directly to
consumers. Retail florists may include greenhouse operations, and incidental
sales of small gardening equipment and accessories.
   FLORIST, WHOLESALER. A facility offering for sale bulk flowers and related
supplies to professionals in the trade. See also GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL.
   FOOD AND BEVERAGE PRODUCTION. The large scale processing of raw ingredients
and materials to create finished or unfinished foods and beverages.
   FOOD TRUCK. Any food sales by any person, partnership or corporation, from
any truck, cart, vehicle, recreational vehicle, trailer, or other apparatus,
which prepared food, meant for human consumption, is being directly offered for
sale.
   FOUNDATION. The supporting member of a wall or structure.
   FPG. Flood protection grade; the elevation of the regulatory flood plus two
feet at any given location in the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
   FRATERNITY, EDUCATIONAL. A club or social activity officially associated
with and recognized and supervised by an institution for higher education whose
membership is limited exclusively to students of the institution.
   FRATERNITY, SOCIAL. A private club of individuals organized around a civic,
social, or intellectual goal or pursuit. See also PRIVATE CLUB.
   FRONT LINE. With respect to a building, the foundation line that is nearest
the front lot line.
   FRONT LOT LINE. For an interior or through lot, the line marking the
boundary between the lot and the abutting street right-of-way. For a corner
lot, the line marking the boundary between the lot and each of the abutting
street rights-of-way.
   FRONT YARD.  See YARD, FRONT.
   FRONTAGE. See LOT FRONTAGE.
   FUNERAL HOME.  A facility used for the preparation of the deceased for
display and burial and the conducting of rituals and religious programs
associated with burial. See also MORTUARY.
   GALLERY, ART OR PHOTO. A facility used primarily for the exhibition and sale
of art, usually visual art, painting, sculpturing, jewelry making, weaving or
other similar function defined as a fine art. For the purpose of administering
and enforcing this chapter, the phrase art or photo gallery is not intended to
include tattoo or piercing parlors.
   GARAGE DOOR, DECORATIVE. Garage doors that function like any modern day
garage door, but typically are designed with unique paneling designs, windows,
hardware, and other design features to enhance the curb appeal of the property.
DECORATIVE GARAGE DOORS shall have no less than  three of the following
features: windows or faux windows with grids, decorative hardware including,
but not limited to visible strap hinges, architectural panel design, stained
wood door, multiple colors utilized, and other features as approved by the
Architectural Review Committee.
   GAS STATION. Any building, structure, or area of land used for the retail
sale of automobile fuels, oils, and accessories.
   GOLF COURSE. An area of terrain on which the game of golf is played. A golf
course typically includes greens, fairways, and natural areas. A golf course
may also include a driving range when integrated with the golf course
operations and hours. A golf course may also include a country club as an
incidental use.
   GOVERNMENT FACILITY. A building, group of buildings, and/or piece of
property operated or occupied by a governmental agency to provide a
governmental service to the public. Government facilities may include the
storage and service of government vehicles, equipment, and supplies. The term
GOVERNMENT in this instance is the appropriate municipal authority, officer or
body charged with the care, custody and control of the land on which the
facility is located. For the purposes of administering and enforcing this
chapter, the phrase government facility is not intended to include penal or
correctional facilities.
   GRADE. The finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of
a building.
   GRADE, EXISTING.  The vertical elevation of the ground prior to any
excavation, filling, or other construction activity.
   GRADE, FINISHED. The final elevation of the ground surface after man-made
alterations have been completed.
   GRANDFATHERED. A description of the a status of certain properties, uses,
activities, and conditions that were legally existing prior to the effective
date of this chapter.
   GRANNY FLAT. See DWELLING, ACCESSORY.
   GRAZING AND PASTURE LAND. A fenced area used for the feeding and upkeep of
livestock.
   GREENHOUSE. A building or structure constructed primarily of translucent
materials which is devoted to the protection or cultivation of flowers and
other tender plants.
   GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL. A building used for the growing of plants, all or
some of which are sold at retail or wholesale either on or off-site.
   GROCERY STORE. Large-scale retailers offering for sale food and other
household goods and services. Grocery stores typically house flower shops,
pharmacies, bakeries, branch banks, and other complementary and incidental
uses. For the purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, the phrase
grocery store shall not include grocery departments that are typically found in
department stores or discount stores.
   GROSS DENSITY. Density determined by dividing that total acreage within the
site by the total number of dwelling units.
   GROUND FLOOR AREA. See FLOOR AREA, GROUND.
   GROUP HOME. As defined by I.C. 12-7-2-98.5, as amended from time to time,
group home means a residential structure in which care is provided on a 24 hour
basis for not more than ten children.
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 12-7-2-98.5 was repealed by P.L.145-2006, Sec. 376.
   GYMNASTICS CENTER. An establishment where patrons learn and practice
gymnastics, and where gymnastics competitions and meets may occur.
   HARD SURFACE. See PAVED SURFACE.
   HARDSHIP. A difficulty with regard to one's ability to improve land stemming
from the application of the requirements of this chapter, which may or may not
be subject to relief by means of variance. In and of themselves, self-imposed
situations and claims based on a perceived reduction of, or restriction on,
economic gain shall not be considered hardships.
   HARDWARE STORE. A small or medium-scale facility primarily engaged in the
retail sale of various basic hardware lines, such as tools, builder's hardware,
plumbing and electrical supplies, paint and glass, housewares and household
appliances, and garden supplies and cutlery. A lumberyard may be included as an
incidental use to the hardware retail sales.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any substances or materials that by reason of their
toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive, or otherwise injurious properties, may be
detrimental to the health of any person handling or otherwise coming into
contact with such material or substance.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL STORAGE/PROCESSING FACILITY. All structures, other
appurtenances, and any improvement to the land used for treating, storing,
processing, or disposing of hazardous materials.
   HEALTH OR DAY SPA. An establishment that offers professional services and
signature treatments provided by licensed aestheticians and therapists, and
which typically offer massage, body and face treatments, professional spa
products, and nutritional/weight counseling. See also FITNESS CENTER.
   HEDGE. A row of closely planted shrubs, bushes, or any other kind of plant
used as a compact, dense, living barrier that protects, shields, separates, or
demarcates an area.
   HEIGHT. The vertical distance to the highest point of any roof for
structures which have roofs, and the vertical distance to the highest point of
all other structures, measured from adjacent grade level. For the purpose of
determining the height in limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and
shown on the airport zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level (MSL)
elevation unless otherwise specified.
   HELIPORT. An area used for the landing and take-off of helicopters,
including any structures, buildings, and equipment associated with that use.
   HISTORIC SITE. All structures and other features identified as contributing,
noteable, or outstanding by the Indiana Historic Sites and Structures Inventory
- Hancock County Interim Report, or listed in the National Register of Historic
Places or the Indiana Register of Historic Sites and Structures, as well as any
subsequent amendments and/or additions to any of these publications.
   HOME ELECTRONICS/APPLIANCE STORE. An establishment that primarily sells home
appliances, electronics, and related accessories.
   HOME IMPROVEMENT, RETAIL. A small or medium-scale facility, such as a
hardware store or garden shop, primarily engaged in the retail sale of various
basic hardware lines, such as tools, builder's hardware, plumbing and
electrical supplies, paint and glass, house wares and household appliances, and
garden supplies, plants, landscaping materials, and related accessories. A
lumberyard may be included as an incidental use to the hardware retail sales.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation carried on in a dwelling unit by a resident
thereof which is limited in extent, and incidental and secondary to the use of
the dwelling unit for residential purposes, and therefore does not change its
residential character.
   HOME OWNER'S ASSOCIATION. See LOT OWNER'S ASSOCIATION.
   HOSPITAL. An institution where sick or injured persons are given medical
care and, during the course of that treatment, are housed overnight, fed, and
provided nursing and related services. Related services include diagnostic
facilities, laboratories, hospices, outpatient facilities, treatment
facilities, and training facilities. Hospital does include institutions
operating for the treatment of insane persons and persons suffering addictions,
but does not include nursing homes, retirement facilities, shelters, or
boarding houses.
   HOTEL. A building in which temporary lodging or board and lodging are
provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and
egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office
supervised by a person in charge at all hours. A hotel furnishes customary
services such as maid service and laundering of linen, telephone, secretarial,
or desk service, and the upkeep of furniture. As such, it is open to the
public. Compensation is usually assessed on a day-to-day basis.
   HOTEL, EXTENDED STAY. A building in which lodgings are provided and offered,
for compensation, to the public for periods greater than seven consecutive
days, and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an
inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. An
extended stay hotel may furnish customary services such as maid service and
laundering of linen, telephone, secretarial, or desk service, and the upkeep of
furniture. This type facility caters to the longer term stays which may be
incurred in business travel. Special accommodation such as kitchenettes may be
provided. In this instance, compensation is typically assessed on a contractual
basis.
   HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A group of individuals functioning as a single household,
making common use of a single kitchen and other family quarters. See also
FAMILY.
   ICE CREAM SHOP. Any establishment that primarily offers ice cream and frozen
desserts to be eaten on- or off-premises.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any hard-surfaced, man-made area that prevents
absorption of stormwater into the ground.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any building, structure, bridge, work of art, area, parking
facility, public facility, fence, gate, wall, landscaping, or other object
constituting a physical addition to real property.
   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT. A permit allowing a person to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any
structure; alter the condition of the land; change the use or occupancy of a
property; or otherwise cause any change to occur that is subject to the
requirements of this chapter and/or the McCordsville Subdivision Control
Ordinance.
   INCIDENTAL. A minor occurrence or condition that is customarily associated
with a permitted use and is likely to ensue from normal operations.
   INCIDENTAL SALES. See SALES, INCIDENTAL.
   INCINERATOR. A facility that uses thermal combustion processes to destroy or
alter the character or composition of medical waste, sludge, soil, or municipal
solid waste (not including animal or human remains).
   INDECISIVE VOTE. A vote which fails to receive a majority of the votes of
the entire membership of the body, either in favor or opposed.
   INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS PARK. Small scale manufacturing, construction,
production, and assembly uses, as well as other light industrial uses. This
district is specifically intended to provide appropriate setbacks and standards
for small-scale businesses, entrepreneurial operations, start-up businesses,
and similar operations.
   INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. The use of a property or area for the manufacture,
fabrication, processing, reduction, or destruction of any article, substance,
or commodity, including related storage facilities and warehouses.
   INDUSTRIAL, GENERAL. General industrial manufacturing, production, assembly,
warehousing, research and development facilities, and similar land uses. This
district is intended to accommodate a variety of industrial uses in locations
and under conditions that minimize land use conflicts.
   INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT. Light production, assembly, warehousing, research and
development facilities, and similar land uses. This district is intended to
accommodate only industrial uses that are completely contained within
structures and do not involve the outdoor storage of materials or the release
of potential environmental pollutants.
   INFRASTRUCTURE. Facilities and services needed to sustain industry,
residential, commercial, and all other land use activities, including utilities
and streets.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle which meets one or more of the
following conditions: (1) any motor vehicle from which there has been removed
the engine, transmission, or differential or that is otherwise partially
dismantled or mechanically inoperable; or (2) any motor vehicle which cannot be
driven on a public street without being subject to issuance of a traffic
citation by reason of its operating condition or not displaying a valid and
current license plate.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE STORAGE.  The outdoor storage of inoperable motor
vehicles from which there has been removed the engine, transmission, or
differential or that is otherwise partially dismantled or mechanically
inoperable. Any motor vehicle which cannot be driven on a town street without
being subject to the issuance of a traffic citation by reason of its operating
condition or not displaying a valid and current license plate.
   INSPECTORS. Employees of the Advisory Plan Commission authorized by the
Administrator to enter, examine, and survey all lands within the town to
accomplish the enforcement of this chapter and any other land use regulations
of the town.
   INSTITUTIONAL FACILITY FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED. An institutional
facility that provides care, supervision, and protection for persons with
developmental disabilities consistent with the provisions of Indiana Code. See
also RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED.
   INSTITUTIONAL FACILITY FOR THE MENTALLY ILL. An institutional facility that
provides care, supervision, and protection for mentally ill persons consistent
with the provisions of Indiana Code. See also RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR THE
MENTALLY ILL.
   INTERIOR GREENBELT. That portion of the front yard of a lot that is
immediately adjacent and parallel to the right-of-way of intersecting corridor
streets having a minimum depth of 15 feet from the street right-of-way line.
   INVESTMENT FIRM. Any office where the primary occupation is concerned with
businesses that buy and sell stocks, bonds, and other notes of purchase.
   JEWELRY STORE. An establishment that primarily sells new jewelry, and may
offer for sale used or consignment merchandise.
   JUNK. Scrap or waste material of any kind.
   JUNK YARD. A building, structure, or parcel of land, or portion thereof,
used for collecting, storage, or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, rubber
tires, bottles, or discarded material; or any  business and any place of
storage or deposit, whether in connection with another business or not, which
has stored or deposited two or more unregistered or inoperable motor vehicles
that are no longer intended or in condition for legal use.
   JURISDICTION. Any area over which a unit of government exercises power and
authority.
   KENNEL. See ANIMAL, KENNEL.
   LABORATORY. A facility that provides controlled conditions in which
scientific research, experiments, and measurements may be performed; a
classroom where practical learning and demonstration take place in science,
language, and other subjects.
   LAND USE. The occupation or use of land for any human activity or purpose.
   LAND USE PETITION. A rezoning petition, variance petition, special exception
petition, or any other petition permitted by rules of procedure adoption by the
McCordsville Advisory Plan Commission.
   LANDING AREA. The area of the airport used for the landing, take off, and
taxiing of aircraft.
   LANDSCAPE BUFFER. See BUFFER.
   LANDSCAPING. The improvement of a lot with grass, shrubs, trees, and other
vegetation and/or ornamental objects. Landscaping may include pedestrian walks,
flower beds, berms, fountains and other similar natural and man-made objects.
   LEGAL NONCONFORMING LOT. Any lot which has been legally established and
recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter, or its subsequent
amendments, which no longer meets the lot-specific development standards.
   LEGAL NONCONFORMING USE. Any continuous, lawful use of structures, land, or
structures and land in combination established prior to the effective date of
this chapter, or its subsequent amendments, that is no longer a permitted use
in the zoning district in which it is located.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment to the currently effective FEMA
map that establishes that a property, area, and/or structure is not located in
a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). A LOMA is only issued by FEMA.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the currently
effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones, delineations,
and elevations.
   LIBRARY. A public facility for the use, but not sale, of literary, musical,
artistic, or reference materials, with the exception of a not-for-profit group
selling outdated or donated books.
   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL PROCESSING AND DISTRIBUTION. Processing and distribution of
materials and products from processed or previously manufactured materials.
Light industry is capable of operation in such a manner as to control the
external effects of processing such as smoke, noise, odor, and the like.
   LINEAR PARK. A park or other green, open space that forms a corridor, or is
a part of a corridor along a body of water, street, abandoned rail line, or
pedestrian/bicycle trail.
   LIQUOR STORE. A store that offers retail and/or wholesale liquor, including
wine and beer.
   LIVESTOCK AUCTION/SALES FACILITY. A commercial establishment where livestock
is collected and auctioned and/or sold. Livestock at the facility are there on
a temporary basis, for immediate sale only, and not housed long term.
   LIVESTOCK RAISING AND BREEDING. The production and upkeep of livestock for
the purposes of sale, including the feeding, sheltering, grazing, and shipping
of livestock, including the storage of all necessary materials and equipment.
   LOADING BERTH. A space within a building or on the premises providing for
the loading and unloading of merchandise and materials.
   LOCAL STREET.  See STREET, LOCAL.
   LODGE OR PRIVATE CLUB. A membership organization that holds regular meetings
and that may, subject to other regulations controlling such uses, maintain
dining facilities, serve alcohol, or engage professional entertainment for the
enjoyment of dues paying members and their guests. There are no sleeping
facilities.
   LOT. A contiguous area of land separated from other areas of land by a
separate description (including a recorded deed, a subdivision plat or record
of survey map, or by metes and bounds) for purpose of sale, lease, transfer of
ownership, or separate use.
   LOT AREA.  The horizontal area within the exterior lines of a lot, including
any easements, but excluding any rights-of-way or other similar dedications to
the public.
   LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of the lot area covered by buildings,
structures, parking areas, driveways, walkways, and other paved or impervious
surface.
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The horizontal distance between side lot lines where a
property abuts a street.
   LOT LINE. The property lines which define the lot.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has
been recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a parcel of land, the
deed to which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder prior to
January 1, 2002, whether or not the property has been subsequently transferred,
but must have been transferred by the same description that was of record prior
to January 1, 2002.
   LOT OWNERS ASSOCIATION. An incorporated non-profit organization operating
under recorded land agreements through which each lot owner is automatically a
member and each lot is automatically subject to a proportionate share of the
expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining common
property.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the
required minimum front setback line or built-line line affecting the property.
   LOT, BUILDABLE. Any lot upon which improvements are permitted to be
constructed, or which is otherwise allowed to be occupied and used consistent
with all applicable requirements of this chapter.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the corner of two or more streets.
   LOT, DEVELOPED. A lot upon which improvements have been made or is otherwise
being used for human purposes.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having frontage on two or more non-intersecting
streets.
   LOT, IMPROVED.  See LOT, DEVELOPED.
   LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot which is not a corner lot or through lot.
   LOT, LEGAL NONCONFORMING. See LEGAL NONCONFORMING LOT.
   LOT, RECORDED.  See LOT OF RECORD.
   LOT, UNDEVELOPED. A lot of record upon which no improvements exist.
   LOT, ZONING. A single tract of land that, at the time of application for an
improvement location permit, is designated by the applicant for the purpose of
complying with this chapter as the tract to be used, developed, or built upon.
A zoning lot or lots may coincide with one or more lots of record.
   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest of the following: (1) the top of the basement
floor; (2) the top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of
the building; (3) the top of the first floor of buildings elevated on pilings
or constructed on a crawl space with permanent openings; or (4) the top of the
floor level of any enclosure below an elevated building where the walls of the
enclosure provide any resistance  to the flow of flood waters unless: the walls
are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on the
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters, by providing a
minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows) having a total
area of one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding. The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; such enclosed space shall be usable for the parking of vehicles
and building access.
   LUMBER YARD. An area designated for open-air storage, or a warehouse or
other enclosed building, established for the storage, distribution or sale (for
wholesale or retail purposes) of products and equipment needed in connection
with the lumber industry.
   LUMINAIRE. A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all
necessary mechanical, electrical, and decorative parts.
   LUMINAIRE, CUT-OFF TYPE. A luminaire that emits less than 2.5% of lamp
lumens, eliminating glare. The bulb is recessed into the housing.
   LUMINAIRE, FULL CUT-OFF TYPE. A luminaire with no light emitted above the
horizontal plane.
   LUMINAIRE, SEMI CUT-OFF TYPE.  A luminaire with less than 5% of the lamp
lumens emitted above the horizontal plane.
   MAIL-ORDER STORE. Similar to a distributor or wholesaler, a mail-order store
offers for sale such things as magazines, catalogs, and music directly to the
consumer via the mail and further avoiding the need for a retail store.
   MALL, SHOPPING.  A large scale retail use that typically serves a regional
market, typically drawing relatively large volumes of traffic and comprised of
a collection of independent retail stores, services, and parking areas
constructed and maintained by a management firm as a single entity.
   MANEUVERING SPACE.  An open space in a parking area which is immediately
adjacent to a parking space and is used for and/or is necessary for turning,
backing, or driving a motor vehicle into the parking space, but is not used for
the parking of or storage of motor vehicles.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. See DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A parcel of land containing two or more dwelling
sites, with required improvements and utilities that are leased for long term
placement of mobile home dwellings and/or manufactured home dwellings. A
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK does not involve sales of mobile home dwellings or
manufactured home dwellings in which unoccupied units are parked for inspection
or sale.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SALES. The sale and incidental storage of single-family
detached housing that includes mobile homes and manufactured homes Type I, II,
and III.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SITE. The area of land in a manufactured home park for the
placement of one manufactured home.
   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. Enterprises engaged in the processing, manufacturing,
compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment, or fabrication of materials and
products, from processed or previously manufactured materials. Light industry
is typically capable of operation in such a manner as to control the external
effects of the manufacturing process, such as smoke, noise, soot, dirt,
vibration or odor.
   MANUFACTURING, MEDIUM. Enterprises in which goods are generally mass
produced from raw materials on a large scale through the use of an assembly
line or similar process, usually for sale to wholesalers or other industrial or
manufacturing uses. Medium industry typically produces moderate external
effects such as smoke, noise, soot, dirt, vibration, or odor.
   MARKER (SURVEY).  A stake or any other object which is intended to mark a
point on a lot or within a subdivision.
   MASONRY. Masonry is the building of structures from individual units laid in
and bound together by mortar; the art, craft and practice of building with
natural or artificial stone which involves stone quarrying, cutting, dressing,
jointing and laying.
   MASSAGE PARLOR. An establishment where, for any form of consideration,
massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment, or similar
treatment or manipulation of the human body is administered, unless the
treatment or manipulation is administered by a medical practitioner,
chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist or similar professional person
licensed by the state.
   MASSING. The shape and form a building takes on through architectural
design. There are ten architectural design elements that create urban space:
(1) building silhouette (similar pitch and scale to a roof line); (2) spacing
between building facades (setbacks or notches between primary facades that
frame the structure); (3) setback from property line (building setback and/or
primary façade setback from the property line); (4) proportion of windows,
bays, and doorways (vertical or horizontal elements tied together in bands
across façade lengths); (5) proportion of primary façade (size of facades
similar in area and height to width ratios); (6) location and treatment of
entryway (important visual commonality between structures); (7) exterior
materials used (similar materials and treatment add to detail and monumentality
of a building); (8) building scale (similarity of building height and
configuration); (9) landscaping (ties together buildings and defines space);
and (10) shadow patterns form decorative features (the light and dark surfaces
from materials used and projections from windows, bays, and setbacks create
visual breaks). A specific project may not need to incorporate all ten
elements.
   MEAT MARKET (BUTCHER). A market that primarily offers retail and/or
wholesale meats, but may also sell related incidental products.
   MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT. See EQUIPMENT, MECHANICAL.
   MEDICAL HOSPITAL, CENTER OR COMPLEX. An institution licensed by the State
Board of Health and providing health services primarily for in-patient medical
or surgical care of the sick or injured and including related facilities such
as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service
facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facility,
provided such institution is operated by or treatment is given under direct
supervision of a licensed physician. Types of hospitals include general,
mental, chronic disease and allied special hospitals such as cardiac,
contagious disease, maternity, orthopedic, cancer and the like.
   MEDICAL OR DENTAL CLINIC. An establishment in which patients are admitted,
or otherwise treated for medical or dental study or treatment and in which the
services of at least two physicians, dentists, optometrists or chiropractors
and where other medical practitioners are available.
   METES AND BOUNDS.  A description of land prepared by a state-registered land
surveyor providing measured distances and courses from known or established
points on the surface of the earth.
   MICROBREWERY (BREW-PUB). A facility for the production and packaging of malt
beverages of low alcoholic content for distribution, retail, or wholesale, on
or off premise, with a capacity of not more than 15,000 barrels per year. The
development may include other uses such as a standard restaurant, bar or live
entertainment.
   MINIATURE GOLF COURSE. A theme-oriented recreational facility composed of a
series of putting greens where patrons pay a fee to move in consecutive order
from one green to the next.
   MINING OR EXCAVATION. The extraction of metallic and nonmetallic minerals or
materials from the earth for use off-site, including incidental uses and
facilities such as rock crushing, screening, and the necessary storage and use
of explosives.
   MINI-STORAGE FACILITY. A storage structure containing separate storage
spaces of varying sizes, each for individual purchase or rental for the storage
of household goods.
   MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT. An area, parcel of land, or structure developed for
two or more different land uses.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable structure suitable for year-round single-family
occupancy and having water, electrical, sewage connections similar to those of
conventional dwellings.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel of land with required improvements and utilities
containing two or more dwelling sites that are leased for more than 60 days.
The phrase MOBILE HOME PARK may include the siting use of a MOBILE HOMES SALES
OFFICE.
   MODULAR HOME. A factory-fabricated transportable building designed to be
used alone or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site and
designed and constructed with a perimeter frame to become a permanent structure
on a site, with all outside walls supported by a permanent foundation. A
modular home is a single-family dwelling for the purposes of this chapter.
   MONUMENT (SURVEY). A permanent physical structure which marks the location
of a corner or other survey point.
   MONUMENT SALES. A retail facility whose primary use is to offer for sale
engraving of funerary headstones, monuments, and cemetery markers, and may
include on-site manufacturing of monuments.
   MORTUARY. An establishment under the care and control of a funeral director
as licensed pursuant to M.G.L. Chap. 114, Sec. 49 with facilities for the
preparation of the dead for burial or cremation, with reposing rooms for the
viewing of the body, and for funerals, and where final disposition of the body
to be elsewhere in accordance with Indiana State Law and where the funeral home
director(s) are licensed by the State of Indiana. The term MORTUARY includes
the phrase FUNERAL HOME. A mortuary may also offer for sale, as an incidental
use, accessory funeral items.
   MOTEL. An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living
or sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space, located on a single
lot, and designed for use by transient automobile tourists. A motel furnishes
customary services such as maid service and laundering of linen, telephone,
secretarial, or desk service, and the use and upkeep of furniture. See also
HOTEL.
   MOTOR HOME.  See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any passenger vehicle, truck, tractor, tractor-trailer,
truck-trailer, trailer, or semi-trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
   MOTOR VEHICLE, INOPERABLE.  See VEHICLE, INOPERABLE.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. See DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.
   MULTI-TENANT BUILDING. A grouping of two or more business establishments
that either share common parking on the lot where they are located, or that
occupy a single structure or separate structures that are physically or
functionally related or attached.
   MULTI-USE PATHWAY.  See PATHWAY.
   MUSEUM. A building having public significance by reason of its architecture
or former use or occupancy, or a building housing a specific collection of
natural, scientific, or literary materials, objects of interest, or works of
art, and designed to be used by the public with or without an admission charge.
It may include as an accessory use the sale of goods to the public.
   MUSIC STORE. A retail establishment specializing in the sale of musical
instruments and equipment, sheet music, CD's, vinyl albums, equipment and other
accessories. A music store may include, as an incidental use, vocal and musical
instrument/equipment instruction to the public.
   NATURAL CONDITION. The condition that arises from, or is found in nature
unmodified by human intervention.
   NATURAL DRAINAGE. Drainage channels, routes, and ways formed over time in
the surface topography of the earth prior to any modifications or improvements
made by unnatural causes and/or human intervention.
   NATURE CENTER. A building, place, or grouping of buildings with a visual
center designed to educate people about nature and the environment. A nature
center is typically located within a protected open space (i.e. conservancy),
or state or town park designed to be used by the public with or without an
admission charge. It may include, as an incidental use, the sale of goods to
the public.
   NATURE RESERVE OR PRESERVE. A place designated as an area of importance for
flora, fauna, or features of geological or other special interest, which is
reserved and managed in their current natural condition for conservation
purposes and further provides special opportunities for study or research, or
preservation for the future. Nature reserves/preserves may be designated by
government institutions, or by private landowners, such as charities and
research institutions. The phrase NATURE RESERVE/PRESERVE is intended to
include WILDLIFE SANCTUARIES.
   NEWSPAPER OR MAGAZINE STAND. An establishment that primarily offers for sale
newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals. For the purpose of administering
and enforcing this chapter, the phrase newspaper or magazine stand does not
include sexually oriented businesses.
   NIGHT CLUB. A commercial establishment operated as a place of entertainment
featuring live, recorded, or televised musical, comedy, or magic performances;
dancing; and/or the serving of alcoholic beverages and/or food. For the purpose
of administering and enforcing this chapter, the phrase night club does not
include sexually oriented businesses.
   NOISE SENSITIVE ZONE. The Act at I.C. 8-21-10-3 defines a noise sensitive
zone as an area lying 1,500 feet on either side of the extended centerline of a
runway for a distance on one nautical mile from the boundary of a public use
airport which definition is incorporated herein and made a part of this
chapter.
   NONCONFORMING LOT.  A lot that does not comply with the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A building or other structure that does not comply
to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A use of land that does not comply to the regulations of
the zoning district in which it is located. For parcels within the Airport
Overlay District, a nonconforming use is any structure, tree, or use of land
which is lawfully in existence at the time of this chapter or an amendment
thereto becomes effective and which does not then meet the requirements of this
chapter or amendment.
   NOVELTY, GIFT OR SOUVENIR STORE. An establishment that primarily sells
novelty items, gifts and/or souvenirs to the general public. For the purpose of
administering and enforcing this chapter, the phrase novelty, gift or souvenir
store does not include sexually oriented businesses.
   NUISANCE. An interference with the enjoyment and use of property as defined
by the Nuisance Ordinances of the Town of McCordsville Code.
   NURSERY. Any land used to grow fruits, vegetables, trees, shrubs, flowers,
and other plants for sale. A nursery ay not include the distribution or sale of
materials that are not raised on the premises.
   NURSING HOME. A facility licensed by the State Board of Health, which
provides nursing services amounting to 24-hour per day care on a continuing
basis; admits the majority of the occupants upon the advice of physicians as
ill or infirm persons requiring nursing services; provides for licensed
physicians services or supervision; and maintains medical records. Such
facilities may also provide other similar medical or health services, including
physical therapy services with equipment uses in an on-going basis for patient
rehabilitation provided that no occupant requires security restraint within the
facility. This facility shall not contain equipment for surgical care or for
treatment of disease or injury, and is not primarily designed for mental
patients or alcoholics. Examples of nursing home facilities that provide health
services typically include nursing homes, convalescent homes, maternity homes,
rest homes, homes for the aged, and the like.
   OBJECTIONABLE ODOR. Odors that are nauseating, noxious, or generally
recognized as unpleasant.
   OCCUPANCY. The use of any land or structure.
   OFFICE SUPPLY STORE.  A large establishment that offers retail and wholesale
office supplies including items such as paper, writing utensils, computer
equipment, and office furniture.
   OFFICE USE. Administrative, executive, professional, research, or similar
organizations, and laboratories having only limited contact with the public,
with no merchandise or merchandising services sold on the premises.
   OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL. See PROFESSIONAL OFFICES.
   OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. A map of McCordsville, Indiana that legally denotes the
boundaries of zoning districts as they apply to the properties within the
Advisory Plan Commission's jurisdiction.
   OFF-PREMISE SIGN. Any sign or structure functioning to direct attention to
an establishment or business that is not located on the same legal parcel as
the advertising sign or structure.
   OFF-STREET PARKING. The provision of parking spaces which are not located on
any public right-of-way.
   OIL CHANGE SHOP.  A facility that provides lubrication, checking, changing,
and the addition of those fluids and filters needed for automobile maintenance.
Generally such services are provided while the customer waits.
   OPEN SPACE. An area of land not covered by structures or accessory uses
except for those related to recreation. Open space may include nature areas;
streams and flood plains; meadows or open fields containing baseball, football,
and soccer fields, golf courses, swimming pools, bicycle paths, and the like.
Open space does not include street rights-of-way, platted lot area, private
yards, patio areas, or land scheduled for future development.
   ORNAMENTAL SHRUB. See SHRUB, ORNAMENTAL.
   ORNAMENTAL TREE. See TREE, ORNAMENTAL.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping of items for sale, the products of
manufacturing, materials used in production, vehicles, and other similar
materials and/or equipment in an area outside of any building.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE, SEASONAL. The outdoor storage of items for retail sale that
are, by their nature, sold during a peak season, such as fruits and vegetables,
Christmas trees, lawn accessories, and bedding plants.
   OUTLOT. A lot platted as part of a larger development that is intended for
the development of uses and structures which are complementary too but of a
smaller scale than the primary use or structure in the development.
   OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT. A zoning district that extends across one or more
other zoning districts which is intended to provide additional or alternate
regulations for a specific critical feature or resource.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to, or sufficient
proprietary interest in the land, or their legal representative.
   OWNERS ASSOCIATION. See LOT OWNERS ASSOCIATION.
   PACKAGING FACILITY. A facility that packages supplies and products that are
manufactured off site.
   PARAPET. The portion of a wall which extends above the roof line.
   PARCEL.  See LOT.
   PARK. Any public or private land and related structures, including athletic
facilities, shelter houses, and maintenance facilities that are designed to
provide recreational, educational, cultural, or aesthetic use to the community.
   PARKING FACILITY. A public or private area or parcel of land located outside
of the public right-of-way and used for the storage of motor vehicles for
limited periods of time. A parking facility includes all parking spaces,
interior drives, and maneuvering areas, and may be an open parking lot or
parking structure.
   PARKING LOT. An open off-street area to be used for the storage of motor
vehicles for limited periods of time. A parking lot includes all parking
spaces, interior drives, and maneuvering areas. Outdoor areas at facilities
where motor vehicles, including uninstalled mobile and manufactured homes, are
sold that are intended for the storage of such vehicles are also considered a
parking lot.
   PARKING SPACE. A space within a public or private parking area for the
storage of one motor vehicle.
   PARKING, OFF-STREET. A storage space for an automobile located outside of a
street right-of-way.
   PARKING, ON-STREET.  A storage space for an automobile that is located
within the right-of-way of a street.
   PARKING, SHARED. A parking space or lot used jointly by two or more uses or
structures.
   PATHWAY. A designated route for travel by pedestrians, bicycles, and other
non-motorized methods of personal transportation and recreation which is
surfaced with crushed rock, concrete, or asphalt and separated from streets by
distance or striping.
   PAVED SURFACE. A durable surface for parking, driving, riding or similar
activities that utilizes asphalt, Portland cement, concrete, brick, paving
blocks, or other approved surfaces. Crushed gravel, street grindings, stone,
rock, or dirt, sand or grass are not a paved surface.
   PAYDAY LOAN ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment where a short-term loan is
offered with intent to cover a borrower's expenses until his or her next
payday.
   PENAL INSTITUTION.  Publicly or privately operated facilities housing
persons awaiting trial or persons serving a sentence after being found guilty
of a criminal offense. The phrase PENAL INSTITUTION shall include the phrase
CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION.
   PERMANENT FOUNDATION. A structural system for transposing loads from a
structure to the earth at a depth below the established frost line without
exceeding the safe bearing capacity of the supporting soil.
   PERMIT AUTHORITY. The staff of the town and the applicable board of zoning
appeals within the jurisdiction of the town.
   PERSON. A person, corporation, firm, partnership, association, trust,
organization, unit of government, or any other entity that acts as a unit,
including all members of any group.
   PERSONAL SERVICES. An establishment or place of business primarily engaged
in the provision of frequent and recurrent services of a personal nature, such
as a beauty or barber shop, shoe repair shop, or tanning salon.
   PET STORE. A retail sales facility primarily involved in the sale of
domestic animals, such as cats, dogs, fish, birds, and reptiles as well as
domestic pet accessories. A pet shop does not include the retail sale of exotic
or farm animals.
   PETITIONER.  See APPLICANT.
   PETROLEUM PROCESSING AND STORAGE. An establishment that processes and stores
petroleum and its raw ingredients.
   PHARMACY. A place where drugs and medicines are prepared and dispensed.
Pharmacy also includes the incidental retail sale of medical accessories and
convenience goods and services.
   PHILANTHROPIC INSTITUTION OR FACILITY. A building, place, or grouping of
buildings used to provide humanitarian or charitable assistance contributing to
the greater good of society. This facility may be utilized for office and
administration purposes, community engagement, education, storage of goods, and
other accessory uses.
   PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDIO. A facility engaged in onsite photography, processing,
and development, including limited retail sale, lease and service of
photography equipment and supplies.
   PLACE OF WORSHIP. See RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION OR OTHER PLACE OF WORSHIP.
   PLAN. See COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   PLAN COMMISSION. McCordsville Advisory Plan Commission.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A large-scale unified development meeting the
requirements of this chapter. Generally a planned unit development provides
design flexibility (e.g. mixed use) for a parcel or parcels to be developed as
a single entity which does not correspond in size of lots, layout, bulk or type
of buildings, density, lot coverage, and required open space to the regulations
established in any zoning district of this chapter.
   PLANNING JURISDICTION. The area over which a city, town or county has
planning authority as drawn by each community in compliance with I.C. 36-7-4 et
al.
   PLANTING SEASON. The spring and fall time periods during which new plant
material which is installed is most likely to survive the planting process.
Generally these periods are from April 15 to June 15 in the spring and from
October 15 to November 15 in the fall.
   PLAT. A map or chart that shows a division of land.
   PLAT, PRIMARY.  The primary plat, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-700 series, is the
plat and plans upon which the primary approval of a proposed subdivision is
based.
   PLAT, SECONDARY.  The secondary plat, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-700 series, is
the plat document of a subdivision meeting all of the requirements of the town
prepared in a recordable form.
   PLAYGROUND. A recreational area for use primarily by children.
   PORCH. A covered, but otherwise unenclosed structure projecting out from the
wall or walls of a main structure.
   POST OFFICE. A facility operated by the United States Postal Service that
houses service windows for mailing packages and letters, post office boxes,
offices, and which also sorts and distributes the mail. A post office may
include on-site storage of delivery vehicles.
   POWER GENERATION FACILITY. A facility that produces usable electricity by
harnessing any array of resources including fossil fuels, water, wind, and
solar sources.
   PRACTICAL DIFFICULTY. A difficulty with regard to one's ability to improve
land stemming from regulations of this chapter. A practical difficulty is not a
"hardship," rather it is a situation where the owner could comply with the
regulations within the Zoning Ordinance, but would like a variance from the
Development Standards to improve his or her site in a practical manner. For
instance, a person may request a variance from a side yard setback due to a
large tree which is blocking the only location that would meet the Development
Standards for a new garage location.
   PRIMARY PLAT. See PLAT, PRIMARY.
   PRIMARY STRUCTURE. The building or structure in which the primary use of the
lot or premises is located or conducted, with respect to residential uses, the
primary building or structure shall be the main dwelling. For agricultural
uses, the primary structure may be a barn or other agricultural structure.
   PRIMARY USE.  See USE, PRIMARY.
   PRINT SHOP OR COPY CENTER, COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL. A facility specializing
in commercial or industrial scale reproduction of written or graphic materials
on a custom order or contract basis. Typical processes include, but are not
limited to: large scale plotting, photocopying, blueprint, and facsimile
sending and receiving, offset printing, logo-printing, stationary and calendar
production and other similar activities.
   PRINT SHOP OR COPY CENTER, RETAIL.  A facility for the custom reproduction
of written or graphic materials on a custom order basis for individuals or
businesses. Typical processes include, but are not limited to: large scale
plotting, photocopying, and facsimile.
   PRINTING/PUBLISHING FACILITY. A large scale facility that specializes in the
printing and publication of books, magazines, or newspapers for the purposes of
sale or distribution. This use may require storage and or distribution
facilities for goods and vehicles.
   PRIVATE CLUB. A facility or property owned or operated by a corporation,
association, person or persons for a social, educational, or recreational
purpose and for which membership is required for participation.
   PRIVATE RECREATIONAL FACILITY. A recreational facility for use by residents
and guests of a particular residential development, church, private primary or
secondary educational facility, or limited residential neighborhood, including
both indoor and outdoor facilities and privately-owned golf courses open to the
public.
   PRIVATE STREET. See STREET, PRIVATE.
   PROCESSING PLANT. A building or an enclosed space used for the collection
and processing of material. PROCESSING means the preparation of material for
efficient shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as
baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical
sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing.
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. A building or establishment for the provision of
professional services. Professional services are typically provided by, but are
not limited to: doctors, lawyers, architects, financial advisors, stockbrokers,
and engineers.
   PROHIBITED TREES. See TREES, PROHIBITED.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The person(s) identified as the property owner on the most
recent list prepared and maintained by the Hancock County Auditor's Office. See
also OWNER.
   PUBLIC ART.  Any visual work of art that is accessible to public view and
located on public or private property.
   PUBLIC HEARING. A formal meeting, announced and advertised in advance
consistent with the requirements of this chapter, which is open to the public,
and at which members of the public have an opportunity to participate.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any improvement, facility, or service which provides
transportation, drainage, public utilities, or similar essential services which
are typically or specifically required to be provided by a unit of government.
   PUBLIC STREET. See STREET, PUBLIC.
   PUBLIC UTILITY STRUCTURE. Electric and telephone substations and
distribution centers, filtration plants, pumping stations and water reservoirs;
public or package sewer treatment plants, telephone exchanges; radio and
television transmitting or relay stations; antenna towers and other similar
public utility service structures.
   PUBLISHING FACILITY. Any facility that prints and/or assembles publications
including books, magazines, and newspapers for the purposes of sale and/or
distribution.
   QUARRY. A lot or any part of a lot used for the extracting of stone, sand,
gravel, or any other material to be processed for commercial purposes.
   RACETRACK. Any measured venue for the sport of racing where animals or
machines are entered in competition against one another or against time. A
racetrack may or may not have areas for spectators. Racetrack includes, but is
not limited to, oval track racing, drag racing, motorcross, tractor pulling,
go-cart racing, remote control airplane flying, and similar uses.
   RADIO OR TV STATION. A facility primarily engaged in the production and
broadcasting of television or radio programs. The size of this facility varies
based on scale of operation. Broadcasting and transmission facilities are
subject to municipal and FCC codes.
   REAR YARD.  See YARD, REAR.
   RECORD.  The written documentation of the actions and expressions of a
public body, such as the Advisory Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals.
   RECORD SHOP (CD SHOP). An establishment that primarily deals with new and
used audio recordings in an array of media formats. Some shops also include the
sales of new and used video recordings as well.
   RECREATION. The refreshment of body and mind through forms of play,
amusement, or relaxation. The recreational experience may be active, such as
boating or swimming, or individual or team sports, or may be passive, such as
enjoying the natural beauty of the shoreline or its wildlife.
   RECREATION FACILITY, INDOOR. A public or private indoor facility designed to
provide opportunities for recreation. The term INDOOR RECREATION FACILITY
typically includes structures for active and passive recreation similar to but
separate from fitness centers and community centers. Indoor recreational
facilities typically include indoor tracks, indoor soccer facilities, paint-
ball facilities, and facilities that house similar activities. This facility
may include an accessory recreational area, provided as part of a development
that is owned and maintained by the owners' association or property owner
primarily for the use of the residents or employees of the development, and
which may also be made accessible for use by the general public through
associate membership subscription or user fees.
   RECREATION FACILITY, OUTDOOR. A public or private outdoor facility designed
to provide opportunities for recreation. The term includes active and passive
recreational structures such as: swimming pools, skating rinks, tennis courts,
basketball courts, pavilions, picnic areas, and the like. This facility may
include an accessory recreational area, provided as part of a development that
is owned and maintained by the owners' association or property owner primarily
for the use of the residents or employees of the development, and which may
also be made accessible for use by the general public through associate
membership subscription or user fees.
   RECREATIONAL USE, LARGE SCALE. Recreational uses that tend to serve a
regional area and include establishments such as riding stables, seasonal
hunting and fishing facilities, and outdoor shooting ranges.
   RECREATIONAL USE, MEDIUM SCALE.  Recreational uses that tend to serve a
community-wide area and include establishments such as bowling alleys,
theaters, assembly halls, miniature golf courses, indoor shooting ranges,
swimming pools, and skating rinks.
   RECREATIONAL USE, SMALL SCALE. Recreational uses that tend to serve a local
area and include establishments such as billiard rooms, arcades, nightclubs,
brewpubs, and bars.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any building, structure, or vehicle designed and/or
used for seasonal living or sleeping and/or recreational purposes and equipped
with wheels to facilitate movement from place to place (either under its own
power or towed by another vehicle). Recreational vehicles are built on a single
chassis and measure 400 square feet or less, including the largest horizontal
projections. Recreational vehicles include automobiles when used for living or
sleeping purposes, pick-up truck coaches, motorized homes, boats, jet skis,
wave runners and other aquatic vehicles, travel trailers, snow mobiles, and
camping trailers not meeting the definition of a manufactured or mobile home.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. Any site, lot, field, or tract designed with
facilities for the temporary use of recreational vehicles.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SALES OR SERVICE.  Any principal use of a premise for
one or more of the following purposes: (a) sale or lease of new recreational
vehicles; (b) purchase and sale of second hand recreational vehicles; (c)
buying of second hand recreational vehicles for the purpose of  remodeling,
taking apart or rebuilding or selling the same, or the buying selling of parts
of second hand recreational vehicles or tires, or the assembling of second hand
recreational vehicles parts; or (d) repair and servicing of recreational
vehicles provided said repair and servicing is conducted as an incidental
service.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE, OUTDOOR. A secure outdoor facility for the
storage of recreational vehicles.
   REFUSE DUMP. A facility designated to receive and hold municipal solid waste
and other waste matters. Waste at a refuse dump is not compacted or covered as
it is in a sanitary landfill.
   REGISTERED ARCHITECT. An architect properly licensed and registered or
through reciprocity permitted to practice in the State of Indiana.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor properly licensed and registered
or through reciprocity permitted to practice in the State of Indiana.
   REGISTERED LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A landscape architect properly licensed and
registered or through reciprocity permitted to practice in the State of
Indiana.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer properly licensed and
registered or through reciprocity permitted to practice in the State of
Indiana.
   REGULATORY FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure which is
acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Natural Resources Commission and the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known by the
term BASE FLOOD.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the flood plains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river
or stream and, is that area covered by floodwaters in significant downstream
motion or covered by significant volumes of stored water during the occurrence
of the regulatory flood.
   RELIGIOUS, PLACE OF WORSHIP. The use of a building or property, or some
combination thereof, by a non-profit group for the purpose of religious worship
together with all incidental uses commonly associated with such a facility,
such as a day-care center or school. The phrase RELIGIOUS PLACE OF WORSHIP
includes synagogue, temple, mosque or any other like facility used for worship
and religious activities.
   REPAIR SERVICES. Establishments that provide repair services to individuals
and households, rather than businesses, not including automotive and equipment
repair. Typically such services include the repair of appliances, watches,
jewelry, and musical instruments.
   REPLAT. Any change in a final plat of an approved or recorded subdivision.
   RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY. A facility primarily engaged in the
development and acquisition of information, specialized technology or to
introduce ideas into the business in order to improve competitiveness and
profitability. For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, the
phrase RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY shall include LABORATORIES.
   RESIDENCE. See DWELLING.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. An area used primarily for dwellings.
   RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT CENTER. Any facility licensed by the Indiana
Department of Health, public or private, which regularly provides one or more
people with 24-hour a day substitute care, food, lodging, training, education,
supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation and treatment they need, but which
for any reason cannot be furnished in the person's own home.
   RESIDENTIAL/INSTITUTIONAL FACILITY FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED OR
MENTALLY ILL. A residential facility which provides residential services for
mentally ill individuals, as defined by I.C. 12-28-4-7, as amended from time to
time.
   RESTAURANT. A structure in which the principal use is the preparation and
sale of food and beverages.
   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN. A facility and its adjacent parking area wherein the
primary function is to offer for sale food to the public by order from and
service to passengers in vehicles parked outside of the structure. Drive-in
restaurants may also provide seating within the restaurant.
   RESTAURANT, EAT-IN. A commercial establishment where food and beverages are
prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building and
where food sales typically constitute more than 50% of the gross sales
receipts.
   RESTAURANT, FAST CASUAL. A commercial establishment where customers order
and are served their food at a counter or in a motor vehicle in packages
prepared to leave the premises, or which are able to be taken to a table or
counter to be consumed. However, unlike fast food, the food is not prepared
prior to the customer ordering.
   RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD. A commercial establishment where customers order and
are served their food at a counter or in a motor vehicle in packages prepared
to leave the premises, or which are able to be taken to a table or counter to
be consumed.
   RETAIL, BARGAIN. A retail establishment that specializes in selling any of
the following: goods at reduced prices; a wide range of retail goods at a
specific price point that is approximately $1; inexpensive items usually priced
at $1 or a few dollars; repurposed or second-hand goods.
   RETAIL USES. Commercial enterprises that provide goods and/or services
directly to the consumer, where such goods are available for immediate purchase
and removal from the business.
   RETAIL USES, LARGE SCALE. Retail uses that serve a regional area and include
establishments such as supermarkets, shopping malls, and department stores.
Such uses are typically 60,000 square feet in gross floor area and greater.
   RETAIL USES, MEDIUM SCALE. Retail uses that serve a community-wide area and
include establishments such as craft stores, sporting goods stores, pharmacies,
antique shops, meat markets, and repair services. Such uses shall be less than
60,000 square feet in gross floor area.
   RETAIL USES, SMALL SCALE. Retail uses that tend to serve a local area and
include establishments such as video stores, delicatessens, bakeries, gift
shops, and ice cream shops. Such uses shall be less than 10,000 square feet in
gross floor area.
   RETIREMENT FACILITY. A residential structure containing multi-family
dwelling units designed for and occupied by senior citizens. Such facilities
may include common gathering and dining facilities, but typically do not
include nursing or medical care.
   RETREAT CENTER. A facility used for professional, educational, or religious
meetings, conferences, or seminars which provides meals, housing, and
recreation for participants during the period of the retreat or program.
   REVERSE GABLE. Roof sections that extend in the opposite direction from the
normal gable construction. These are usually miniature additions that allow
homeowners to include windows and peaks in an otherwise flat roof slope. A
reverse gable roof reverses the direction of the gable, versus the gable
structure itself, making the roof a secondary construction attached to the main
roof of the house.
   REZONING. An amendment to the Official Zoning Map which has the affecting of
removing property from one zoning district and placing it in a different zoning
district.
   RIDING STABLE. An establishment that shelters and offers upkeep to horses
for use by patrons and private owners. Stables generally include grazing
pastures and land designated for horseback riding.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Property occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
trail, utility transmission line, or other public utility or facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE. The limit of publicly owned land encompassing a public
facility, such as a street or an alley as measured in the Thoroughfare Plan.
   ROAD. See STREET.
   R-O-W. See RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   RUNWAY. The surface of an airport used for landing and take-off of aircraft.
   RUNWAY, NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT. A runway that has an electronic approach
guidance system utilizing navigational aids that provide horizontal course
alignment guidance and position location, but not electronic descent guidance
which authorizes aircraft to execute non-precision approaches with visibility
minimums down to and including 3/4 mile.
   RUNWAY, PRECISION INSTRUMENT. A runway that has an electronic approach
system utilizing navigational aids that provide electronic descent guidance in
addition to the course alignment guidance of a non-precision instrument runway
which authorizes aircraft to execute precision approaches with visibility
minimums of 3/4 mile or less.
   RUNWAY, VISUAL. A runway that is used only under Visual Flight Rules (VFR)
and/or for circle to land instrument flight procedures.
   SALES, INCIDENTAL. Sales that are related and subordinate to the primary
service or retail activities of a commercial use.
   SALES, TEMPORARY SEASONAL. Facilities that are indoor or outdoor and operate
on a temporary basis for the sale of seasonal fruits and vegetables, fireworks,
Christmas trees, and/or other holiday, event, or season related products.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. The designated area where non-hazardous and non-medical
farm, residential, institutional, commercial, or industrial waste is buried.
   SATELLITE DISH/ANTENNA. An apparatus capable of receiving communications
from a transmitter relay located in a planetary orbit or broadcasted signals
from transmitting towers.
   SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL (TRADE OR BUSINESS). A specialized instructional
establishment that provides on-site training of business, commercial, and/or
trade skills such as technology, cosmetology, accounting, data processing, and
computer programming and repair. The terms COMMERCIAL, TRADE OR BUSINESS
SCHOOLS are intended to include VOCATIONAL SCHOOLS and CAREER CENTERS.
   SCHOOL, NURSERY.  A school for children between the ages of three and five
years of age, staffed by qualified teachers and other professionals who
encourage and supervise educational play rather than simply providing
childcare.
   SCHOOL, PRE-K THROUGH 12. A public, private, or parochial institution which
offers instruction in any of the branches of learning and study comparable to
that taught in the public schools under the State of Indiana school laws and/or
regulations, including pre-school, kindergarten, elementary school, and junior
and senior high schools.
   SCHOOL, UNIVERSITY OR COLLEGE. An institution, public or private, for post-
secondary education offering courses in general, technical, or religious
education. This use typically operates in buildings owned or leased by the
institution for administrative and faculty offices, student and faculty
housing, classrooms, laboratories, chapels, auditoriums, lecture halls,
libraries, student and faculty centers, community rooms and facilities,
athletic facilities, fraternities, or sororities. A university may include for-
profit businesses and facilities that are incidental to the educational,
cultural, and athletic functions and which lease space from the institution.
   SCRAP METAL YARD. A general industrial use established independent or
ancillary to and connected with another general industrial use, which is
concerned exclusively in new and salvaged metal pipes, wire, beams, angles,
rods, machinery, parts, filings, clippings, and all other metal items of every
type, and which acquires such items incidental to its connection with the other
general industrial use or by purchase, consignment or bailment which stores,
grades, processes, melts, cuts, dismantles, compresses, cleans, or in any way
prepares the items for reuse by the connected other general industrial use or
for storage, sale or shipment and use in other industries or businesses
including open hearth, electric furnaces and foundry operations; such an
establishment shall not include junk yards, dumps, or automobile graveyards.
   SEASONAL HUNTING/FISHING FACILITY. A designated outdoor area that allows for
the hunting and fishing of certain species during their appropriate gaming
seasons.
   SEED SALES, DISTRIBUTION, AND STORAGE. An establishment that sells, stores,
and distributes agricultural seed for farm planting. Such establishments
primarily sell in bulk for commercial farm purposes.
   SELF SERVICE LAUNDRY. A business with vending machine type washing, drying,
dry-cleaning, and ironing equipment for use by customers on site.
   SELF STORAGE OR MINI-WAREHOUSE, COMMERCIAL. Facilities that rent spaces or
units within a permanent building, for the temporary or long-term storage of
personal items. These businesses generally have lease agreements with customers
and have hours of operation during which customers may access their stored
items.
   SERVICES, PERSONAL AND PROFESSIONAL. See PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
   SETBACK. The horizontal distance between a structure and a lot line or
right-of-way line.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any facility designed for the treatment of sewage
that serves an entire community, region, or specific geographic area.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any commercial activity whether conducted
intermittently or continuously, which primarily involves the sale, display,
exhibition, or viewing of books, magazines, films, photographs, or other
materials, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to human sex acts, or by an emphasis on male or female
genitals, buttocks, or female breasts. Sexually oriented businesses typically
include, but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. Any establishment having as a preponderance of its
stock in trade or its dollar volume in trade any merchandise for sale, trade or
lease which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on adult
matter;
      (2)   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, theater, restaurant or similar
establishment which frequently features live performances by topless or
bottomless dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, whether professional or
amateur, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on, or by exposure of, adult matter;
      (3)   ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT ARCADE. Any building or structure which
contains or is used for commercial entertainment where the patron directly or
indirectly is charged a fee to view from an enclosed or screened area or booth
a series of live dance routines, strip performances or other gyrational
choreography and where performances are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on, or by exposure of, adult matter;
      (4)   ADULT MOTEL. Any motel or similar establishment offering public
accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons, upon
request, with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, DVD's, digital or physical slides or other photographic,
reproduction which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction or description of adult matter;
      (5)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Any establishment, to which the
public is permitted or invited, used for presenting films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, DVD's, digital or physical slides or similar photographic
reproductions in which a preponderance of the total presentation time is
devoted to showing of materials which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on adult matter; or
      (6)    ADULT SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any building, structure, premises or
other facility, or any part thereof, under common ownership or control which
provides a preponderance of services involving adult matter.
   SHADE TREE. See TREE, SHADE.
   SHIPPING SERVICE, RETAIL. A commercial establishment whereby items can be
shipped via various carriers on a custom order basis for individuals or
businesses.
   SHOE REPAIR SHOP. An establishment that primarily repairs shoes, with
incidental sales of shoe related items.
   SHOOTING RANGE. Any establishment at which firearms are discharged for the
purpose of recreation and entertainment.
   SHOOTING RANGE (INDOOR).  A shooting range at which all shooting areas and
targets are completely enclosed in a structure.
   SHOOTING RANGE (OUTDOOR). A shooting range at which any portion of the
shooting areas or targets are located outside of a completely enclosed
structure.
   SHOPPING MALL.  A shopping center where numerous stores front on a
pedestrian way that may be enclosed or open.
   SHRUB, ORNAMENTAL. A shrub planted primarily for its ornamental and
screening value, not to be confused with a perennial.
   SIDE LOT LINE. A lot boundary line other than a front or rear lot line,
typically those which are perpendicular to, and intersect with the front and
rear lot lines.
   SIDE YARD.  See YARD, SIDE.
   SIGHT VISIBILITY TRIANGLE. Triangular shaped areas on each corner of an
intersection that are looked through by drivers approaching or departing an
intersection to view oncoming traffic on crossing streets and roadways.
   SIGN. Any name, identification, description, device, display, or
illustration which is affixed to, painted, or represented directly or
indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land which directs attention
to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or
business. A sign includes the face area which conveys a message, any equipment
or sign device, and any related mechanical, electrical, and structural supports
and features, such as poles and lighting. In no instance shall this chapter be
interpreted as considering any flag as a sign.
   SIGN PERMIT.  A permit issued by the Administrative Officer on behalf of the
Advisory Plan Commission that must be obtained before temporary and permanent
signs are erected.
   SIGN SETBACK. The distance between any property line or right-of-way and the
nearest portion of any sign at or above grade level.
   SIGN, ABANDONED. A sign face or sign area is considered abandoned when the
use to which it relates is no longer in existence or operational for a period
of at least 30 days. Additionally, a sign structure, including all poles,
frames, supports, and other structural, electrical, mechanical, and other
elements shall be considered abandoned if the property on which it is located
is vacant and/or unused for a period of six months or longer.
   SIGN, A-FRAME. A temporary sign that is constructed of wood or other similar
rigid material and is designed to be displayed outside only between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m (EST) or 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. (EDT). A-FRAME SIGNS
have an “A” shaped frame and may feature a sign on one or both sides.
   SIGN, ANIMATED. A sign with action, motion, or changing colors or lights,
any of which imitates movement. A flashing sign shall be considered to be an
ANIMATED SIGN.
   SIGN, AREA. The entire face of a sign including the message surface and any
framing or trim, but excluding any poles or other supports. SIGN AREA is
measured as the maximum vertical dimension of the face area multiplied by the
maximum horizontal dimension of the face area, each at its largest point.
   SIGN, AWNING.  A sign incorporated into, or attached to an awning.
   SIGN, BANNER. A sign with a message applied to cloth, paper, fabric, or
flexible plastic, with any such non-rigid material for background.
   SIGN, BILLBOARD. See SIGN, OFF-PREMISE.
   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. A sign or portion thereof which has a reader board
for the display of text information in which each alphanumeric character,
graphic or symbol is defined by objects which may be changed or rearranged
manually or mechanically with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be
changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS display a static message rather than a message that
imitates movement.
   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. Any on-premises sign that includes information assisting
in the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as "enter", "exit", and
"one-way".
   SIGN, DOUBLE-FACED. A sign designed and/or used to display a message on the
outer surface of two identical and opposite parallel planes.
   SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD.  A sign or portion thereof that displays
electronic information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic or symbol
is defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of
light emitting diodes (LEDs) or fiber optics, light bulbs, or other
illumination devices within the display area itself. ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD
SIGNS typically include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled
electronic displays. For the purposes of administering and enforcing this
chapter, the phrase ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD shall also include projected
images or messages onto a building or other object.
   SIGN, ENTRY FEATURE. A permanent on-premise sign identifying an entrance to
a residential subdivision, apartment complex, or manufactured home park.
   SIGN, FACE. The area or display surface used for the message.
   SIGN, FREE-STANDING. A sign supported completely by a frame, pole, or
foundation and which is independent from all other structures on the property.
   SIGN, FUEL STATION LED PRICING SIGN COMPONENT. An LED sign with a black
background consisting of one, two or three colors which illuminate only the
price of up to three products. In no instance shall the price flash, scroll,
twirl, change color, fade in or out, or be anything other than static display
of price. The only changes shall be change in price. Such signs are only
permitted at fuel stations. FUEL STATION LED PRICING SIGN COMPONENTS are not
considered electronic message boards.
   SIGN, FUEL STATION PUMP. A type of wall sign affixed for fueling pump
dispensers.
   SIGN, GROUND. A sign supported by one or more uprights, posts, or bases
placed upon or affixed in the ground and not attached to any part of a
building. It includes freestanding signs and monument signs.
   SIGN, HEIGHT.  The highest point measured from adjacent street grade level
to the highest point of the sign, including any structure, frame, light
fixture, or other element of the sign.
   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting
either by internal or external illumination.
   SIGN, INFLATABLE. Any flexible or expandable sign or portion thereof which
is filled with air, helium, or other gas and appears to float, rise, move, and
the like. This shall include, but not be limited to, balloons.
   SIGN, MONUMENT. A sign that is permanently affixed to the ground at its
base, supported entirely by a base structure, and not mounted on a pole. This
sign could be displayed on a decorative feature of brick, wood or other
material, which is intended to serve as an entry feature or focal point.
   SIGN, MURAL. A sign painted onto the side of a building, wall, ground, or
structure.
   SIGN, OFF-PREMISE. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, organization, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere
than upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
This includes billboard and other outdoor advertising and directional signs
located on private property.
   SIGN, OPINION. A sign which does not advertise a product, good, business, or
service and which expresses an opinion or point of view, such as a student
achievement announcement, a political, religious, or other sentiment, or
support or opposition to a candidate or proposition for a public election.
   SIGN, POLE. A free-standing sign, usually double-faced, mounted on a round
pole, square tube or other fabricated member without any type of secondary
support; a free-standing sign with a visible support structure.
   SIGN, PORTABLE. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not
limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs
converted to A or T-frames; menu or sandwich board signs; and balloons used as
signs.
   SIGN, POSTER. Any sign made of cardboard, metal, plastic or other semi-rigid
material which is attached to outdoor products, structures, or other features,
or anchored into the ground with the use of stakes.
   SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign attached to and projecting out from a building face
or wall, generally at right angles to the building.
   SIGN, PYLON. A free-standing sign, other than a pole or ground mounted sign,
which is secured permanently to the ground by one or more supports. A pylon
sign differs from a pole sign in that the support structure (i.e. pole or
poles) of a pylon sign is not visible.
   SIGN, REAL ESTATE. A temporary sign that relates to the sale, lease or
rental of property or structures, or to construction activity on a site.
   SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD. A free-standing sign located at grade level
constructed in such a manner as to form an "A" by separating to opposite and
parallel sign faces by supporting structural members.
   SIGN, SEARCHLIGHT. A searchlight used to attract attention to a property,
use, or structure consistent with the definition of a sign. A SEARCHLIGHT is a
type of animated sign.
   SIGN, SUPPLEMENTARY WALL. A temporary, exempt wall sign permitted for a
limited amount of time in a calendar year.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign not fixed to a permanent foundation and displayed
for a fixed period of time, for the purpose of conveying information,
knowledge, or ideas to the public.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY GROUND. A temporary sign constructed of wood, composite
wood, or other similar rigid materials.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY WALL. A temporary sign permitted that is attached to a
primary structure.
   SIGN, TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGN COMPONENT. An LED sign with a black
background consisting of one color which illuminates only the current time and
temperature. In no instance shall the time and temperature flash, scroll,
twirl, change color, fade in or out, or be anything other than static display
of time and temperature. The only changes shall be change in time and
temperature. TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGN COMPONENTS are not considered electronic
message boards.
   SIGN, UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT. A single sign structure with one or more sign
faces indicating the presence of multiple tenants on a property being
constructed or managed as a single development. Such developments include, but
are not limited to: shopping centers, office parks, and industrial parks.
   SIGN, VEHICLE. A sign that is attached to or painted on a parked vehicle for
the purpose of drawing attention to the product, business, or property which is
indicated on the sign.
   SIGN, WALL. A sign attached to or painted on the exterior wall of a
structure.
   SIGN, WINDOW. A sign affixed to a window or placed immediately behind a
window pane so as to attract the attention of persons outside of the structure.
   SIGN, YARD. A temporary, exempt ground sign permitted for a limited amount
of time in a calendar year.
   SIGNABLE AREA. A two-dimensional area that describes the largest square,
rectangle, or parallelogram on the facade of a building which is free of
architectural details.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  The plan indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, structures, paved areas, walkways, vegetative cover,
landscaping and screening within a site proposed for development which is to be
submitted for approval prior to the release of improvement location permits on
the site consistent with the requirements of the I.C. 36-7-4-1400 series.
   SITE IMPROVEMENT. The erection, construction, placement, repair, alteration,
conversion, removal, demolition, maintenance, moving, razing, or remodeling of
any new or existing structure or any part thereof and any activity for which an
improvement location permit is required.
   SKATING RINK. An establishment that provides facilities for patron skating.
   SMALL CELL FACILITY. A personal wireless service facility as defined by the
Act or a wireless service facility that satisfies the following requirements:
      (1)   Each antenna, including exposed elements, has a volume of three
cubic feet or less;
      (2)   All antennas, including exposed elements, have a total volume of
six cubic feet or less; and
      (3)   The primary equipment enclosure located with the facility has a
volume of 40 cubic feet or less.
   SMALL CELL FACILITY CONSTRUCTION PLAN. A written plan for construction,
provided by a qualified and licensed professional engineer that demonstrates
the aesthetics of the wireless support structure is substantially similar to
the town’s street lights; includes the total height and width of the wireless
facility and wireless support structure, including cross section and elevation,
footing, foundation, and wind speed details; a structural analysis indicating
capacity for future and existing antennas, including a geotechnical report and
calculations for the foundations capacity; the identity and qualifications of
each person directly responsible for the design and construction; and
documentation that shows the proposed locations of the wireless facility and
wireless support structure and all easements and existing structures within 200
feet of such wireless facility or wireless support structure.
   SMALL CELL NETWORK. A collection of interrelated small cell facilities
designed to deliver wireless service.
   SORORITY, EDUCATIONAL. A club or social activity officially associated with
and recognized and supervised by an institution for higher education whose
membership is limited exclusively to students of the institution.
   SORORITY, SOCIAL. A private club of individuals organized around a civic,
social, or intellectual goal or pursuit. See also PRIVATE CLUB.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION. A use that would not be appropriate generally or without
restrictions throughout the zoning district, but if controlled as to number,
area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would promote public health,
safety, and general welfare.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION, USE. See USE, SPECIAL EXCEPTION.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdiction of the
Town of McCordsville that are subject to inundation by the regulatory flood.
The SFHAs of the town are identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of Hancock
County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   SPORTING GOODS SHOP.  An establishment that primarily sells sporting
equipment, sporting apparel, and related items.
   SPOT ZONING. The zoning of a typically small area of land controlled by a
single or limited number of property owners that results in the property
involved being granted permitted uses and/or development standards that are
inconsistent with those provided to, or planned for, similar surrounding
properties.
   SPOTLIGHT. A fixture designed to direct a narrow intense beam of light on a
desired area.
   STATE. The State of Indiana.
   STATIONARY SHOP. An establishment that primarily sells stationary, paper,
cards, writing utensils, and various related items.
   STOCKADE FENCE. A wooden fence made of half round posts with pointed tops.
   STONE. Natural stones such as granite, limestone, marble, sandstone, slate,
and travertine. Other stone products may be considered by the Architectural
Review Committee; however, concrete masonry units (CMU) shall not be considered
as stone.
   STOP-WORK ORDER.  A written document issued by an enforcement official which
requires the cessation of an activity.
   STORAGE, OUTDOOR. See OUTDOOR STORAGE.
   STORY.  That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling above it.
   STREAM BANK. The usual boundaries, not the flood boundaries, of a stream
channel.
   STREET. A partially or fully improved public thoroughfare, including a road,
highway, drive, lane, avenue, place, boulevard, and any other thoroughfare that
affords vehicular access to abutting property.
   STREET FRONTAGE. The distance along which a property line of a lot abuts the
right-of-way of an adjacent street.
   STREET INTERSECTING. Any street that joins another street at an angle,
whether or not it crosses the other street.
   STREET INTERSECTION. The point of crossing or meeting of two or more
streets.
   STREET ORIENTATION. The direction of the architectural front façade of a
building in relation to the street.
   STREET VISTA. A view framed by buildings at the termination of the axis of a
thoroughfare.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A street which serves the major traffic movements within a
community, such as between the central business district and the outlying
commercial and residential areas, as well as a majority of the vehicular
traffic entering and leaving the town to travel to and from adjacent
communities. The town's arterial streets are identified on the Thoroughfare
Plan within the McCordsville Comprehensive Plan.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street designed and used to carry moderate volumes of
traffic from local streets to arterial streets. The town's collector streets
are identified on the Thoroughfare Plan within the McCordsville Comprehensive
Plan.
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A street with a single common ingress and egress and
with a turn-around at the end.
   STREET, LOCAL. A street designed to provide vehicular access between
individual properties and the collector and arterial street system. The town's
local streets are identified on the Thoroughfare Plan within the McCordsville
Comprehensive Plan.
   STREET, NON-RESIDENTIAL. Any street where the primary land use of the lots
which the street provides access to, as well as the lots on either side of the
street is not residential.
   STREET, PRIVATE. Any street which is privately owned and maintained that is
used to provide vehicular access to more than one property or dwelling unit.
   STREET, PUBLIC. A street constructed and maintained by a unit of government
within an officially deeded and accepted public right-of-way.
   STREET, RESIDENTIAL. Any street where the primary land use of the lots which
the street provides access to, as well as the lots on either side of the street
is residential.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a building
or structure such as bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders, or
any substantial change in the footprint or increasing size of living space.
Also, substantial roofing and siding work when repairs are made to the
structure beneath.
   STRUCTURE. Any building or other object that is constructed or erected that
requires location on or under the ground or is attached to something on the
ground. For parcels located within the airport overlay district as structure is
also an object constructed or installed by man, including, but without
limitation thereof buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission
lines.
   STRUCTURE HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from adjacent ground level
to the highest point of the roof.
   STUDIO, ART/ARTIST. An establishment for the conducting of one or more of
the following activities: painting, sculpturing, jewelry making, weaving or
other similar function defined as a fine art. For the purpose of this chapter,
the phrase art/artist studio does not include tattoo or piercing parlors, or
sexually oriented businesses.
   STUDIO, PERFORMING ARTS.  A facility for performing arts education and
productions such as dance, aerobics, and pilates. For the purpose of this
chapter, the phrase performing arts studio does not include tattoo or piercing
parlors, or sexually oriented businesses.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person or other entity which initiates proceedings to create
a subdivision. See also DEVELOPER.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, parcels, sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of sale, transfer, gift, or lease which results in one or more new
building sites.
   SUB-LOTS. Portions of a lot of record created in connection with the
transfer of ownership of individual dwelling units in a two-family or multi-
family dwelling.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. For the purpose of flood hazard area standards,
substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred substantial
damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. This term does not
include improvements to structures to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code requirements or any alteration of an
historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
   SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION OF A WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. The mounting of a
wireless facility on a wireless support structure in a manner that:
      (1)   Increases the height of the wireless support structure by a greater
of:
         (a)   Ten percent of the original height of the wireless support
structure; or
         (b)   Twenty feet;
      (2)   Adds an appurtenance to the wireless support structure that
protrudes horizontally from the wireless support structure more than the
greater of:
         (a)   Twenty feet; or
         (b)   The width of the wireless support structure at the location of
the appurtenance; or
      (3)   Increases the square footage of the equipment compound in which the
wireless facility is located by more than 2,500 square feet. The term
substantial modification does not include the following:
         (a)   Increasing the height of a wireless support structure to avoid
interfering with an existing antenna;
         (b)   Increasing the diameter or area of a wireless support structure
to:
            1.   Shelter an antenna from inclement weather; or
            2.   Connect an antenna to the wireless support structure by cable.
   SUPERMARKET. See GROCERY STORE.
   SUPPLY YARDS. A commercial establishment storing or offering for sale
building supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain, and
similar goods. Supply yards do not include the wrecking, salvaging,
dismantiling or storage of automobiles and similar vehicles.
   SURETY. An amount of money or other negotiable instrument provided by a
developer to the town which guarantees that they will perform all actions
required by the town regarding an approved site development plan, plat, or
other improvement, which provides that if the developer fails to comply with
the requirements of approval, funds will be provided for the town to complete
those requirements.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any structure located either at, above, or below grade which
is designed and/or used to hold water which exceeds two feet in depth at any
point for the purpose of recreation and entertainment of adults and children.
   TAILOR SHOP. An establishment that alters and repairs clothing for patrons.
   TANNING SALON. Any business which provides a service using artificial
lighting systems or spray booths to produce a tan on a person's body. The
phrase tanning salon may include the incidental sale of tanning products.
   TATTOO AND/OR PIERCING PARLOR. A business providing tattooing and/or
piercing services by licensed professionals under Indiana state law.
   TAVERN. See BAR.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission of information between or among
geographic points without change in the form or content of the information as
sent or received.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA. Any structure or device, including all
appurtenances, used for the purpose of collecting or radiating electromagnetic
waves, including those used to transmit cellular telephone service, data, radio
and television signals, and any other information.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A mast, pole, monopole, guyed, or freestanding
framework, or other vertical structure that acts as an antenna or to which an
antenna is affixed or attached.
   TEMPORARY SEASONAL SALES. See SALES, TEMPORARY SEASONAL.
   TEMPORARY USE. See USE, TEMPORARY.
   TERMINAL NAVIGATIONAL AIDS (NAVAIDS). Those facilities and equipment
installed on or near the airport for the purpose of providing pilots with
electronic guidance or visual reference to use in executing an approach to land
at the airport.
   THEATER, INDOOR. An indoor facility for audio and visual productions and
performing arts. For the purpose of this chapter, the phrase indoor theater
shall not include tattoo or piercing parlors, or sexually oriented businesses.
   THEATER, OUTDOOR. A type of theatre located outdoors consisting of a large
outdoor screen, a projection booth, a concession stand and a large parking area
for automobiles. Also know as a DRIVE-IN THEATER.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The official plan, now and hereafter adopted, which sets
forth the location, alignment, dimensions, and classification of existing and
proposed streets and other thoroughfares.
   TOBACCO STORE. A business selling tobacco in various forms and the related
accoutrements per Indiana State Laws regarding sale of tobacco products.
   TOOL AND DYE SHOP. An establishment that processes, cuts, and molds metal
into tools, molds, machine components, and similar products.
   TOPOGRAPHY. The configuration of the earth's surface, including the relative
relief, elevations, and position of land features.
   TOPPING. The indiscriminate cutting back of tree branches to stubs or
lateral branches that are not large enough to assume the terminal role. Other
names for topping include HEADING, TIPPING, HAT-RACKING, and ROUNDING COVER.
   TOWER. A ground pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof including
supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts intended primarily for the
purpose of mounting an antenna, a meteorological device, or other similar
apparatus above ground.
   TOWNHOUSE. A one-family dwelling with a private entrance that is attached
horizontally to other dwelling units in a linear arrangement, with a front and
a rear wall that are totally exposed for light, access, and ventilation.
   TRADE OR BUSINESS SCHOOL. A specialized instructional establishment that
provides on-site training of business, commercial, and/or trade skills such as
accounting, data processing, and computer repair. Includes vocational schools
and career centers.
   TRAIL. A public way, separate from a street, alley, or other vehicle
roadway, designed for and used by pedestrians, cyclists, and others using non-
motorized transportation and recreation equipment.
   TRANSIT STATION. A public facility designed and used as a destination stop
for future regional public transportation systems including, but not limited
to, commuter light-rail systems, pedestrian travel and bus rapid transit
systems.
   TREE. An object of natural growth.
   TREE, BROADLEAF. Trees having non-needle like leaves.
   TREE, DECIDUOUS. Trees and shrubs that shed their leaves annually.
   TREE, EVERGREEN. Trees and shrubs that do not shed their leaves annually.
   TREE, ORNAMENTAL. A deciduous tree possessing qualities such as flowers or
fruit, attractive foliage, bark or shape, with a mature height generally under
35 feet.
   TREE, PROHIBITED. A tree, as listed in this chapter that does not meet site-
landscaping or performance standard requirements.
   TREE, SHADE. A deciduous tree planted primarily for its high crown of
foliage or overhead canopy.
   TRUCK FREIGHT TERMINAL. An area and building where trucks and cargo are
stored, where loading and unloading is carried on regularly, and where minor
truck maintenance is performed.
   TRUCK SALES AND SERVICE. Any establishment that sales and services semis,
grain trucks, and other vehicles similar in size. Inoperable trucks may be
stored on a temporary basis, and only if they are to be serviced.
   TRUCK STOP. A facility designed and used to provide services to the trucking
industry including, but not limited to, fuel stations, repair shops, truck
washes, restaurants, convenience stores, weight scales, and shower facilities,
all as part of a unified facility.
   UNDEVELOPED LAND. Land in its natural state.
   UNIVERSITY (OR COLLEGE). An institution for post-secondary education, public
or private, offering courses in general, technical, or religious education and
operated not-for-profit. It operates in buildings owned or leased by the
institution for administrative and faculty offices, student and faculty
housing, classrooms, laboratories, chapels, auditoriums, lecture halls,
libraries, student and faculty centers, community rooms and facilities,
athletic facilities, fraternities, and sororities. A university may include
for-profit businesses and facilities that are incidental to the educational,
cultural, and athletic functions and which lease space from the institution. A
university shall not include trade schools operated for profit.
   UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP. A hardship which is subject to relief by means of
variance, such as those that result from exceptional topographic conditions,
exceptional physical conditions of a parcel of land, or other characteristics
of the property that are unique from those of adjoining property in the same
zoning district. Hardships which are self-imposed, resulting from errors in
judgment on the part of the property owner, or based on a perceived reduction
in economic gain shall not be considered unnecessary hardships.
   USE.  The purpose for which land, building, or structure thereon is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied, maintained, let,
or leased.
   USE CLASSIFICATION. A group of similar use types that are associated with
each other to such an extent that they are grouped together for the purpose of
identifying land uses by this chapter, such as retail uses, office uses,
personal service uses, and general industrial production.
   USE, CHANGE OF. The discontinuation of the specific primary use of a lot or
structure and the replacement of that use with a different specific use.
   USE, EXISTING. The use of a lot or structure present at the effective date
of this chapter.
   USE, ILLEGAL. Any use that is neither legal nonconforming or permitted by
right or special exception in the zoning district in which it is located as
defined by this chapter.
   USE, NONCONFORMING. A use which does not comply with the use regulations of
the zoning district in which it is located.
   USE, PERMITTED. Any use listed as a permitted use in this chapter or which
is an accessory or temporary use associated with a permitted use for the zoning
district in which it is located.
   USE, PRIMARY. The main use of land or structures, as distinguished from an
accessory use. A primary use may be either a permitted use or a special
exception use.
   USE, SPECIAL EXCEPTION. A use that is designated by this chapter as being
permitted in a specific zoning district if it is found to be appropriate and
upon application, is specifically authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   USE, TEMPORARY. A land use or structure established for a limited and fixed
period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of
the time period.
   UTILITY FACILITY. A building or structure used for the offices, storage,
distribution or transmission of utilities such as water, gas, electricity, or
sewer.
   UTILITY POLE. A structure that is:
      (1)   Owned or operated by;
         (a)   A public utility;
         (b)   A communications service provider;
         (c)   A municipality;
         (d)   An electric membership corporation; or
         (e)   A rural electric cooperative; and
      (2)   Designed and used to:
         (a)   Carry lines, cables, or wires for telephone, cable television,
or electricity; or
         (b)   Provide lighting.
   UTILITY SUBSTATION. A building or structure used for the distribution or
transmission of utilities such as water, gas, electricity, or sewer.
   VACATION. The termination or termination of interest in a plat, an easement,
or a right-of-way or other public dedication.
   VARIANCE, DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. A specific approval granted by a Board of
Zoning Appeals in the manner prescribed by this chapter, to deviate from the
development standards (such as height, bulk, area) that the chapter otherwise
prescribes.
   VARIANCE, USE. See USE, VARIANCE.
   VARIETY STORE. A retail establishment that sells a multitude of consumer
goods.
   VEHICLE. A device used as a mode of transportation of persons and/or goods
including but not limited to automobiles, semi-tractor trailers, all types of
trailers, snowmobiles, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, and like devices.
   VEHICLE DETAILING/ACCESSORY SHOP. An establishment that provides auto-
detailing services and/or sells associated merchandise. Services offered are
cosmetic in nature, and do not include mechanical upgrades or repairs.
   VEHICLE, INOPERABLE. A vehicle which, due to mechanical defect or failure,
or incorrect or unapparent licensing, is not physically or legally able to be
operated.
   VENDING MACHINE. A machine that dispenses small articles such as food,
drinks, DVDs, cigarettes, and the like, when a coin, bill, or token is
inserted. VENDING MACHINES shall also include LP exchange cages, water bottle
exchange cages, and the like.
   VETERINARY OFFICE (ANIMAL CLINIC). An establishment for the care,
observation, or treatment of domestic animals.
   VIDEO STORE. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail rental of DVD,
videotapes, films, CD-ROMS, laser discs, video games, or other electronic
media.
   VINEYARD OR ORCHARD. A facility in which fruit is grown and grapes processed
for retail and commercial sales or to be made into wine. The development may
include incidental uses such as a retail shop, standard restaurant, bar or live
entertainment.
   WAREHOUSING. An enclosed or unenclosed facility for the storage, wholesale,
and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment.
   WAREHOUSING, PETROLEUM PRODUCTS. An enclosed facility for the secure
storage, wholesale, and distribution of petroleum products, supplies, and
equipment in order to minimize risk of fire and/or explosion.
   WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility that functions to store or dispose of
waste including incinerators, junk metal yard, sanitary landfills, refuse
dumps, and inoperable vehicle storage.
   WASTE, HAZARDOUS. See HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   WATER TOWER. A tower or standpipe that functions as a reservoir providing
water to the community.
   WELLFIELD (PUBLIC PUMPHOUSE). An area of land that contains one or more
existing or proposed wells for supplying water to a water utility.
   WETLAND. Areas that are inundated and saturated by surface or groundwater at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions as identified by the National Wetlands
Institute and certified by an individual with a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Regulation 4 Jurisdictional Wetland Certification.
   WHOLESALE FACILITY. An establishment or place of business primarily engaged
in selling and/or distributing merchandise to retailers, to industrial,
commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other
wholesalers.
   WINERY. A facility in which wine products are grown and processed for
commercial sales. The development may include other uses such as a retail shop,
standard restaurant, bar or live entertainment.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. The set of equipment and network components necessary to
provide wireless communications service. The term does not include a wireless
support structure.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure designed to support
wireless facilities. The term does not include a utility pole or an electrical
transmission tower.
   YARD. A space on a lot that is open and unobstructed.
   YARD SALE.  See GARAGE SALE.
   YARD, FRONT.  The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a
building to the front lot line, extending to the side lines of the lot, and
measured as the shortest distance from that foundation to the front lot line.
   YARD, REAR. The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a
building to a rear lot line and that rear lot line, extending to the side lines
of the lot, and measured as the shortest distance from the foundation to the
rear lot line. Corner lots shall have no rear yards, only front yards and side
yards.
   YARD, SIDE. The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a
building to the side lot line and that side lot line, measured as the shortest
distance between that foundation and the side lot line.
   YARD, SIDE (AGGREGATE). The sum of the horizontal space between the
foundation of a building and each side lot line, measured as the shortest
distance between the foundation and the side lot line.
   YARD, SIDE (SEPARATION). The sum of the distance of the horizontal space
between a foundation and side lot line, plus the horizontal space between the
foundation and shared side lot line of the structure on the immediately
adjacent lot.
   ZONING DISTRICT.  A section of the town for which uniform zoning regulations
governing use, height, area, size, intensity of use of buildings and land, and
open spaces around buildings, are established by this chapter.
   ZONING MAP. See Official Zoning Map.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 040814A, passed 4-8-2014; Ord. 111114,
passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 041216-A, passed 4-12-2016; Ord. 101116-A, passed 10-
11-2016; Ord. 111020C, passed 12-8-2020; Ord. 111423E, passed 12-12-2023)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.020 SUMMARY OF AUTHORITY.
   The municipal bodies and officials listed in this chapter, without
limitation upon such authority as each may possess by law, have responsibility
for implementing and administering this chapter in the manner described herein.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.021 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Administrative Officer. The Town Manager, including any staff members
or other designee(s), shall have the principal responsibility for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter. Together their duties shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Improvement location permits. Reviewing, approving, or disapproving
all improvement location permits and keeping permanent records of applications
made and actions taken.
      (2)   Inspections. Conducting inspections of structures and properties to
determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all approvals
granted by the Plan Commission, Plat Committee, Board of Zoning Appeals, Town
Council, or other body in the execution of its duties as established by this
chapter and Indiana State Code.
      (3)   Record keeping. Maintaining permanent and current records
documenting the application of this chapter including, but not limited to, all
maps, amendments, special exception uses, variances, and appeals.
      (4)   Plan Commission applications. Receiving, processing docketing, and
referring to the Plan Commission all appropriate applications.
      (5)   Board of Zoning Appeals applications. Receiving, processing,
docketing, and referring to Board of Zoning Appeals all appeals, variances,
special exception uses, and other matters upon which it is authorized to act
under this chapter and Indiana State Code.
      (6)   Committee applications. Receiving, processing, docketing, and
referring to either the Plat Committee and/or Technical Review Committee all
appropriate applications.
      (7)   Clerical and technical assistance. Providing all such clerical and
technical assistance as may be required by the Board of Zoning Appeals, Plan
Commission, Plat Committee, Technical Review Committee, Town Council, or other
body in the execution of its duties as established by this chapter and Indiana
State Code.
   (B)   Review and decision authority. The following table summarizes the
review, decision making, and appeal powers and duties as they relate to various
application processes required by this chapter. The specific steps and
requirements for each are prescribed in more detail by this chapter.
Table 1: Review and Decision Authority by Application Type
Application Type Review and Decision Authority
                 Staff Plan Commission Board of Zoning Appeals Town Council
                  Review and Decision Authority
Application Type  Staff          Plan Commission Board of Zoning Town Council
                                                 Appeals
Zoning Map
Amendment         Review         Review                          Final Decision
(Rezoning)
Zoning Text       Review         Review                          Final Decision
Amendment
Annexation        Review         Review                          Final Decision
PUD Preliminary   Review         Review                          Final Decision
Plan
PUD Final Plan    Review         Review                          Final Decision
PUD Minor         Final Decision                 Consider Appeal
Modifications
Site Plan         Final Decision                 Consider Appeal
Site Development  Review         Final Decision
Plan
Development
Standards         Review                         Final Decision
Variance
Special Exception Review                         Final Decision
Use
Interpretation    Final Decision                 Consider Appeal
 
   (C)   Fee schedule.
      (1)   Purpose and intent. All fees shall be intended to reimburse the
town for the time and cost of processing the required materials. In no instance
shall a fee be used as a means of discouraging or encouraging any particular
types of applications.
      (2)   Availability. The Administrative Officer, or his or her designee,
shall maintain a schedule of fees available to the public, as approved by the
Town Council, for all applications, permits, and other processes outlined in
this chapter.
      (3)   Establishment. The fee schedule shall be prepared by the
Administrative Officer or his or her designee, reviewed by the Plan Commission,
and approved, by resolution, by the Town Council.
      (4)   Revisions. The Administrative Officer, or his or her designee,
shall review the fee schedule, at a minimum, annually and bring any necessary
revisions to the attention of the Plan Commission and Town Council. The fee
schedule may be amended by a recommendation submitted to the Town Council by
the Plan Commission followed by the Council's approval of a revised fee
schedule resolution.
      (5)   Payment in full required. Until all applicable fees have been paid
in full, no action shall be taken on any application or petition. In addition,
the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, may require any property
owner(s) who initiates construction of a structure or the alteration of land
prior to obtaining any required permit to pay up to two times the amount of the
normal permit fee listed on the Official Fee Schedule as a penalty. The penalty
shall be in addition to any enforcement cost including incurred attorney's fees
for such activity and the established fee.
   (D)   Schedule of meetings and filing dates.  The Administrative Officer, or
his or her designee, shall maintain an annual Calendar of Meetings and Filing
Dates for the Technical Review Committee, Plat Committee, Plan Commission, and
Board of Zoning Appeals. The existence of this calendar shall not be
interpreted as prohibiting special meetings of the Committees, Commission or
Board.
      (1)   Coordination of calendars. The calendars of the Technical Review
Committee, Plat Committee, and Plan Commission shall be coordinated to ensure
the efficient processing of applications.
      (2)   Compliance with Indiana State Code. All meeting and filing dates
shall be based on the requirements of this chapter and the laws of the State of
Indiana.
      (3)   Approval of dates. The Calendar of Meetings and Filing Dates shall
be prepared by the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, and approved
by the Plan Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals, wherein the Plan Commission
shall be responsible for approving a coordinated calendar for the Technical
Review Committee and the Plat Committee.
      (4)   Maintenance. The Calendar of Meeting and Filing Dates shall be
reviewed and updated annually by the Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee, and posted in McCordsville Town Hall.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.022 ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES AND OFFICIALS.
   (A)   Town Council. The Town Council hereby reserves to itself the following
powers and duties in connection with the implementation of this chapter for the
area within its jurisdiction:
      (1)   Duties. The following duties should be interpreted as activities
that are obligations. Town Council duties include:
         (a)   Adopt, reject, or amend the Comprehensive Plan, any other plans,
the Zoning Ordinance, and the Subdivision Control Ordinance as certified and
submitted by the Plan Commission;
         (b)   Adopt, reject, or amend proposals to amend or partially repeal
the text of the Comprehensive Plan, any other plans, the Zoning Ordinance, and
the Subdivision Control Ordinance as certified and submitted by the Plan
Commission;
         (c)   Adopt, reject, or amend proposals to amend the Official Zoning
Map certified and submitted by the Plan Commission;
         (d)   Adopt, reject, or amend proposals for Planned Unit Developments
as certified and submitted by the Plan Commission; and
         (e)   All additional duties as established by Indiana State Code.
      (2)   Powers. The following powers should be interpreted as activities
that are optional and may be initiated by the Town Council within the Council's
jurisdiction. These powers include:
         (a)   Initiate amendments to the text of the Comprehensive Plan, any
other plans, the Zoning Ordinance, and/or the Subdivision Control Ordinance;
         (b)   Initiate amendment to the Official Zoning Map;
         (c)   Initiate the annexation process and request advice from the Plan
Commission as to the zoning designation to be applied to the annexed area if
and when annexed; and
         (d)   All additional powers permitted by Indiana State Code.
   (B)   Advisory Plan Commission.
      (1)   Establishment. There is hereby established the McCordsville
Advisory Plan Commission, to be known as the McCordsville Plan Commission.
      (2)   Composition. The Plan Commission shall consist of seven members as
prescribed by I.C. 36-7-4-207(b), which states:
         (a)   The Town Council shall appoint three persons, who must be
elected or appointed municipal officials or employees in the municipal
government, as members.
         (b)   The municipal executive shall appoint four citizen members, of
who no more than two may be of the same political party. Each citizen member
shall be appointed because of the member's knowledge and experience in
community affairs, the member's awareness of the social, economic,
agricultural, and industrial problems of the area, and the member's interest in
the development and integration of the area. A citizen member may not hold
other elective or appointive office in municipal, county or state government. A
citizen member must be a resident of the jurisdictional area of the Plan
Commission (I.C. 36-7-4-216).
         (c)   The Hancock County Area Plan Commission shall appoint a
designated representative from its body to serve as an advisor to the Plan
Commission, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-213.
      (3)   Certification.  Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-212, the clerk of the Town
Council and the secretary of the Park Board shall certify members appointed by
their respective bodies, and the executive shall certify his or her
appointments. The certificates shall be sent to and made a part of the records
of the Plan Commission.
      (4)   Terms of office.
         (a)   Appointment. Upon the establishment of a seven member municipal
plan commission, two citizen members shall initially be appointed for a term of
three years and two shall initially be appointed for a term of four years.
         (b)   Term expiration. Each member's term expires on the first Monday
of January of the second, third, or fourth year respectively, after the year of
the member's appointment.
            1.   Appointed members. The term of office of a member who is
appointed from the membership of a Town Council, a Park Board, or the Advisory
Council on town affairs is coextensive with the member's term of office on that
body, board, or council, unless that body, board, or council appoints, at its
first regular meeting in any year, another to serve as its representative (see
I.C. 36-7-4-217).
            2.   Citizen members. When an initial term of office of a citizen
member expires, each new appointment of a citizen member is for a term of four
years (see I.C. 36-7-4-218).
      (5)   Conflict of interest.  Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-223, neither a
member of the Plan Commission nor the Town Council may participate as a member
Plan Commission or Town Council in a hearing or decision of that commission or
body concerning a zoning matter (excluding the preparation or adoption of a
Comprehensive Plan) in which the member has a direct or indirect financial
interest. The commission or body shall enter in its record the fact that its
member has such a disqualification.
      (6)   Duties. The following duties should be interpreted as activities
that are obligations. Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-401, I.C. 36-7-4-405 and I.C. 36-
7-4-213, the Plan Commission shall:
         (a)   Supervise, and make rules for, the administration of the affairs
of the Commission;
         (b)   Prescribe uniform rules pertaining to investigations and
hearings;
         (c)   Keep a complete record of all proceedings;
         (d)   Fix the time for holding regular meetings each month, or as
necessary, keep minutes of all meetings, and maintain all minutes and records
in the office of the Administrative Officer;
         (e)   Record and file all bonds and contracts and assume
responsibility for the custody and preservation of all papers and documents of
the Commission;
         (f)   Prepare, publish, and distribute reports, ordinances, and other
material relating to the activities authorized by Indiana State Code;
         (g)   Adopt a seal;
         (h)   Certify all official acts;
         (i)   Supervise the fiscal affairs of the Commission;
         (j)   Prepare and submit an annual budget in the same manner as other
departments of municipal government, and be limited in all expenditures to the
provisions made for the expenditures by the fiscal body of the municipality;
         (k)   Make recommendations to the Town Council or bodies concerning:
            1.   The adoption of the Comprehensive Plan and amendments to the
Comprehensive Plan;
            2.   The adoption or text amendment of: an initial Zoning
Ordinance, a replacement Zoning Ordinance, and a Subdivision Control Ordinance;
            3.   The adoption or amendment of a PUD district ordinance; and
            4.   Zone Map changes (rezonings).
         (l)   Render decisions concerning and approve plats, replats, and
amendments to plats of subdivisions under the 700 series of I.C. 36-7-4.
         (m)   Make decisions concerning development plans and amendments to
development plans under the 1400 series of I.C. 36-7-4, unless delegated under
I.C. 36-7-4-1402(c).
         (n)   Prescribe the qualifications of, appoint, remove, and fix the
compensation of the employees of the Commission, consistent with the
compensation fixed by the appropriate fiscal body.
         (o)   Appoint a designated representative of the Plan Commission to
serve as an advisory member to the Hancock County Area Plan Commission.
         (p)   All additional duties as established by Indiana State Code.
      (7)   Powers. The following powers should be interpreted as activities
that are optional and may be initiated by the Plan Commission within the
Commission's jurisdiction. Pursuant to Indiana State Statute, these powers
include:
         (a)   Establish advisory committees as necessary, composed of specific
members and organized for specific purpose;
         (b)   Establish an executive committee;
         (c)   Seek funding assistance through grant programs as necessary and
accept gifts, donations and grants;
         (d)   Establish a schedule of fees, to be approved by Town Council
resolution, to defray the administrative costs of the official action of the
Commission;
         (e)   Appoint and fix the duties of the recording secretary;
         (f)   Contract for special or temporary services and professional
counsel; and
         (g)   All additional powers as permitted by Indiana State Code.
      (8)   Communication with members of the Advisory Plan Commission.  No
person (including applicants, remonstrators, and other interested parties) may
communicate with any member of the Plan Commission before a hearing with the
intent to influence the member's action on a matter pending before the Plan
Commission.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.023 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)   Establishment. Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-900 series, the Town Council
hereby establish the Board of Zoning Appeals which shall conduct business
consistent with all requirements of this chapter and Indiana State Code. The
members shall initially be appointed for the following terms of office:
      (1)   One for a term of one year.
      (2)   One for a term of two years.
      (3)   One for a term of three years.
      (4)   One for a term of four years.
   (B)   Membership. Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-902, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall consist of five voting members, as follows:
      (1)   Three citizen members appointed by the executive, one of who must
be a member of the Plan Commission while the other two must not be members of
the Plan Commission.
      (2)   One citizen member appointed by the Town Council, who must not be a
member of the Plan Commission.
      (3)   One citizen member appointed by the Plan Commission, who must be a
citizen member of the Plan Commission other than the member appointed under
division (B)(1) above.
   (C)   Membership restrictions. Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-905, none of the
members of the Board of Zoning Appeals may hold other elective or appointive
office, except as permitted by I.C. 36-7-4-902, in municipal, county or state
government. A member must be a resident of the jurisdictional area of the
board.
   (D)   Terms. When an initial term of office expires, each new appointment
shall be for a term of four years beginning on the first Monday in January.
   (E)   Powers and duties.  The powers and duties of the Board of Zoning
Appeals with regard to this chapter are defined by Indiana State Code, and are
described below. These powers and duties are further described by the Board of
Zoning Appeals Rules and Procedures.
      (1)   Duties.  Duties should be interpreted as activities that are
obligations. The duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals are as follows:
         (a)   Fix a reasonable time for the hearing of administrative appeals,
special exceptions, and variances;
         (b)   Keep minutes of all proceedings and record the vote on all
actions taken, and file all minutes and records in the office of the Board in
all cases;
         (c)   Adopt rules concerning the filing of appeals, applications,
public notice, the conduct of hearings, and the determination of whether a
variance application is for a variance of use or for a variance from the
development standards;
         (d)   Make adopted rules available to all applicants and other
interested persons;
         (e)   Review, hear, and approve or deny all applications for variances
from development standards such as height, setback or area;
         (f)   Review, hear and approve or deny all applications for a special
exception use;
         (g)   Review, hear and decide appeals of decisions made under this
chapter or in the enforcement of this chapter by the Administrative Officer, or
other Plan Commission staff, committees, administrative boards, or any other
bodies, with the exception of the Plan Commission; and
         (h)   All additional duties as established in Indiana State Code.
      (2)   Powers. The following powers of the Board of Zoning Appeals should
be interpreted as activities that are optional and may be initiated by the
Board. They include:
         (a)   Appointment of a hearing committee;
         (b)   Appointment of a secretary and other employees as necessary for
the discharge of Board duties; and
         (c)   All additional powers permitted by Indiana State Code.
      (3)   Rules and procedures. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the
sole authority to adopt any and all rules under I.C. 36-7-4-916 and any and all
procedures concerning organization, selection of officers, forms for
applications (development standards variances, special exceptions), filing
requirements, procedures, giving of public notices and conduct of meetings and
public hearings.
      (4)   Communication with members of the Board of Zoning Appeals. No
person (including applicants, remonstrators, and other interested parties) may
communicate with any member of the Board before a hearing with the intent to
influence the member's action on a matter pending before the Board.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.024 TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   The Plan Commission may establish a Technical Review Committee for the
purpose of providing detailed reviews and recommendations to the Plan
Commission concerning any proposed development plans or subdivision plats that
may from time to time be submitted.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the Technical Review Committee is
to provide written recommendations pertaining to technical aspects of design
and construction plans; however, approval or disapproval of a development or
subdivision is clearly the responsibility of the Plan Commission.
   (B)   Establishment. The Technical Review Committee is hereby established
under both the Zoning Ordinance and the Subdivision Control Ordinance to serve
the differing needs of these two documents. The Committee shall be made up of
the same members under both ordinances in order to facilitate coordination of
the decision making by the Plan Commission with respect to the design and
construction aspects of these two documents.
   (C)   Composition. Committee membership shall be at the request of the
Administrative Officer. The Administrative Officer may request the assistance
of members of public and semi-public local and state departments, agencies and
organizations, including but not limited to the following (or their designees):
      (1)   Town Planner, Chair;
      (2)   Town Engineer;
      (3)   Town Street Commissioner;
      (4)   County Highway Superintendent;
      (5)   Wastewater Superintendent;
      (6)   Water Superintendent;
      (7)   Fire Chief;
      (8)   Police Chief;
      (9)   Building Department;
      (10)   County Health Department;
      (11)   A representative and/or designee of the County Soil and Water
Conservation District; and
      (12)   Any other persons deemed appropriate by the Plan Commission.
   (D)   Roles and responsibilities. The Technical Review Committee shall limit
its attention and recommendations to the design and construction aspects of the
proposed development or subdivision with emphasis placed on public
improvements, utilities, drainage, landscaping, parking, signage, and other
development standards. Projects shall be reviewed for compliance with the
Zoning Ordinance and compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan, as amended from
time to time.
   (E)   Committee meetings. The Technical Review Committee is strictly a
committee and does not have the authority to take any official action; however,
the Committee shall advertise for and hold public meetings. The Committee shall
meet as prescribed by the Calendar of Meetings and Filing Deadlines, and all
Technical Review Committee meetings shall be open to the public. The Committee
shall then submit its review comments and recommendations to the Advisory Plan
Commission.
   (F)   Authority. The Technical Review Committee shall have the authority to
request that a docket be continued by the Advisory Plan Commission until the
Committee has reviewed revised plans submitted by a petitioner(s).
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.025 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   The Plan Commission may establish an Architectural Review Committee for the
purpose of providing detailed reviews and recommendations to the Plan
Commission concerning any proposed building elevation that may from time to
time be submitted.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the Architectural Review Committee
is to provide written recommendations pertaining to technical aspects of
building elevations for the purpose of providing for the orderly and harmonious
appearance of structures throughout the town. For the purposes of administering
and enforcing this chapter, the Architectural Review Committee is not to be
confused with an Architectural Review Board which is typically concerned with
protecting and preserving historic areas, sites and buildings in a community.
   (B)   Establishment. The Architectural Review Committee is hereby
established under both the Zoning Ordinance and the Subdivision Control
Ordinance to serve the differing needs of these two documents. The Committee
shall be made up of the same members under both ordinances in order to
facilitate coordination of the decision making by the Plan Commission with
respect to the design and construction aspects of these two documents.
   (C)   Composition.  Committee membership shall be at the request of the
Administrative Officer. The Administrative Officer may request the assistance
of members of public and semi-public local and state departments, agencies and
organizations. The Architectural Review Committee shall be chaired by the
Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, and shall consist of at least
one licensed architect residing or working in the town. Remaining members shall
be residents of the town interested in civic matters.
   (D)   Roles and responsibilities. The Architectural Review Committee shall
limit its attention and recommendations to the architectural design standards
of this chapter. Projects shall be reviewed for compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance and compatibility with the McCordsville Comprehensive Plan, as
amended from time to time. Members of the Architectural Review Committee shall:
      (1)   Review the Town of McCordsville Architectural Design Standards
contained herein and adopted planned unit development ordinances, and any
additional architectural design requirements imposed as part of an overlay
district, such as the Highway Corridor Overlay district.
      (2)   Review applications for their compatibility with all applicable
standards, regulations, and commitments.
      (3)   Offer opinions as to what physical alterations or enhancements
could be made to projects presented in order to improve the aesthetic quality
of the project and the town's overall physical environment.
      (4)   Make recommendations regarding architectural issues raised on
appeal to the appropriate governing body (e.g. Board of Zoning Appeals) in
connection with the issuance or denial of entitlements or other project
approvals or denials.
      (5)   Zoning commitments, if applicable.
   (E)   Committee meetings. The Architectural Review Committee is strictly a
committee and does not have the authority to take any official action; however,
the Committee shall advertise for and hold public meetings. The Committee shall
meet as prescribed by the Calendar of Meetings and Filing Deadlines, and all
meetings of the committee shall be open to the public. The Committee shall then
submit its review comments and recommendations to the Advisory Plan Commission
and/or Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (F)   Authority. The Architectural Review Committee shall have the authority
to request that a docket be continued by the Advisory Plan Commission or Board
of Zoning Appeals until the Committee has reviewed revised plans submitted by a
petitioner(s).
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 154.040 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The Town of McCordsville is divided into zoning district classifications as
described and defined in this chapter and as shown on the Zoning Map. The
Zoning Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
   (A)   Identification. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the
signature of the President of the Plan Commission and attested by the
Administrative Officer under the following words: "This is to certify that this
is the Official Zoning Map of McCordsville, Indiana, adopted, and hereby
supersedes and replaces any and all previous zoning maps." The Official Zoning
Map shall also include the ordinance number by which it was adopted, the date
of adoption, and the dates of any subsequent amendments.
   (B)   Location.  The Official Zoning Map shall hereafter be kept in the
custody of the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee. Regardless of
the existence of purported copies of the Zoning Map which may from time to time
be made or published, the Official Zoning Map located in the office of the
Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, shall be the final authority as
to the current zoning statutes of land and water areas, buildings, and other
structures within the jurisdiction of the Plan Commission.
   (C)   Copies.  Copies of the Official Zoning Map may be made and distributed
to interested persons. All copies of the Zoning Map shall be labeled as copies
and include the date on which it was obtained. A fee may be established for the
purchase of Zoning Map copies.
   (D)   Amendment or replacement. No changes of any nature shall be made on
the Official Zoning Map except in compliance with the procedures set forth in
§§
154.020 through
154.025, Administration. Any unauthorized change by any property owner(s) or
person(s) shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
      (1)   Amendment (rezoning). Upon the passage of a map amendment
(rezoning), the Town Council shall certify a copy of the amendment to the
Administrative Officer. The Administrative Officer, or his or her designee,
shall cause the change to be made to the Official Zoning Map in accordance with
the amendment. The Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, shall cause
the Official Zoning Map to show a notation, either electronically or through a
permanent-pen hand written note, identifying the ordinance number, ordinance
title, and date of adoption by the Town Council.
      (2)   Errors and omissions. Other revisions may be made to correct
drafting or other errors or omissions in the Zoning Map, but shall not have the
effect of amending the map.
      (3)   Replacement. In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes
damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or
number of changes and additions, the Plan Commission may, by resolution,
recommend to the Town Council adoption of a new Official Zoning Map which shall
supersede the prior map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or
other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map. The replacement map
shall be identified by the signature of the President of the Plan Commission
and attested by the Administrative Officer under the following words: "This is
to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of McCordsville, Indiana, and
hereby supersedes and replaces all previous zoning maps."
      (4)   Preservation of the prior Official Zoning Map.  Unless the prior
map has been lost or completely destroyed, it or any significant parts shall be
preserved, together with any available records of its adoption and amendment.
   (E)   Interpretation of district boundaries.
      (1)   Interpretation procedures.
         (a)   Administrative Officer interpretation. The Administrative
Officer, or his or her designee, shall determine the applicable zoning for each
property in the Plan Commission's jurisdiction. Any decision of the
Administrative Officer may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
         (b)   Plan Commission interpretation provision.. In the event that the
Administrative Officer cannot definitively determine the location of a district
boundary, immediate action on any affected application shall be delayed until
such time when the Plan Commission determines the zoning district boundary. The
Plan Commission shall interpret the location of the district boundary with
reference to the scale of the Official Zoning Map and the purposes set forth in
all relevant provisions of this chapter. This interpretation may occur as part
of a regular or special Plan Commission meeting and shall not require a public
hearing. Decisions of the Plan Commission may not be appealed to the Board of
Zoning Appeals, but may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (2)   Interpretation standards. Zoning district boundaries illustrated on
the Official Zoning Map shall be interpreted as follows:
         (a)   Streets and easements. Boundaries shown within the lines of
roads, easements, and transportation rights-of-way shall be deemed to follow
the centerlines.
         (b)   Property lines.  Boundaries indicated as following section or
fractional sectional lines, platted lot lines, or municipal corporation limits
shall be construed to follow such lines.
         (c)   Bodies of water.  Boundaries indicated as approximately
following the center line of streams, rivers, or other bodies of water shall be
construed to follow such center lines. Boundaries indicated as following a
shore line shall be construed as moving with any change in the actual shore
line.
         (d)   Divided lots. In the event that a boundary line divides a lot or
parcel, the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, shall determine the
applicable zoning district. If a portion of a lot or parcel is in an overlay
district, the entire lot or parcel shall be deemed as being within the overlay
district. The Administrative Officer may require a rezone or replat of the site
if any portion of a construction or development proposal overlaps two or more
zoning districts. The petitioner shall be responsible for filing the
appropriate forms and for applying the appropriate filing fees to rezone or
replat the lot or parcel.
         (e)   Extensions of lines.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or
extensions of the features listed above in divisions (a) through (d) above
shall be construed as such.
         (f)   The Conservation and Flood Plain Overlay District boundaries.
Boundaries of the Conservation and Flood Plain Overlay District shall coincide
with the boundaries as documented on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Hancock
County, Indiana.
      (3)   Effect of vacation on zoning district boundaries. Whenever any
street, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way, or other similar area is
vacated by the proper authority, the adjoining zoning districts shall be
extended automatically to the center of the vacated area. All areas included in
the vacation shall then be subject to all applicable regulations of the
extended zoning district. In the event of a partial vacation, the adjoining
zoning district, or the zoning district nearest the portion vacated, shall be
extended automatically to include all of the vacated area.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.041 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the town is divided into zoning district
classifications. Each of the following districts is intended to stand alone and
is not part of a hierarchy system of land use regulation. For example, uses
permitted in a Neighborhood Commercial (CN) district are not automatically
permitted in a Regional Commercial (CR) district. Only those uses expressly
permitted as prescribed by the Official Use Schedule shall be permitted in said
district.
   (A)   Residential districts. Residential zoning districts are intended to
accommodate areas for residences and public and semi-public uses (e.g. parks
and open space) which are normally associated with residential neighborhoods.
In some instances, retail goods and services may be appropriate. However, when
permitted, such uses shall not detract from the overall residential character
of the neighborhood. Development and redevelopment in these districts should be
served by sewer and water utilities and have convenient access via local roads
and streets. The underlying purpose for the town's seven residential districts
described below is the creation of a stable and orderly residential
environment. Each of the following residential districts is intended to
differentiate between density and housing needs. All residential districts
should be served by sewer and water utilities.
      (1)   R1, Low Density Residential. All R1 districts are intended to
accommodate areas of low density (less than one dwelling unit per acre),
single-family residences.
      (2)   R2, Low-Medium Density Residential. All R2 districts are intended
to accommodate areas of low to medium density (1 - 1.99 dwelling units per
acre), single-family residences.
      (3)   R3, Medium Density Residential. All R3 districts are intended to
accommodate areas of moderate density (2 - 2.49 dwelling units per acre),
single- or two-family residences.
      (4)   R4, High Density Residential. All R4 districts are intended to
accommodate area of high density (2.5 - 2.99 dwelling units per acre), single-
or two-family residences.
      (5)   R5, High Density Residential. All R5 districts are intended to
accommodate areas of the highest density (three or more dwelling units per
acre), single- or two-family residences.
      (6)   MF1, Low-Medium Density Multi-family Residential. All MF1 districts
are intended to accommodate areas of low to moderate density (less than eight
units per acre) multi-family attached housing such as duplexes and townhomes.
MF1 districts may also be used to provide a transition between some single-
family or two-family residential districts and non-residential districts.
      (7)   MF2, Medium-High Density Multi-family Residential. All MF2
districts are intended to accommodate areas of higher density (eight or more
units per acre) multi-family housing such as apartments and condominiums. MF2
districts may also be used to provide transition between some single-family or
two-family residential districts and non-residential districts.
   (B)   Commercial districts. Commercial zoning districts are intended to
accommodate different types of businesses and commercial uses. The intent is to
establish compact districts for like uses and better provide for efficient
traffic movement, parking facilities, and police and fire protection.
Development and redevelopment in these districts should be served by sewer and
water utilities and have convenient access via local collector and arterials
streets. In general, industrial uses are excluded due to the hazards and
nuisances they often present. All commercial business districts shall be served
by sewer and water utilities.
      (1)   CN, Neighborhood Commercial. All CN districts are intended to
accommodate smaller areas of land suitable for convenience stores, services,
and amenities within close proximity to residential areas. They should enable
the development of small scale, mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented neighborhood
centers located at the intersection of major thoroughfares. These districts
should be free of larger retailers, such as "big box" stores or other regional
retail uses with 7,500 or more square feet in gross floor area, that do not
serve the immediate needs of the neighborhood.
      (2)   CO, Professional Business Office. All CO districts are intended to
accommodate moderate to large areas of land suitable for professional office
centers with complimentary retail uses and support facilities. These districts
may also be used to transition between non-residential districts and
residential districts, provided they are limited to a maximum of three stories
in height.
      (3)   CR, Regional Commercial. All CR districts are intended to
accommodate larger areas of land suitable for a variety of businesses that
serve a regional market, or require convenient access to arterial roadways and
major collector streets that are designed to carry relatively large volumes of
vehicular traffic. These districts can be used alone as well as in combination
with other zoning districts to create community shopping, entertainment,
services and public gathering spaces. These districts should be focused and
centralized at intersections rather than sprawled out along the highway so as
not to define the highway itself.
   (C)   Industrial districts.  Industrial zoning districts are intended to
accommodate low and medium intensity industrial business within the town by
providing for suitable space for existing industries and their expansion as
well as for future industrial development. Development and redevelopment in
these districts should be served by sewer and water utilities and have
convenient access via major collector and arterials streets. Performance
standards, parking specifications, and yard regulations prescribed by this
chapter ensure safe industrial development that is compatible with adjacent
land uses. In general, all industrial districts should be sited near railroads,
or collectors or arterial roadways in order to meet the anticipated
transportation needs of anticipated land use activities. All industrial
districts shall be served by sewer and water utilities.
      (1)   I1, Low Intensity Industrial. All I1 districts are intended to
accommodate moderate to large land areas suitable for warehousing, research and
development, or similar type uses where all activities take place within
enclosed buildings. In this instance, low intensity industries are those
industrial activities that are less likely to cause conditions that would be
objectionable to neighboring properties.
      (2)   I2, Medium Intensity Industrial. All I2 districts are intended to
accommodate production or assembly of modern industrial parts. In general,
greater separation is needed between industries located in an I2 district and
residential or commercial areas compared to those separation distances required
in an I1 district.
   (D)   Overlay Districts.
      (1)   AO, Airport Overlay. The AO district is intended to regulate uses
within close proximity to the Mount Comfort Airport further ensuring
compatibility through additional regulations regarding height and further
limiting the types of uses allowed within certain zones.
      (2)   HCO, Highway Corridor Overlay. The HCO district is intended to
address the unique characteristics of the properties adjacent to the two
primary transportation corridors that run through the town. Citing unique
traffic management needs, development pressures, and aesthetic quality, the
purpose of the HCO district is to require additional development standards and
regulations without modifying the development objectives of the underlying base
zoning districts.
      (3)   R/WCO, Right-of-Way Corridor Overlay. The R/WCO district is
intended to address land uses and facilities located within all public rights-
of-way within the incorporated limits of the town. The purpose of this overlay
district is to provide for functional and appropriate land use and development
standards that will allow for suitable, reliable public and private
telecommunications services. The town recognizes the need for the use of small-
cell facilities for telecommunications in order to serve the needs of the area,
and in doing so, there is a need to minimize the adverse, undesirable impacts
of such facilities.
   (E)   Other districts.
      (1)   P, Public/Semi-public.  All P districts are intended to accommodate
large-scale public facilities and other public/semi-public institutions where a
large number of people gather or congregate.
      (2)   Old Town. In general, the Old Town district is intended to
accommodate residential uses and residential conversions with an emphasis on
protecting the residential character of the original town plat. In this
district, commercial establishments are intended to serve the residents of and
visitors to the town rather than the motoring public.
      (3)   TC, Town Center.  In general, all TC districts are intended to
accommodate a mix of land uses and serve as a primary commercial activity
center, wherein residents and visitors can find a vast range of goods and
services, and entertainment. It is further intended that all TC districts
ensure a pedestrian-friendly environment with multiple destinations for
working, shopping, and entertainment. In most instances, residential dwellings
are encouraged, provided they are not single-family detached homes.
         (a)   In undeveloped area of town, the TC district is intended to
become the most intensely developed areas within the community.
         (b)   In established areas of town, TC districts are intended to
ensure the continued viability of neighborhoods and businesses. In these
instances, the standards and regulations are intended to maintain contextually
appropriate setbacks, uses and other standards consistent with the McCordsville
Comprehensive Plan. Small parcels may need to be consolidated to provide
development sites large enough for today's building and parking needs, but
should be designed with an emphasis on pedestrian traffic rather than vehicular
traffic, keeping parking lots to the sides and rears of the building where
possible, emphasizing the front entrances, incorporating numerous buildings
openings (e.g. windows and doors), and providing screening for parked cars.
      (4)   PUD, Planned Unit Developments. All PUD districts are intended to
accommodate development of land in areas where there are site limitations or
unique site characteristics. It is the intent of the town to encourage
innovation in land development practices through the use of the planned unit
development process.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 101116-A, passed 10-11-2016)
SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
§ 154.060 ACCESSORY USE AND STRUCTURE STANDARDS, GENERAL.
   (A)   Board of Zoning Appeals approval. To vary from the following specific
use standards shall require review and approval from the Board of Zoning
Appeals pursuant to the development standards variance process prescribed by
this chapter.
   (B)   Purpose and intent. The intent of these accessory use and structure
standards is to address the unique features of these types of structures and
uses; allow the reasonable utilization of property; and to ensure the provision
of adequate light, air, and circulation on each property.
   (C)   Order of establishment. No accessory use or structure, or incidental
use or structure, shall be permitted to be located, placed, or established on
any lot prior to the issuance of an improvement location permit for a primary
structure, or an occupancy permit for a primary land use. All accessory uses
and structures shall be permitted only in association with, and on the same lot
as, the primary use or structure.
   (D)   Incidental uses and structures. The following shall be considered
incidental uses and structures and shall meet the requirements specified
herein.
      (1)   Satellite dish.
         (a)   Residential zoning districts.
            1.   Size. Satellite dishes located in a single-family residential
zoning district shall not exceed 24 inches in diameter.
            2.   Location. No satellite dish, including anchors and supports,
shall be permitted in any front yard (not just the minimum front yard setback),
or within the required side and rear yard setbacks.
            3.   Height. No satellite dish within a residential zoning district
shall be mounted above the height of the eave of the roof.
         (b)   Non-residential. For all satellite dishes 24 inches in diameter,
or greater, located within a non-residential zoning district shall comply with
the following:
            1.   Location. No satellite dish, including anchors and supports,
shall be permitted in any front yard, or within the required side and rear yard
setbacks in any non-residential district.
            2.   Height. In all non-residential zoning districts, no satellite
dish shall exceed ten feet in height, measured from ground level if mounted on
the ground, or five feet in height above the highest point of the roof of the
primary structure if mounted on the roof.
            3.   Screening. All satellite dishes located in a non-residential
district shall be screened by the structure of the roof if mounted on the roof,
or by landscaping approved by the Administrative Officer if mounted on the
ground.
      (2)   Free-standing kiosks and vending machines. The town prefers that
all kiosks and vending machines be located inside or flush with the exterior of
an existing building. All free-standing kiosks and vending machines shall
require a kiosk or vending machine permit from the town. Free-standing kiosks
and vending machines include, but are not necessarily limited to, any free-
standing, unmanned automated teller machine (ATM) or vending machine, but
excluding newspaper racks and payphones. All free-standing kiosks and vending
machines shall comply with the following:
         (a)   Visibility. All free-standing kiosks and vending machines shall
be located to minimize visibility to the street. If located adjacent to an
existing building, the back of the kiosk or vending machine shall be positioned
flush with the exterior wall. Kiosks or vending machines shall be located under
an awning or contained in a roofed shelter, stall or other structure, which is
architecturally compatible to the primary structure and so located as not to
interfere materially with the use of the property or adjacent properties. The
kiosks and machines shall not impede pedestrian traffic or encroach onto the
clear travel space of sidewalks or paths.
         (b)   Interference with design elements. The placement of a free-
standing kiosk or vending machine shall be coordinated with the architecture of
the building with which it is associated so as not to cover up or otherwise
detract from window and door openings, landscaping, or decorative elements.
         (c)   Pedestrian traffic flow. No free-standing kiosk or vending
machine shall be placed in a location so as to impede pedestrian access, block
parking areas or create an unsafe condition. A minimum of 36 inches clearance
in front of the kiosk or vending machine is required when placed within a
pedestrian way.
         (d)   Public rights-of-way. No free-standing kiosk or vending machine
may be installed within a public way or immediately adjacent to a public way so
as to require customers to stand in the public way to use the kiosk or machine.
         (e)   Accessibility. Public access to free-standing kiosks and vending
machines shall meet all applicable state and federal ADA accessibility
requirements.
         (f)   Illumination. All free-standing kiosks and vending machines
shall be externally illuminated for security purposes.
         (g)   Entertainment media. Any free-standing kiosk or vending machine
selling or otherwise offering entertainment media of a sexual nature shall also
comply with all applicable sexually oriented uses standards and regulations
prescribed by this chapter.
         (h)   Product waste. All free-standing kiosks or vending machines
shall have a waste receptacle incorporated as part of the facility to provide
for proper waste disposal.
      (3)   Other incidentals. Bird baths and houses, mailboxes, lamp posts
(provided they do not exceed eight feet in height), doghouses, patios, yard
ornaments, athletic courts (provided they are not lighted), and similar items,
except as otherwise stated in this chapter, shall be exempt from the
requirements of this subchapter, provided they remain otherwise lawful.
      (4)   Solar panels.
         (a)   Solar panels may be permitted in all commercial zoning
districts, industrial zoning districts, public/semi-public zoning district,
Town Center zoning district, and commercial/industrial zoned areas of PUD
zoning districts with the following restrictions:
            1.   Solar panels shall only be roof-mounted;
            2.   Solar panels are only permitted on flat roofs;
            3.   Solar panels must be completely screened by parapet walls.
Solar panels and their associated components must not be visible from any other
property or street;
            4.   Solar panels shall be designed and installed so as to allow
proper access to and around the roof structure for emergency personnel;
            5.   The panels, components, and equipment shall be matte black;
         (b)   Solar panels may be permitted in all residential zoning
districts, Old Town zoning district, and residentially zoned areas of PUD
zoning districts with the following restrictions:
            1.   Solar panels shall only be roof-mounted;
            2.   Solar panels which are mounted to roof plane facing a street
or are visible from a street or roadway, shall be limited to a symmetrical
panel grouping. This shall be interpreted to mean the panels shall form a
perimeter that is four-sided, such as a square or rectangle. There may be more
than one symmetrical panel grouping
            3.   Solar panels shall project no more than a maximum of six
inches above the roof plane and be parallel to the roof plane;
            4.   Solar panels shall not project about the maximum structure
height of applicable zoning district;
            5.   Solar panels shall only be mounted to a primary residential
structure; accessory buildings shall not be used for solar panels;
            6.   Solar panels are subject to private restrictions (i.e., HOA
covenants); however, the town’s permit process will not include such reviews.
Any enforcement of private restrictions shall be the responsibility of the
applicable private parties;
            7.   Solar panels shall be designed and installed so as to allow
proper access to and around the roof structure for emergency personnel;
            8.   Solar panels shall be designed and located to avoid glare or
reflection onto adjacent properties and roadways. They shall not interfere with
traffic or create a safety hazard.
   (E)   Vehicles use. In no instance shall a vehicle, including semi-tractor
trailers, truck bed whether located on or off a truck chassis, and / or mobile
home structure be used as an accessory structure in any district (such as for
storage, and the like).
   (F)   Accessory structure location. Accessory structures shall comply with
the following location requirements:
      (1)   Septic fields. No accessory structure shall be placed in any
operable septic field.
      (2)   Landscaping and buffer areas. No accessory structure shall encroach
into any required landscaped area or buffer yard.
      (3)   Yard location. No accessory structure shall be permitted in any
front yard. The minimum rear and side yard setbacks for accessory structures
shall be the same as the side and rear yard setbacks for primary structures
within the zoning district they are located, or setback a distance equal to the
height of the accessory structure, whichever is greater.
      (4)   Easement. No accessory structure shall be permitted in any
easement.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 071216,
passed 7-12-2016; Ord. 010819, passed 2-12-2019; Ord. 111423E, passed 12-12-
2023)
§ 154.061 TEMPORARY USE AND STRUCTURE STANDARDS, GENERAL.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.  The purpose of these temporary use and structure
standards is to establish minimum standards for the temporary use of property
and the placement of temporary structures in order to:
      (1)   Accommodate the temporary needs or properties and land uses;
      (2)   Ensure that temporary uses do not become permanent without proper
scrutiny; and
      (3)   Protect the public welfare from the unique hazards that can be
created by temporary uses and structures.
   (B)   General. The following standards shall apply to all properties within
the town.
      (1)   Temporary structure standards. All temporary structures shall
comply with the following requirements:
         (a)   Applicable development standards. Temporary structures must meet
all development standards for a permanent accessory structure unless otherwise
specified in this subchapter.
         (b)   Temporary structure time limits. Any temporary structure used
for a permitted primary use may be permitted for up to 120 days in a calendar
year, unless otherwise specified by this chapter. Temporary structures used for
a permitted primary religious-place of worship or school use may be permitted
for up to two years.
      (2)   Temporary use and structure standards. Temporary uses and
structures are permitted in any zoning district provided that the use is a
permitted use in that zoning district. All temporary uses and structures shall
comply with the following requirements:
         (a)   Permit requirements. All temporary uses and structures shall
require a temporary use permit unless otherwise specified in this chapter. No
temporary use or structure, or the related signs, lighting, parking, and the
like shall be constructed or placed upon a site prior to all necessary permits
being obtained.
         (b)   Time limits. Any temporary structure used for or in support of
permitted primary or other use may be permitted for up to 90 days in a calendar
year, or as listed on the permit, whichever is less, unless otherwise specified
by this subchapter. This limit shall apply to all temporary structures on a
property. Temporary structure used for a permitted primary religious–place of
worship or school (public or private) use may be permitted for up to two years.
            1.   An extension of up to 30 days may be granted by the
administrative officer in any given calendar year, without the need for a
public hearing. The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant subsequent extensions
after a public hearing is held. For religious–place of worship or school uses
the Administrative Officer may approve a one-time extension for up to two
additional years. The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant subsequent extensions
after a public hearing is held. The Board or Administrative Officer may impose
reasonable conditions as part of its approval.
            2.   No extensions of the time limits described in this subchapter
shall be granted for any temporary use or structure known to violate any
requirements of this chapter as it exists at the time the extension is
requested. An extension shall be considered invalid if the temporary use or
structure was in violation of this chapter at the time the extension was
sought.
         (c)   Removal. All temporary uses and/or structures shall be removed
and the site reverted to its original condition within the duration of the
permit or any extension thereof.
      (3)   Construction trailers.  Construction trailers are permitted as
temporary structures only during times of construction activity. Construction
trailers shall not be located in any required setback or buffer yard.
Construction trailers may be permitted for up to two years, and may be extended
by the
Board of Zoning Appeals or the Administrative Officer via an unlimited number
of one-year extensions. The Board or Administrative Officer may impose
reasonable conditions as part of its approval.
      (4)   Construction dumpsters. Dumpsters for construction-related debris
shall be permitted as temporary structures only during times of construction
activity. Dumpsters shall not be located in any required setback or buffer
yard. Construction dumpsters in residential districts shall be held to the time
limits listed in division (B)(1)(b) and extensions listed in division (B)(2)(b
)1. of this section. Construction dumpsters in commercial districts shall be
permitted for up to one year; a one-time extension of one year may be granted
by the Administrative Officer. The Administrative Officer may impose reasonable
conditions as part of its approval.
      (5)   Temporary outdoor uses. Uses such as temporary parking facilities,
sidewalk sales, Christmas tree sale lots, festivals, farmer’s markets, or
similar activities conducted outside of an enclosed building, excluding
residential garage/yard sales, may be permitted on a temporary basis in any
zoning district in the town upon obtaining a temporary use permit from the
Administrative Officer. The permit may be issued without a public hearing,
provided that the permit shall not be issued for more than 30 days or the time
requested in the permit application if less than 30 days. The following
procedures apply to the issuance of a temporary outdoor land use permit:
         (a)   Application. An application for a temporary outdoor land use
permit shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee, on a form provided by the Administrator's office. The application
shall contain the following information:
            1.   The name and address of the applicant and contact information
including telephone numbers, fax, and email address;
            2.   The location of the proposed temporary outdoor land use;
            3.   A description of the temporary outdoor land use;
            4.   Evidence that the applicant owns the site for which the permit
is requested, or alternatively, evidence that the applicant's use of the site
is authorized by the owner of the property;
            5.   The days and hours of operation for when the temporary outdoor
land use is to occur, including the total number of consecutive days the
temporary outdoor land use will be in operation;
            6.   The number of persons expected to visit or attend the proposed
temporary outdoor land use;
            7.   The planned areas for parking for those working at and those
visiting or attending the proposed temporary land use;
            8.   A site layout and circulation plan illustrating pedestrian and
motorist circulation patterns and routes and including distances between
stationary objects such as tables, displays, or exhibits; and
            9.   Any other information the Administrative Officer, in his or
her reasonable determination, deems necessary to properly review the permit
application.
         (b)   Criteria. Before approving an application for a temporary
outdoor land use permit, the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee,
shall first find that the application is complete and then that the proposed
temporary outdoor land use meets all of the following criteria:
            1.   The nature and intensity of the temporary use and the size and
placement of any temporary structure shall be planned so that the temporary use
or structure will be compatible with existing development.
            2.   The temporary use is not located within a permanent structure
or building.
            3.   The parcel is of sufficient size to adequately accommodate the
temporary use or structure.
            4.   The location of the temporary use or structure shall be such
that adverse effects on surrounding properties will be minimal, particularly
regarding the traffic generated by the temporary use or structure.
            5.   Off-street parking areas are of adequate size and properly
located for the particular temporary use or structure and the entrance and exit
drives are laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards or nuisances.
            6.   All signs are in compliance with all applicable standards
prescribed by §§
154.140 through
154.148, Sign Standards, of this chapter.
            7.   All lighting is directed and controlled so as not to create a
nuisance to neighboring property owners.
         (c)   Action taken by the Administrative Officer.
            1.   Upon review and determination that the proposed temporary
outdoor land use is consistent with the requirements of this section, as well
as the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan, the
Administrative Officer may approve the permit or approve it with conditions.
            2.   If the Administrative Officer finds that the proposed
temporary outdoor land use is not consistent with the requirements of this
section or the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan, he
or she shall deny the application.
            3.   In making his or her determination on the application, the
Administrative Officer may, in his or her discretion, first consult with the
Plan Commission.
            4.   An appeal of a decision by the Administrative Officer relative
to the denial of a temporary outdoor land use permit for a temporary use may be
taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the provisions for appeal set
forth in this chapter.
         (d)   Permit. A written temporary outdoor land use permit shall be
obtained for all temporary outdoor land uses. For those temporary outdoor land
uses which are reasonably likely to have an attendance of 750 or more persons
at any one time, the permit shall contain the following information:
            1.   The applicant's name;
            2.   The location and effective dates of the temporary outdoor land
use;
            3.   Any conditions attached to the permit including, without
limitation:
               a.   Use and placement of signs;
               b.   Provision for security and safety measures;
               c.   Control of nuisance factors; and
               d.   A statement of compliance with all applicable local, state,
and federal laws, rules or regulations, including any requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act;
            4.   Those temporary outdoor land uses which are reasonably likely
to have an attendance of 750 or more persons shall establish a performance
guarantee. Said guarantee shall be in such amount as shall, in the reasonable
discretion of the Administrative Officer, insure compliance with the terms and
conditions of the temporary outdoor land use permit and fully reimburse the
town for all expenses incurred, including legal and administrative costs, in
correcting any failure on the part of the permit holder and repairing any
damage caused thereby; and
            5.   The signature of the Administrative Officer.
         (e)   Revocation. The Administrative Officer may revoke a permit at
any time for noncompliance with the requirements of this section or the
conditions of any permit issued hereunder. Upon expiration or revocation of a
temporary outdoor land use permit, the use shall cease and all temporary
structures shall be removed from the parcel of land within five days or such
other timeframe as established by the Administrative Officer. A temporary
outdoor land use permit may be revoked if any one of the following findings can
be made:
            1.   The temporary outdoor land use permit was obtained by
misrepresentation or fraud;
            2.   One or more of the conditions of the temporary outdoor land
use permit has not been met; or
            3.   The use is being conducted in violation of a town ordinance,
or a state or federal law or regulation.
      (6)   Fireworks sales. Strict compliance with the provisions of state
fireworks laws is required. Fireworks stands are hereby expressly prohibited
from being located within a residential zoning district, unless otherwise
approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The permit holder shall also provide
proof of insurance with financial limits acceptable to the Administrative
Officer. In no instance shall the sale of fireworks take place outside of an
enclosed building.
   (C)   Residential. The following standards shall apply to properties within
a residential zoning district. The following temporary uses and structures are
permitted as described below wherein no permit shall be required unless
otherwise specified.
      (1)   Garage/yard sales. Garage/yard sales are permitted to occur no more
than four times per calendar year, not to exceed 16 days per calendar year.
Garage/yard sales shall be distinguished from flea markets or farmer’s markets
in that garage/yards sales are clearly incidental to residential uses, while
flea markets and farmer’s markets are commercial businesses. In no instance
shall this provision be interpreted as permitting the operation of a flea
market or farmer’s market.
      (2)   Children's roadside stands.  Children's roadside stands shall be
permitted, but shall not be located in any existing public right-of-way.
      (3)   Temporary home sales facilities.
         (a)   Temporary model homes. Temporary model homes shall be permitted
in any residential development provided they comply with the following
provisions:
            1.   Use. The use of the facility shall be limited to open house
purposes for prospective buyers. Temporary model homes may be used for the
purpose of selling homes in other developments or in other communities.
            2.   Signs. Signs shall be placed in a manner consistent with the
intersection sight visibility standards of this chapter and in compliance with
§§
154.140 through
154.148, Sign Standards, of this chapter.
            3.   Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting for model homes shall
be limited to typical household exterior lighting. The use of all other types
of lighting, including floodlighting and search lights shall be prohibited.
            4.   Parking. Off-street parking spaces for model homes installed
for the use of salespersons and potential buyers shall comply to the size
requirements of this chapter. Off-street parking for the facility shall be
located in the driveway or may be a small parking lot with a maximum of six
parking spaces located adjacent to the model home and behind the sidewalk. Such
a parking lot shall be hard surface. Any driveway area shall be consistent in
size and paving with those of the homes to be constructed in the development.
            5.   Landscaping. Model homes shall provide landscaping consistent
with that which will be provided for homes to be constructed in the
development. If parking is provided via a small parking lot, a row of shrubs
must be provided around the perimeter.
            6.   Model home conversion. Prior to the sale of a model home for
use as a residence, all signage shall be removed and the garage area and
driveway finished or fully installed. All necessary permits shall be obtained
prior to occupancy as a residence.
            7.   Timeline. A model home may be permitted from the date the
subdivision has provided proper emergency access to the model home lot from a
perimeter street, and complied with all other aspects of this chapter, until
the last certificate of occupancy is issued for the individual lots within the
subdivision or five years has passed from the issuance of the permit for the
model home, whichever is less. The Administrative Officer may grant two one-
year extensions; any subsequent extensions may be granted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
         (b)   Temporary sales trailers . No more than one temporary sales
trailer shall be permitted in any development until either: (a) building
permits have been obtained for greater than 90% of the lots included in the
preliminary plat for the development; or (b) two years from the date of
approval of the secondary plat or final detailed plan for the most recent
section of the development, whichever is less. An improvement location permit
shall be required for all temporary sales trailers. All temporary sales
trailers shall comply with the following requirements.
            1.   Location. Temporary home sales trailers shall be located on a
lot in the development in which the homes are for sale. No other structures
shall be permitted on any lot occupied by a temporary sales trailer.
            2.   Use. The use of the facility shall be limited to open house
purposes for prospective buyers. Temporary sales trailers may not be directly
used for the purpose of selling homes in other developments or in other
communities.
            3.   Signs. Signs shall be placed in a manner consistent with the
intersection sight visibility standards of this chapter and in compliance with
§§
154.140 through
154.148, Sign Standards, of this chapter.
            4.   Exterior lighting.  All exterior lighting for temporary sales
trailers shall be limited to typical household exterior lighting. The use of
all other types of lighting, including floodlighting and search lights shall be
prohibited.
            5.   Parking.  Temporary sales trailers shall provide two off-
street parking spaces. The spaces shall be surfaced with stone meeting the
requirements of the Town Engineer.
            6.   Landscaping. Temporary sales trailers shall provide a
landscaped area extending from the trailer for five feet in each direction. The
landscaping shall include a variety of shrubs and other materials consistent
with the landscaping design of the development. The trailer site shall be
graded to ensure proper drainage and treated with a combination of grass seed
and sod appropriate to prevent erosion and provide a lawn consistent with that
of the homes to be built in the development.
            7.   Sales trailer conversion. Any builder with a temporary home
sales trailer and either constructing an approved model home, or removing the
trailer, shall restore the trailer site to pre-installation conditions,
removing the trailer and any associated signage and lighting. If the trailer is
to be replaced by a model home, the trailer and all associated site features
shall be removed prior to the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy
for the model home.
   (D)   Temporary signage.  See §§
154.140 through
154.148, Sign Standards.
   (E)   Food trucks. The following standards apply to all food trucks wishing
to operate within the town corporate limits:
      (1)   A permit is required for all food trucks per §§
154.200 through
154.211.
      (2)   Food trucks shall not operate, locate, or park in any public right-
of-way.
      (3)   Food trucks shall not interfere with traffic flow on any public
street, private street, or internal drives of parking lots.
      (4)   Food trucks shall not operate, locate, or park on any sidewalk or
multi-use path.
      (5)   Food trucks shall not operate, locate, or park in a manner that
hinders access to a fire hydrant.
      (6)   Food trucks shall not operate, locate, or park in a manner that
prevents or blocks access to any driveway, sidewalk, or building entrance or
exit.
      (7)   Food trucks shall not operate, locate, or park within 200 feet of
the front door of any restaurant and/or dining area, unless given written
approval any and all restaurants and/or dining areas within said distance.
      (8)   Food trucks shall operate, locate, and/or park on properties zoned
Neighborhood Commercial, Professional Business Office, Regional Commercial, Low
Intensity Industrial, Medium Intensity Industrial, Public/Semi-public, and PUDs
(only when specifically permitted by that PUD Ordinance). Food trucks shall be
permitted only by special exception in Old Town and are prohibited in all other
zoning districts.
      (9)   Food trucks are prohibited from locating on a lot or property that
does not have another primary structure.
      (10)   Food truck hours of operations are limited to 8:00 a.m. through
10:00 p.m.
      (11)   Food trucks signage shall be limited to signs which are attached
to the surface to the food truck itself. Such signage shall not project more
than six inches from the surface of the truck. In addition, each truck shall be
permitted a sandwich board sign as described in §§
154.140 through
154.148. These signs shall also comply with the location/placement limitations
listed in divisions (E)(2) through (E)(6) of this section, be removed each day
with the truck, and shall not be placed further than ten feet from the food
truck.
      (12)   Food trucks shall not be permitted to be located or parked
overnight in the town other than in an enclosed building.
      (13)   Town trash receptacles shall not be used by the customers or
operators of any food truck.
      (14)   The area surrounding any food truck shall be kept clean of trash
and debris. Discharges of waste or liquid onto the ground or into the sanitary
or storm sewers is strictly prohibited.
      (15)   The permit holder shall be held responsible for any non-
compliance.
      (16)   The permit must be posted in plan sight of the general public on
the food truck at all times when in operation.
      (17)   Any food truck found not to be in compliance with these rules and
regulations will be issued a notice of violation which must be corrected and
the truck brought into compliance within 24 hours thereafter or the
Administrative Officer may revoke the permit subject to appeal as set forth in
§§
154.200 through
154.211.
      (18)   Exemptions:
         (a)   Food trucks operating at a festival, farmer’s market, church
function, public school function, or the like, and such festival, farmers’
market, church function, public school function, or the like, has applied for
and obtained a temporary use permit, may operate under such temporary use
permit for the duration of such permit but only for the food truck(s)
identified within said permit. Food trucks operating under this exemption shall
be required to comply with divisions (E)(3), (E)(5), (E)(8), (E)(11) and (E)
(14) of this section.
         (b)   Under no circumstances shall a roadside stand solely operated by
a child(ren) be considered a food truck).
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 040814A, passed 4-8-2014; Ord. 111114,
passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 111423E, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 154.062 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT STANDARDS.
   Single-family dwellings constructed and used as accessories to the primary
dwelling on the property (otherwise commonly known as "mother-in-laws quarters"
and "granny flats") shall be either: (a) attached to, and designed and
constructed as part of the primary structure; or (b) located above a detached
garage or workshop. In no case may any accessory dwelling exceed 850 square
feet in living area.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.063 DAYCARE HOME STANDARDS.
   Child day-care homes shall meet the definition established by I.C. 12-7-2-
28.6 and shall be consistent with all applicable regulations of the State of
Indiana.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.064 AMATEUR RADIO AND TELEVISION AND RADIO RECEIVER ANTENNAS.
   All amateur radio antenna, CB radio antenna, antenna for receiving
television signals, antenna for receiving radio signals, and all other personal
broadcasting equipment shall meet the following requirements:
   (A)   Location. No antenna (including anchors or supports) shall be located
in any front or side yard.
   (B)   Height. No amateur radio tower shall exceed 48 feet in height from
ground level or five feet in height above the highest point of the roof of the
primary structure, whichever is greater. Amateur radio towers shall be
permitted to exceed these height requirements if a determination is made by the
Board of Zoning Appeals, through the development standard variance process,
that the increased tower height is technically necessary to successfully engage
in amateur radio communications.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.065 PARK AND RECREATION FACILITY ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Where park and recreation facilities are permitted, customary accessory uses
and structures including but not limited to restrooms, groceries, refreshment
stands, restaurants, laundries, and sporting goods sales are also permitted,
subject to the following standards:
   (A)   Area. The maximum cumulative area occupied by accessory uses and
structures, including any parking intended for accessory structure use that is
separate from park and recreation area primary parking, shall not exceed 10% of
the park and recreation site.
   (B)   Subordinate role. The accessory uses and structures shall be
subordinate to the recreational character of the development.
   (C)   Design focus. The accessory uses and structures shall be located,
designed and intended to serve only the needs of the park and recreation
facility.
   (D)   Visibility. The accessory uses and structures shall present no visible
evidence of their business nature to areas outside the park or recreation park
facility.
   (E)   Parking. Parking for accessory uses and structures shall be consistent
with the parking standards of this chapter.
   (F)   Waste containers. All dumpsters and other waste containers shall be
screened consistent with §
154.120, Buffering and Screening Standards, of this chapter.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.066 MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Where multi-family dwellings or manufactured home parks are permitted,
customary incidental uses and accessory structures including but not limited to
management offices, sales offices, storage facilities, day-care centers, self-
service laundries, fitness centers, community centers, and recreation centers,
may also be permitted, provided they comply with the following standards:
   (A)   Area. The maximum cumulative area occupied by accessory uses and
structures, including any associated parking shall not exceed 10% of the
development site.
   (B)   Subordinate role. The accessory uses and structures shall be
subordinate to the multi-family character of the development.
   (C)   Design focus. The accessory uses and structures shall be located,
designed and intended to serve only the needs of the development.
   (D)   Visibility. The accessory uses and structures shall present no visible
evidence of their business nature to areas outside the multi-family community.
   (E)   Parking.  Parking for accessory uses and structures shall be
consistent with the parking standards of this chapter.
   (F)   Waste containers. All dumpsters and other waste containers shall be
screened consistent with §
154.120, Buffering and Screening Standards, of this chapter. Waste containers
shall not be interpreted as a trash can, which shall be permitted without the
need for screening or buffering.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111423E, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 154.067 DRIVE-THRU ESTABLISHMENTS.
   In no instance shall a business equipped with a drive-thru be permitted by
right. Any business with a drive-thru shall be required to obtain a special
exception use permit granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.068 TWENTY FOUR HOUR BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.
   Any 24-hour business must obtain a special exception use permit from the
Board of Zoning Appeals. For the purposes of administering and enforcing this
chapter, a 24-hour business shall be defined as a commercial establishment,
other than a hospital, that operates anytime between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.069 FIRE ARM/GUN SALES.
   The establishment of any fire arm sales shop shall be prohibited if such
business is within 200 feet of the property line of any school. The distance
between a gun shop and any school shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of
the gun shop to the nearest property line of any school. If any gun shop is
part of or included within a building or structure containing multiple
commercial uses, only the portion of the building or structure occupied by such
gun shop shall be included in determining the closest exterior wall of the
establishment.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.070 SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES.
   All adult uses shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any church,
school, park, child care home or child care center, residentially zoned
district, public or cultural facility (such as Town Hall, libraries, and the
like), or any established adult use. The distance shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
closest property lines of the lot on which each use is located.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.071 FACILITIES FOR THE MENTALLY ILL AND DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of these residential standards is to:
(1) provide minimum requirements for residential facilities; and (2) establish
the unique standards for new residential developments. This section also
establishes requirements for residential facilities for the developmentally
disabled and mentally ill that minimizes conflicts with other uses and permits
the establishment of such facilities consistent with I.C. 12-28-4-7.
   (B)   Residential facility standards for the mentally ill. Residential
facilities for the mentally ill shall be permitted as prescribed by the
Official Schedule of Uses (see
Chapter 154, Appendix A). All such facilities shall be required to comply with
all licensing and operational standards of the State of Indiana.
      (1)   Exclusion prohibited.  In no instances shall a residential facility
for the mentally ill be prohibited from locating, expanding, or operating in a
residential area solely because the facility is a business or because the
individuals residing in the facility are not related.
      (2)   Separation. A residential facility for the mentally ill may be
excluded from a residential area if the residential facility will be located
within 3,000 feet of another residential facility for the mentally ill, as
measured between lot lines.
   (C)   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled. Residential
facilities for the developmentally disabled Type I shall be a permitted as
prescribed by the Official Schedule of Uses. Residential facilities for the
developmentally disabled Type I are defined as those that are not designed for,
nor accommodate more than eight developmentally disabled individuals. Type II
facilities accommodate more than eight developmentally disabled individuals
(consistent with I.C. 12-28-4-7).
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.072 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Pedestrian access. Multi-family residential subdivisions shall include
public sidewalks, constructed by the builder/lot owner at the time of
construction of the residences. All sidewalk design and construction shall
comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), as amended. The
restrictive covenants of the development shall include the following
maintenance covenant text and be recorded with the plat of the development:
“The developer or property owner (lot owner) shall be responsible for
constructing a five-foot wide concrete sidewalk of 4,000 PSI strength plain
cement four inches thick, sloped one-quarter inch per foot toward the street
with expansion joints each 48 inches along the entire street frontage of their
respective lot.” The sidewalk shall be constructed prior to completing finish
lot grading. The sidewalk shall be located one foot inside the planned public
right-of-way line, (not on the lot) and parallel to the street right-of-way
line, or it may be located inside a private street easement or access easement,
when the street is not a public right-of-way. The lot owner and/or developer is
responsible for the repair and maintenance of the sidewalk for the initial one
year from completion of residence. Thereafter, the homeowners’ association
shall be responsible for maintenance and upkeep of the sidewalk. However,
except any damage done by the adjoining lot landowner and/or developer during
construction shall be corrected by the landowner and/or developer. All public
sidewalks shall comply with all Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), as
amended, requirements and in the situation of a conflict between ADA rules,
covenants or other regulations, the ADA shall govern.”
   (B)   Community structure. In multi-family developments with more than 300
dwelling units, the development plan shall include provisions for a civic or
semi-public use, such as a clubhouse or swimming pool, which shall be made
available to all property owners within the development. Any civic or semi-
public building shall have a ground floor area of no less than 2,000 square
feet and comply with the same architectural guidelines and covenants which are
applicable to the residences proposed for the development.
   (C)   Public safety. In multi-family developments the petitioner/developer
shall submit the development plan to the governing fire agency for review to
determine if the plan shall include provisions to preserve land for future fire
structures. If the fire agency so determines that a need exists for land, the
Plan Commission may require, the petitioner to include in the plans of the
development, such reserved land areas up to two acres. At such time as that
land is platted, the developer shall include the land in the plat and deed the
land to the governing fire agency within 60 days thereafter, or upon taking
title of the land.
   (D)   Community amenity.  Multi-family developments greater than 120 and
less than 239 acres shall include provisions for public recreation such as
baseball fields, soccer fields, basketball court, tennis courts, fitness trails
and the like. The land set aside for such uses shall be a minimum of five acres
and shall increase five acres for each additional 120 acres that the gross
number of acres exceeds 239 acres. The park land shall be transferred to the
McCordsville Park Board upon recording the plat for the area upon the consent
of the Board. If at the time of recordation of the plat, the Park Board does
not accept the transfer of the park, the land shall be deeded to the homeowners
association for maintenance and control. After five years from the date of
recordation, if the Park Board does not formally request title to the land, the
homeowners association shall use the land for the benefit of the development as
set forth above. The use may include park amenities, sports fields, trails,
community buildings and other uses which meet the intent of this section of the
ordinance and shall be consistent with all applicable zoning commitments, codes
and regulations.
   (E)   Block length.  The maximum length of a block of residences along a
perimeter of the development, excluding frontage along a public road, shall not
exceed 500 feet. Acceptable block breaks include a future street stub;
neighborhood park a minimum of 100 feet in width; lot configuration which
causes the residence orientation to be altered a minimum of 60 degrees; change
in building minimum standards which alter the rear elevations of the residences
to give the appearance of a block change (roof line changes, rear wall
alignment).
   (F)   Street interconnectivity. In all developments there shall be a plan
for vehicular connections into undeveloped tracts or parcels of land. Streets
designed for future extensions shall have public rights-of-way platted to the
developer's property line so as not to create future rights-of-way takings or
purchases upon extension. A barricade shall be constructed on the extension to
prevent accidental passage into undeveloped areas.
   (G)   Driveway. Driveways on corner lots in multi-family developments shall
be handed in the opposite side from the intersection of the street rights-of-
way lines.
   (H)   Mailboxes. The subdivision covenants of a multi-family residential
development shall establish a uniform design and specification for all
mailboxes. The design and specifications shall be done in accordance with the
U.S. Postal Service regulations. Further, all municipal regulations for the
placement of mailboxes shall be adhered to.
   (I)   Landscaping. Refer to §
154.119, Landscaping Standards, of this chapter.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 041216-A, passed 4-12-2016)
§ 154.073 HOME OCCUPATION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of these home occupation standards is
to establish minimum requirements for home-based businesses in order to protect
the residential character of the McCordsville Community, preserve property
values, and prevent the hazards to persons and property that can result from
residential-commercial land use conflicts.
   (B)   Applicability. A home occupation may be permitted, subject to Board of
Zoning Appeals approval of a special exception use, as an incidental use to any
residential dwelling. In order to be considered a permitted home occupation,
the use shall comply with the requirements of this section.
   (C)   Activities. The face-to-face wholesale/retail sale of stocked
inventories is not permitted, except for incidental sales that do not exceed
25% of total home occupation sales. Mail-order/telephone/internet sales, as
well as distribution of sold merchandise, is hereby permitted. Manufacturing
activities are hereby expressly prohibited.
   (D)   Effects of operation. There shall be no equipment or process used in
the home occupation that creates noise, vibration, glare, smoke, fumes, odors,
or electrical interference that is detectable, without the aid of instruments,
off the premises (as determined by the Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee). There shall be no electrical or mechanical equipment utilized in the
home occupation that will create any visual or audible interference with radio
or television reception.
   (E)   Owner/operator. At least one person residing within the dwelling must
be the primary operator of the home occupation.
   (F)   Employees. The home occupation may not involve the on-site employment
or regular on-site gathering of any more than one person, other than those
residing at the location of the home occupation.
   (G)   Outdoor storage/display. There shall be no exterior storage of
products, equipment or materials that are related to the home occupation.
   (H)   Business area. The home occupation may be located within the dwelling
and/or an accessory structure, but shall not exceed a total area of 500 square
feet. The home occupation must utilize no more than 25% of the total floor area
of the dwelling.
   (I)   Structural alterations. The home occupation must not require any
structural or aesthetic alterations to the dwelling and/or accessory structure
that changes its residential character as described below:
      (1)   Dwelling appearance. The dwelling and/or accessory structure shall
not be altered in its appearance and the home occupation shall not be conducted
in such a manner as to differentiate the dwelling from the residential
character of the area by the use of colors, materials, construction, or
lighting.
      (2)   Entrances. The home occupation shall not require any additional
entrances to the dwelling and/or accessory structure.
      (3)    Utility service. The home occupation shall not require increasing
or enhancing the size, capacity, or flow of the water, gas, waste treatment, or
electrical systems beyond what is standard for a residence. Illegal discharge
to the town's sanitary or stormwater sewers is expressly prohibited.
      (4)   Interior alterations.  There shall be no alterations to the
interior of the dwelling to accommodate the home occupation that would render
the structure undesirable for residential use, as determined by the
Administrative Officer, or his or her designee.
   (J)   Parking and business vehicles.  The home occupation shall not involve
on-site customers, employees, meetings, or other events that necessitate the
installation of any off-street parking spaces in addition to those required of
the dwelling unit by this chapter. In addition, the on-site storage of business
vehicles shall meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (K)   Deliveries.  The home occupation must not require the regular use of
commercial vehicles for pickup and deliveries, other than those from the U.S.
Postal Service or other small package carriers. For the purposes of this
chapter a commercial vehicle is any vehicle in excess of 16,000 pounds.
   (L)   Signs. No signs of any type shall be used, other than those permitted
in the applicable zoning district by §§
154.140 through
154.148, Sign Standards, of this chapter.
   (M)   Home occupations which comply with the list below are permitted by a
home occupation permit and are not required to receive a special exception from
the BZA.
      (1)   Compliant with divisions (C) through (L) of this section, and as
further restricted below:
      (2)   No signage;
      (3)   No on-site sales;
      (4)   No operator/employee that is not an owner in the property;
      (5)   No storage or parking of business vehicles; and
      (6)   No customer visits.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 010819, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 154.074 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of these telecommunication facility
standards is to provide for adequate, reliable public and private
telecommunications service while maximizing the use of transmission wireless
support structures and wireless support structure sites. These requirements
also seek to minimize the adverse, undesirable visual impact of wireless
support structures through minimizing needed wireless support structures and
wireless support structure sites, careful design and siting, and screening.
   (B)   Validity clause. If any part, section, division, subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word in this
subchapter is declared invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity
or enforceability of the remaining portions of this subchapter.
   (C)   General regulations applicable to wireless telecommunication
facilities.
      (1)   Abandonment. Abandoned or unused wireless support structures or
portions of wireless support structures shall be removed. The owner of a
wireless facility shall file annually a declaration with the Administrative
Officer or his or her duly authorized designee as to the continuing operation
of every facility installed subject to these regulations. In addition, the
owner shall file annually a certificate of insurance from the owner’s insurance
carrier listing the town and the Town Council as additional insureds for the
purposes of general liability with regard to bodily injury, personal injury and
property damage from all possible risks in an aggregate amount of not less than
$5,000,000 per incident with a further provision that the insurance carrier
shall notify the Town Council 30 days in advance of either cancellation and/or
non-renewal of the policy of insurance. Failure to do any of the above
requirements shall be determined to mean that the facility is no longer in use
and considered abandoned, thus subject to the following:
      (2)   Removal. All abandoned or unused wireless support structures and
associated facilities shall be removed within 180 days of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the
Administrative Officer or his or her duly authorized designee. A copy of the
relevant portions of a signed lease which requires the applicant to remove the
wireless support structure and associated facilities upon cessation of
operations at a site shall be submitted at the time of application. In the
event that a wireless support structure is not removed within 180 days of the
cessation of operations at a site, the wireless support structure and
associated facilities may be removed by the town and the costs of removal,
enforcement including attorney’s fees shall be assessed against the property;
and/or the property owners.
      (3)   Time constraint. Unused portions of wireless support structures
above a manufactured connection shall be removed within 180 days of the time of
antenna relocation. The replacement of portions of a wireless support structure
previously removed requires the issuance of a new wireless facility permit.
      (4)   Materials. The use of residentially compatible high quality
materials such as wood, brick, or stone is required for associated accessory
structures within or adjacent to the equipment compound, which shall be
designed to architecturally match the exterior of any adjacent residential or
commercial structures within the neighborhood or area.
      (5)   Design. Wireless telecommunication support structures shall be of a
monopole design and, when located within or adjacent to an environmentally or
aesthetically sensitive area, or a residential district, be designed to
architecturally camouflage the wireless telecommunication support structure as
much as reasonably practical to blend into the surroundings.
      (6)   Support structure height.
         (a)   In any commercial zoning district the maximum height of the
wireless support structure shall be 150 feet. The maximum height of any
accessory structure shall be 15 feet.
         (b)   In any industrial zoning district the maximum height of the
wireless support structure shall be 200 feet. The maximum height of any
accessory structure shall be 15 feet.
         (c)   In any residential district the maximum height of the wireless
support structure shall be 100 feet. The maximum height of any accessory
structure shall be 15 feet.
      (7)   Interference. No new telecommunications facility shall result in
any interference with public safety telecommunications.
      (8)   Proximity. No wireless support structure equipment compound shall
be placed closer than 500 feet to any property included in a residential zoning
district.
      (9)   Setback. The minimum front, side, and rear yard setback for all
wireless support structures shall be a minimum of the area within which the
wireless support structure is designed to collapse, as set forth in the
applicant’s engineering certification for the wireless support structure. No
part of a wireless telecommunications facility, including the equipment
compound, security fence, any required guide wires or bracing shall be
permitted in the required setback of the applicable zoning district. Landscape
screening may be provided in the setback area.
      (10)   Right-of-way encroachment. No part of any wireless
telecommunications facility nor associated lines, cables, equipment, wires or
braces shall at any time extend across or over any part of an existing or
planned public right-of-way, street, highway, sidewalk, or property line.
      (11)   Fence height. An eight-foot high security fence/wall shall
completely surround the wireless support structure equipment compound and
accessory equipment building site.
      (12)   Screening area. An area ten feet in width shall remain outside of
the fence/wall for the purpose of providing the landscape screening described
in this section.
      (13)   Access gates. In all zoning districts, the required security fence
enclosing the facility shall be 100% opaque and of wood, brick, or stone
construction. Opaque eight-foot tall wooden, composite wood, or metal gates
shall be provided to access the facility.
      (14)   Landscape screening. Evergreen buffer plantings shall be located
around the outermost perimeter of the security fence of all wireless
telecommunications facilities, including any wires and anchors. If evergreen
hedges are used they shall be a minimum of two feet tall at the time of
planting (measured from ground level) and shall be planted a maximum of three
feet on center. If evergreen trees are used they shall be a minimum of five
feet tall at the time of planting (measured from the top of the root-ball), and
shall be planted a maximum of ten feet on center. Existing vegetation (trees
and shrubs) shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
   (D)   Required approvals.
      (1)   Installation of new collocation.
         (a)   The placement or installation of new wireless facilities on
existing structures that include a wireless facility or a wireless support
structure, including water towers and other buildings or structures. This
includes the placement, replacement, or modification of wireless facilities
within an approved equipment compound.
         (b)   In addition to the requirements provided elsewhere in this
chapter, applications for collocation shall include the following:
            1.   The name, business address, and point of contact for the
applicant.
            2.   The location of the proposed or affected wireless support
structure.
            3.   Evidence of conformance with applicable building permit
requirements.
      (2)   Substantial modification of wireless support structure.
         (a)   The installation or mounting of a wireless facility on a
wireless support structure in a manner that:
            1.   Increases the height of the wireless structure by the greater
of:
               A.   Ten percent of the original height of the wireless support
structure; or
               B.   Twenty feet.
            2.   Adds an appurtenance to the wireless support structure that
protrudes horizontally from the wireless support structure more than the
greater of:
               A.   Twenty feet; or
               B.   The width of the wireless support structure at the location
of the appurtenance; or
               C.   Increases the square footage of the equipment compound in
which the wireless facility is located by more than 2,500 square feet.
         (b)   Any substantial modification that increases height, width, adds
an appurtenance, or increases the size of the equipment compound requires a
special exception from the Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA).
         (c)   In addition to the requirements provided elsewhere in this
chapter, applications for substantial modifications to wireless support
structures shall include the following:
            1.   The name, business address, and point of contact for the
applicant.
            2.   The location of the proposed or affected wireless support
structure.
            3.   A construction plan that describes the proposed wireless
support structure and all equipment and network components, including antennas,
transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related
equipment. Such plan shall be provided by a professional engineer licensed in
the State of Indiana, and include the engineer's stamp and registration number.
            4.   If a special exception is required by this chapter, evidence
showing that the application complies with the criteria set forth in this
chapter with respect to the special exception.
      (3)   Installation of new wireless support structure.
         (a)   The installation of any new wireless support structure(s) shall
be reviewed either by the Administrative Officer in the case of a permitted use
or by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a special exception use consistent with
the provisions of this chapter.
         (b)   In addition to the requirements provided elsewhere in this
chapter for the receipt of a special exception use approval and an improvement
location permit, applications for new wireless support structures or a complete
replacement of an existing wireless support structure with a new wireless
support structure shall include the following:
            1.   The name, business address, and point of contact for the
applicant.
            2.   The location of the proposed or affected wireless support
structure.
            3.   A construction plan that describes the proposed wireless
support structure and all equipment and network components, including antennas,
transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related
equipment. Such plan shall be provided by a professional engineer licensed in
the State of Indiana, and include the engineer’s stamp and registration number.
            4.   Evidence supporting the choice of location for the proposed
wireless support structure, including a sworn statement from the individual
responsible for the choice of location demonstrating that collocation of
wireless facilities on an existing wireless support structure was not a viable
option because collocation:
               A.   Would not result in the same wireless service
functionality, coverage, and capacity;
               B.   Is technically infeasible; or
               C.   Is an economic burden to the applicant.
            5.   If a special exception is required by this chapter, evidence
showing that the application complies with the criteria set forth in the
chapter with respect to the special exception.
      (4)   Replacement of existing, legal nonconforming wireless support
structure. Existing legal nonconforming wireless support structures may
continue in use for their current purpose but may not be replaced unless either
the replacement wireless support structure is an exact match to the height,
setback, and other features of the removed wireless support structure, or the
replacement wireless support structure complies in all respects to the
requirements in this chapter. If such wireless support structures are hereafter
damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause whatsoever, the wireless
support structure may be repaired and restored to its former location and
physical dimensions upon obtaining an improvement location permit.
   (E)   Small-cellular facilities.
      (1)   Location. Small-cellular facilities are permitted in the R/WCO
District, except for right-of-way having a "local" or "local-collector"
functional classification as identified in the town's thoroughfare plan, and
"alleys."
      (2)   Permitting. Any person or entity seeking to install small-cellular
facilities, related equipment, a substantial modification, or collocate shall
seek a right-of-way permit and telecommunications facility permit from the
town. Additionally, a right-of-way bond and certificate of liability insurance,
in amounts determined appropriate by the town, shall be required.
      (3)   Development standards.
         (a)   New small-cellular facilities shall be monopole design
constructed to support the initial user and at least one additional user.
         (b)   A proposal for a new wireless support structure or wireless
facilities shall not be approved unless the petitioner submits an affidavit
that the telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed structure cannot
be accommodated on an existing or approved utility pole, electrical
transmission tower, other wireless support structure, or other structure due to
one or more of the following reasons:
            1.   The planned telecommunications equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing or approved utility pole, electrical
transmission tower, other wireless support structure, or other structure as
documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and the existing
or approved utility pole, electrical transmission tower, other wireless support
structure, or other structure cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate the planned telecommunication equipment at a reasonable cost;
            2.   The planned telecommunications equipment would cause
interference impacting the usability of other existing telecommunication
equipment at the site if placed on existing structures. Supportive
documentation by a qualified and licensed professional engineer indicating the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;
            3.   The existing or approved utility pole, electrical transmission
tower, other wireless support structure, or other structure within the search
radius cannot accommodate the planned telecommunication equipment at a height
necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer;
            4.   Other unforeseen reasons make it unfeasible or impossible to
locate the planned telecommunication equipment upon an existing or approved
utility pole, electrical transmission tower, other wireless support structure,
or other structure; or
            5.   The petitioner has been unable to enter a commonly reasonable
lease term with the owners of existing or approved utility pole, electrical
transmission tower, other wireless support structure, or other structure.
         (c)   The overall maximum antenna and tower height shall be 50 feet
from grade level.
         (d)   The minimum tower separation shall be 1,000 feet between any
other support structures primarily used for telecommunications, as measured in
any direction between support structures, not necessarily a dimension measured
parallel to a road right-of-way.
         (e)   Support structures must be metal or fiberglass monopoles
matching the design and color of the town's non-residential street lights, as
amended. The town reserves the right to require luminaires on support
structures that match the town's street light luminaire specifications. Such
luminaires shall be maintained in good working order, be illuminated consistent
with the timing of other street lights along the corridor, at the cost of the
applicant, including the cost of electricity.
         (f)   Any antenna equipment mounted to the support structure shall
also be matching in color to the support structure.
         (g)   All facility equipment at a single facility (with the exception
of the antenna itself) shall be ground mounted in a cabinet having an area not
to exceed 40 cubic feet and no greater than 48 inches in overall height. Under
special circumstances, contingent upon a mutual agreement, the town may allow a
pole mounted cabinet with dimensions not exceeding 20 inches by 20 inches by
six inches (20" x 20" x 6"), ground mounted cabinet not to exceed two feet by
two feet by one foot (2' x 2' x 1') and other considerations, such as, but not
limited to, the addition of shrouding and landscaping to mitigate the visual
impact of the equipment. If a mutual agreement cannot be reached, then the town
Public Works Committee shall intervene and make a determination.
         (h)   All support structures shall have a plaque identifying the
structure, the owner, and the owner's contact information; said plaque shall
not exceed 0.25 square feet.
         (i)   All support structures shall avoid conflicts with sidewalks,
multi-use trails, and other roadway and utility infrastructure.
         (j)   All conduit, wiring and fiber shall be concealed within the
support structure and/or shall be buried underground. All new electrical
service lines to the support structure and/or equipment shall also be
underground. Existing aerial electrical service lines may remain. Under no
circumstance shall any service drop crossing a street or roadway be run in any
manner other than underground via a bore.
         (k)   Wireless support structures and facilities shall be designed to
blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color, camouflaging
and architectural treatment. The entire facility shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with its environment. The use of materials
compatible with the surrounding environment is required for associated support
structures, which shall be designed to architecturally match the exterior of
residential or commercial structures within the neighborhood or area. Specific
requirements for aesthetics of the wireless support structures and facilities
shall be in accordance with the standards established by the Public Works
Committee, from time to time.
      (4)   Operation. A petitioner receiving a permit for a: (1) new
construction of a wireless support structure; (2) substantial modification of
wireless support structure; or (3) collocation of wireless facilities on an
existing structure inherently agrees that if the wireless support structure or
wireless facilities are not used for a period of six months, they will be
removed by the facilities owner at its expense. Should such owner fail to
remove the wireless support structure or wireless facilities after 30 days from
the date of notice of violation is issued by the town, the town may remove such
structure or facilities and bill the owner for the costs of removal and clean-
up and restoration of the site. The owner of any facility shall annually file a
copy of any inspections completed on such wireless support structure or
wireless facilities with the town for continued operation and use of the
structure or facility, and provide documentation of compliance with the
financial assurance provisions of division (C) of this section.
      (5)   Confidential. All confidential information submitted by the
petitioner shall be maintained to the extent authorized by I.C. 5-14-3 et seq.
      (6)   Application process.
         (a)   New wireless support structures.
            1.   Contents of application. An application for a permit shall
include the following:
               a.   The name, business address, email address, telephone
number, and point of contact for the applicant;
               b.   The location address, and Latitude and Longitude of the
proposed or affected wireless support structure or wireless facility, and
identify all small cell towers within 1,500 feet of the proposed new support
structure;
               c.   A small cell facility construction plan, as defined herein,
that describes the proposed wireless, support structure and all equipment and
network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations,
power supplies, cabling, and related equipment sufficient to determine
compliance with these standards; and
               d.   Evidence supporting the choice of location, including,
without limitation:
                  (i)   Maps or plats showing the proposed location(s) of
applicant's proposed wireless support structure; and
                  (ii)   A sworn statement from the individual responsible for
the choice of location demonstrating that collocation of wireless facilities on
an existing wireless support structure was not a viable option based upon
documentation by a qualified and licensed professional engineer.
            2.   Single application. An applicant may submit one application
for multiple wireless service facilities that are located within R/WCO. The
permit authority may issue a single permit for all wireless support structures
and service facilities included in the application rather than individual
permits for each wireless support structure and service facility.
            3.   Procedure.
               a.   Determination of completion/defects. Within ten business
days of receipt of an application, the permit authority shall review the
application to determine if the application is complete. If the permit
authority determines that an application is not complete, the permit authority
shall notify the applicant in writing, which shall be an email within the
specified time period, and followed-up by a mailed letter which may not be
within the specified time period, of all defects in the application. An
applicant that receives a written notice of incompletion may cure the defects
and resubmit the application within 30 business days of receiving the notice.
If an applicant is unable to cure the defects within the 30 day period, the
applicant shall notify the permit authority of the additional time the
applicant requires to cure the defects.
               b.   Decision by permit authority. Not more than 14 business
days after the permit authority makes an initial determination of completeness,
the permit authority shall: (1) review the application to determine if it
complies with applicable requirements of this division (E); (2) review the
application to determine if it complies with standards required as established
by the permit authority; and (3) notify the applicant in writing, which shall
be an email within the specified time period, and followed-up by a mailed
letter which may not be within the specified time period, whether the
application is approved or denied. However, if the applicant requested
additional time to cure defects in the application, the 14 business days shall
be extended for a corresponding, reasonable amount of time.
            4.   Written determinations. A written determination, which shall
be delivered via an email within the specified time period and followed-up by a
mailed letter which may not be within the specified time period, shall state
clearly the basis for the decision to approve or deny an application. If the
permit authority denies an application, the written notice must include
substantial evidence in support of the denial. A notice is considered written
if it is included in the minutes of a public meeting of the permit authority.
         (b)   Substantial modification.
            1.   Contents of application. An application for substantial
modification of a wireless support structure shall include: (a) the name,
business address, email address, telephone number, and point of contact for the
applicant; (b) the location of the proposed or affected wireless support
structure or wireless facility; and (c) a small cell facility construction
plan, as defined herein, that describes the proposed modifications to the
wireless support structure and all equipment and network components, including
antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and
related equipment.
            2.   Single application. An applicant may submit one application
for multiple modifications of wireless support structures and service
facilities that are located within R/WCO. The permit authority may issue a
single permit for all wireless support structures and service facilities
included in the application rather than individual permits for each wireless
support structure and service facility.
            3.   Procedure.
               a.   Determination of completion/defects. Within ten business
days of receipt of an application, the permit authority shall review the
application to determine if the application is complete. If the permit
authority determines that an application is not complete, the permit authority
shall notify the applicant in writing, which shall be an email within the
specified time period, and followed-up by a mailed letter which may not be
within the specified time period, of all defects in the application. An
applicant that receives a written notice of incompletion may cure the defects
and resubmit the application within 30 business days of receiving the notice.
If an applicant is unable to cure the defects within the 30 day period, the
applicant shall notify the permit authority of the additional time the
applicant requires to cure the defects.
               b.   Decision by permit authority. Not more than 14 business
days after the permit authority makes an initial determination of completeness,
the permit authority shall: (1) review the application to determine if it
complies with applicable requirements of this division (E) of this section; (2)
review the application to determine if it complies with standards required as
established by the permit authority; and (3) notify the applicant in writing,
which shall be an email within the specified time period, and followed-up by a
mailed letter which may not be within the specified time period, whether the
application is approved or denied. However, if the applicant requested
additional time to cure defects in the application, the 14 business days shall
be extended for a corresponding, reasonable amount of time.
            4.   Written determinations. A written determination, which shall
be delivered via an email within the specified time period and followed-up by a
mailed letter which may not be within the specified time period, shall state
clearly the basis for the decision to approve or deny an application. If the
permit authority denies an application, the written notice must include
substantial evidence in support of the denial. A notice is considered written
if it is included in the minutes of a public meeting of the permit authority.
         (c)   Collocation.
            1.   Contents of application. An application for collocation of a
wireless support structure shall include:
               a.   The name, business address, email address, telephone
number, and point of contact for the applicant;
               b.   The location of the proposed or affected wireless support
structure or wireless facility;
               c.   Evidence of conformance with applicable building permit
requirements; and
               d.   Evidence from a qualified and licensed professional
engineer demonstrating the existing support structure can handle the additional
equipment.
            2.   Single application. An applicant may submit one application to
collocate multiple wireless service facilities that are located within R/WCO.
The permit authority shall issue a single permit or all wireless service
facilities included in the application rather than individual permits for each
wireless service facility.
            3.   Procedure.
               a.   Determination of completion/defects. Within ten business
days of receipt of an application, the permit authority shall review the
application to determine if the application is complete. If the permit
authority determines that an application is not complete, the permit authority
shall notify the applicant in writing, which shall be an email within the
specified time period, and followed-up by a mailed letter which may not be
within the specified time period, of all defects in the application. An
applicant that receives a written notice of incompletion may cure the defects
and resubmit the application within 30 business days of receiving the notice.
If an applicant is unable to cure the defects within the 30 day period, the
applicant shall notify the permit authority of the additional time the
applicant requires to cure the defects.
               b.   Decision by permit authority. Not more than 14 business
days after the permit authority makes an initial determination of completeness,
the permit authority shall: (1) review the application to determine if it
complies with applicable requirements of this division (E) of this section; (2)
review the application to determine if it complies with standards required as
established by the permit authority; and (3) notify the applicant in writing,
which shall be an email within the specified time period, and followed-up by a
mailed letter which may not be within the specified time period, whether the
application is approved or denied. However, if the applicant requested
additional time to cure defects in the application, the 14 business days shall
be extended for a corresponding, reasonable amount of time.
            4.   Written determinations. A written determination, which shall
be delivered via an email within the specified time period and followed-up by a
mailed letter which may not be within the specified time period, shall state
clearly the basis for the decision to approve or deny an application. If the
permit authority denies an application, the written notice must include
substantial evidence in support of the denial. A notice is considered written
if it is included in the minutes of a public meeting of the permit authority.
      (7)   Construction requirements. All wireless support structures,
wireless facilities, telecommunication towers, accessory structures, and any
associated equipment and wiring shall comply with the following requirements:
         (a)   All applicable provisions of the town's municipal code, zoning
ordinance, subdivision control ordinance, and all other town ordinances, as
amended.
         (b)   All applicable provisions of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC).
         (c)   All applicable provisions of the Building Code of the State of
Indiana, as amended.
         (d)   All wireless facilities and support structures shall be
certified by a qualified and licensed professional engineer to conform to the
latest structural standards and wind loading requirements of the Uniform
Building Code, as amended, and the Electronics Industry Association.
         (e)   All wireless facilities and support structures shall be designed
to conform with accepted electrical engineering methods and practices and to
comply with the provisions of the National Electric Code, as amended.
         (f)   All wireless facilities and support structures shall be
constructed to conform with the requirements of the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA).
         (g)   All wireless facilities and support structures shall be designed
and constructed to all applicable standards of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) manual, as amended.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 041216-A,
passed 4-12-2016; Ord. 101116-A, passed 10-11-2016)
§ 154.075 INDUSTRIAL OPERATION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of these industrial operation
standards is to minimize the conflicts between industrial uses and other land
uses and to protect persons and property from the possible negative impacts of
industrial operations.
   (B)   Applicability. All industrial uses shall be in compliance with any and
all applicable requirements of the state and federal governments (including the
standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration - OSHA). No
industrial use shall exhibit obnoxious characteristics to the extent that it
constitutes a public nuisance defined by and subject to this chapter. In cases
where the requirements of this chapter are in conflict with other applicable
requirements, the most restrictive shall apply.
   (C)   Exemptions. The following uses, activities, and circumstances shall be
exempt from the standards established by this section:
      (1)   Construction and maintenance.  Site preparation or the
construction, maintenance, repair, alteration, or improvement of structures,
equipment or other improvements on or within the lot lines of the subject
property.
      (2)   Motor vehicles. The operation of motor vehicles for the
transportation of personnel, material, or products.
      (3)   Public safety alerts. Public safety sirens and related apparatus
used solely for public purposes and/or necessary for the protection of life,
limb, or property.
   (D)   Interpretation. The industrial standards established by this section
provide general guidelines for discussing expectations with new and expanding
industrial operations. Where applicable the determination of compliance of
industrial operations with the requirements of this section shall be determined
by the Advisory Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or Administrative
Officer when consistent with the petition review processes established by this
chapter.
   (E)   General standards. All uses placed into operation after the effective
date of this chapter shall comply with all federal and state standards, as well
as the following general standards in the interests of protecting public
health, safety, and general welfare and lessening potential damage to property.
No use in existence on the effective date of this chapter shall be altered or
modified in a manner that conflicts with these standards.
      (1)   Fire and explosive hazards. Firefighting equipment and prevention
measures shall be subject to the approval of the governing fire agency and
shall be readily available and apparent when any activity involving the
handling and storage of flammable or explosive materials is conducted.
      (2)   Noise. No use on a property shall create a production or
operational noise, or combination of noises that are detectable without the aid
of instruments at the boundary line of any residential or commercial zoning
district.
      (3)   Odor. No use on a property shall emit any objectionable odor, or
combination of odors, that is detectable without the aid of instruments at the
boundary line of any residential or commercial zoning district.
      (4)   Vibration. No use on a property shall cause any objectionable
vibrations or concussions that are detectable without the aid of instruments at
the property lines of the lot on which the use is located.
      (5)   Glare and heat. No use on a property shall produce any glare or
heat that is detectable without the aid of instruments at the property lines of
the lot on which the use is located. All outdoor lighting shall be exempt from
these industrial standards, but shall comply with the exterior lighting
standards of this chapter.
      (6)   Noxious or toxic materials. No use on a property shall accumulate
or discharge outside any building materials, gases and fluids generally known
to be toxic or noxious. Such uses shall also comply with all applicable
regulations of the Hancock County Board of Health.
      (7)   Waste materials. No use on a property shall accumulate on the lot,
or discharge beyond the lot lines any waste matter in violation of the
applicable standards and regulations of the Hancock County Board of Health and/
or Indiana State Board of Health.
      (8)   Water pollutants. No use on a property shall discharge any
material, whether liquid, solid or gas, into public waters without any required
approvals of the Hancock County Board of Health and/or Indiana State Board of
Health.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.076 LAND USE REQUIREMENTS.
   Each land use is either permitted by right or by special exception. For the
purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, the location of a given
land use shall be as prescribed by the Official Schedule of Uses. Any use not
designated by a "P" or "S" in the subject district shall be considered to be a
prohibited use in the subject district. The Administrative Officer may
determine into which category a use is placed if it is not specifically listed
but is similar to another use that is listed in the Official Schedule of Uses.
This determination may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to
§§
154.200 through
154.210, Procedures and Permits, of this chapter.
   (A)   Compatibility with surrounding land uses. All proposed developments
within the town will be reviewed for their compatibility with the surrounding
neighborhoods, the natural environment, and their ability to create pleasing
transitions between land uses. To decrease the level of incompatibility between
residential and non-residential uses, landscape buffers may be required. Refer
to § 165.120, Buffering and Screening Standards, of this chapter.
   (B)   Residential uses.
      (1)   Determining density and open space.
         (a)   To allow greater flexibility and variety in the creation of
residential subdivisions while preserving significant community and natural
resources, residential subdivisions are required to arrange the residential
units on areas of the project site best suited for development and protect at
least 25% of the land for open space uses. A minimum of 6% of the land shall be
for active or passive recreation purposes. Open spaces must be accessible to
residents of the subdivision without crossing a private lot.
         (b)   Residential development within a project may not exceed the
gross density of the identified on
Chapter 154, Appendix B, Bulk Use Standards Matrix, of this chapter. The
applicant must meet all other development standards of the residential zoning
classification and the requirements of this chapter.
         (c)   The development potential of the property is determined by
multiplying the area of the tract times the density permitted by the zoning
district.
         (d)   The minimum open space requirement is calculated by multiplying
the area of the tract by 0.25. The recreation open space requirement is
calculated by multiplying the area of the tract by 0.06.
         (e)   Land designated for open space uses shall be restricted from
further subdivision through the use of conservation easements in a form
acceptable to the County Recorder and duly recorded in the County Recorder's
Office.
         (f)   Storm water management ponds or basins, land within the rights-
of-way of underground pipelines, and floodplain areas may be included as part
of the minimum required open space. Road rights-of-way may not be included as a
part of the minimum required open space.
      (2)   Evaluation criteria. In evaluating the layout of lots and open
space, the following criteria will be considered by the Plan Commission as
indicating design appropriate to the site's natural, historic, and cultural
features and meeting the purposes of this chapter. Diversity and originality in
lot layout shall be encouraged to achieve the best possible relationship
between development and conservation areas. The Plan Commission shall evaluate
proposals to determine whether the proposed subdivision:
         (a)   Protects and preserves all floodplains, wetlands, and slopes
greater than 20% from clearing, grading, filling, or construction to the
greatest extent possible.
         (b)   Preserves and maintains mature woodlands and existing
agricultural fields and creates sufficient buffer areas to minimize conflicts
between residential and agricultural areas.
         (c)   Maintains and creates a buffer of natural species vegetation at
least 100 feet wide adjacent to wetlands and surface waters, including creeks,
streams, springs, lakes, and ponds.
         (d)   Designs around existing hedgerows and tree lines between fields
and minimizes impacts on woodlands greater than five acres in size. Woodlands
on highly erodible slopes should also be avoided.
         (e)   Protects wildlife habitat areas of species listed as endangered,
threatened, or of special concern by the US Environmental Protection Agency
and/or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
         (f)   Improves public safety and vehicular carrying capacity by
avoiding development fronting directly onto existing public roads.
         (g)   Organizes the subdivision where the largest practicable number
of lots abuts open space areas in order to provide direct views and access to
open space.
         (h)   Provides recreational areas in suitable locations that offer
convenient access by residents and adequate screening from nearby lots.
         (i)   Includes a pedestrian circulation system designed to ensure that
pedestrians can walk safely and easily on the site, between properties and
activities or special features within the neighborhood open space system.
         (j)   Provides open space that is reasonably contiguous. Fragmentation
of open space should be minimized so that resource areas are not divided into
numerous small parcels located in various parts of the development. To the
greatest extent practicable, this land shall be designated as a single
block with logical, straightforward boundaries with a length-to-width ratio not
to exceed 4:1. Long, thin open space areas shall be avoided unless the
conservation feature is linear or such configuration is necessary to connect
with other streams and trails. The open space shall generally abut existing or
potential open space uses on adjacent parcels.
      (3)   Garage location/orientation. Two-car garages, a minimum of 22 feet
in width, or 20 feet in width with an additional four-foot-deep by eight-foot-
long storage area (within the garage), shall be required for all dwellings.
Garages may be front-loading, side-loading, courtyard-loading, rear-loading,
and/or detached. Any front-loading garage, attached or detached, which is
located less than 20 feet behind the front elevation of the home, shall feature
a decorative garage door. Any front-loading garage that protrudes eight feet or
more in front of the front elevation, shall feature at least one window on each
side elevation of the garage. The ARC may approve an architectural feature, in
lieu of window on the side elevation closest to the front door. These windows
shall not count towards any other window requirement. No front-loading garage
shall protrude more than ten feet in front of the front elevation. Garage
protrusion shall be measured by determining the distance between the farthest
protruding front facade of the garage and the widest portion of the front
facade of the front elevation. Front-loading garages shall not exceed 45% of
the width of the front elevation. Detached garages must be separated from the
primary structure a minimum often feet. For any three-car or larger garage that
faces a street, at least one of the bays must have a separate door and be off-
set a minimum of two feet from the other bays. At least 25% of all lots within
a residential subdivision shall feature a home that does not have a front-
loading garage. All decorative garage doors shall be approved by the
Architectural Review Committee. These regulations do not apply to multi-family
residential developments.
   Figure 1: Attached Front Load Garage A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-64.jpg]
   Figure 2: Attached Front Load Garage B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-66.jpg]
   Figure 3: Detached Front Load Garage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-68.jpg]
   Figure 4: Detached Rear Load Garage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-70.jpg]
   Figure 5: Attached Side Load Garage A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-72.jpg]
   Figure 6: Attached Side Load Garage B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-74.jpg]
 
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 010819,
passed 2-12-2019; Ord. 071123, passed 7-11-2023; Ord. 111423E, passed 12-12-
2023)
§ 154.077 FARM ANIMALS.
   (A)   Purpose. The intent of this section is to permit the use and enjoyment
of horses and farm animals at rates that are appropriate for the health,
welfare, and safety of the animals, neighboring property owners, and the
public. This type of agriculture use should also be conducted in a manner that
protects the values and aesthetic of the community.
   (B)   The keeping of horses is permitted in the R-l, R-2, and R-3 Zoning
Districts only, with the following requirements:
      (1)   The minimum property size shall be two acres for the first horse,
and an additional acre for each horse thereafter.
      (2)   Pasture areas shall be properly fenced, provided that any fencing
in a front yard does not exceed five feet and is transparent.
   (C)   The keeping of farm animals such as chickens, ducks, goat, sheep,
pigs, cows, or other animals as determined by the Director, may be permitted on
a property of at least five acres in the R-l, R-2, and R-3 Zoning Districts.
Furthermore, farm animals shall be classified into two categories, small farm
animals and large farm animals. Farm animals who have not reached mature
adulthood shall not count against any animal quantity restrictions. For the
purpose of this section, small farm animals are chickens, ducks, pygmy goats,
and the like. Large farm animals are cows, pigs, sheep, goats, llamas, donkeys,
and the like. Farm animal quantities shall be limited as follows:
      (1)   The keeping of small farm animals shall be limited to three small
farm animals per acre.
      (2)   The keeping of large farm animals shall be limited to one large
farm animal per acre.
      (3)   Structures, kennels, stalls, coops, pens, and other elements to
house farm animals on the immediate surrounding property controlling the
movement of those farm animals shall be considered confinement areas and
limited in size. Confinement areas shall be limited to 10% coverage of the
total lot area of the property. Confinement areas shall not be in a front yard.
      (4)   Small farm animal confinement areas shall be a minimum of 50 feet
from any side or rear property line.
      (5)   Large animal confinement areas shall be a minimum of 100 feet from
any side or rear property line. Pastures for cattle shall not be considered a
confinement area. Fencing for cattle pasture shall be a minimum of ten feet
from any side or rear property, and 30 feet from any front property line. Front
yard fencing shall be limited to five feet in height.
   (D)   Under no circumstance shall the provisions of this section be
interpreted to allow a confined animal feeding operation or the like. These
standards do not apply to an existing legal, non-conforming farm animal use.
(Ord. 111020C, passed 12-8-2020)
§ 154.078 OUTDOOR DINING.
   Purpose. Outdoor dining areas are encouraged for all restaurants and
businesses serving food and drinks. The following standards shall apply to all
outdoor dining areas:
   (A)   Outdoor dining areas shall be adjacent to their occupied space.
   (B)   Outdoor dining shall be accessed through the primary occupied space.
   (C)   The dining area shall be enclosed by a fence or wall enclosure that is
complementary to the architecture of the primary structure and shall be no less
than 30 inches and no more than four feet tall.
   (D)   Shall maintain a minimum five foot sidewalk around the perimeter of
the outdoor dining area that leads to entrances, parking, or other points of
interest for pedestrians.
   (E)   Landscaping in the form of planter beds, large pots, hanging baskets,
or the like shall be incorporated, subject to the approval of the Zoning
Administrator.
(Ord. 111020C, passed 12-8-2020)
§ 154.079 PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION.
   The purpose and intent of this section is to require property identification
for buildings within the town for public safety and emergency response purposes
and set enforcement provisions for failure to display identification. These
standards are not considered a sign as described in the town's Sign Ordinance.
   (A)   The assigned street address of a building shall be displayed in such a
manner so that the numerals can readily be seen from the street. The size of
the numerals shall comply with the applicable standards required by the
Building Code. However, the minimum numeral height for a non-residential
building shall be eight inches, or as otherwise required by the Fire Marshall
during the plan review process.
   (B)   Any dwelling or commercial building that abuts an alley or secondary
access that could be used by motor vehicles shall not only display the premises
identification on the front but shall also display its premises identification
visible from the alternate access to the property.
   (C)   Any structure with a main entrance that is not directly accessible or
visible from any roadway or parking lot shall also display the premises
identification at the main entrance.
   (D)   Any structure for which there exists a ground or monument sign shall
also display the premises identification on the ground or monument sign.
   (E)   When the numerals representing premises identification are removed or
become illegible, such numerals shall be renewed or replaced by the owner or
occupant of the building within ten business days.
   (F)   The provisions of this section requiring premises identification shall
apply to all existing residential and non-residential structures within the
town.
   (G)   The surface area devoted to these provisions does not count toward the
sign area allocations in the town's Sign Ordinance.
(Ord. 111020C, passed 12-8-2020)
§ 154.080 PUBLIC ART.
   The town encourages the incorporation of public art in all development and
projects. Public art should aim to have the highest aesthetic standards by
enabling artists to create original and sustainable artwork, with attention to
design, materials, construction, and location. The following criteria should
describe the public art sought by the town.
   (A)   Public art shall be in keeping with the best practices in maintenance
and conservation.
   (B)   Public art should generate visual interest by creating focal points,
meeting places and landmarks that will enhance the town's image.
   (C)   Public art should enliven and enhance the unique quality of sense of
place, within the development or community.
   (D)   Public art should foster common currency for social and economic
exchange between residents and attract visitors by ensuring that they have
access to visual 'clues' that will help them navigate and embrace a potentially
unfamiliar environment.
   (E)   Public art is expected to be integrated into the overall design of the
larger civic context in which it is placed.
   (F)   Public art should illuminate the character, community, geography,
history and environment found in the town.
   (G)   Public art in privately owned developments should be fully integrated
into the development's design, in the most accessible and visible locations.
   (H)   Artwork in retail streets and developments will need to be reviewed in
relation to signage and store frontage to make sure it will not impact the
visibility or access to the business.
   (I)   Attention should be paid to how the artwork will appear amidst mature
landscaping.
   (J)   Special care should be made to avoid locations where public art may be
damaged, such as in the portion of right-of-way dominated by vehicles.
   (K)   All public art to be erected shall be approved by the Town Council.
(Ord. 111020, passed 12-8-2020)
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
§ 154.090 ESTABLISHMENT AND GENERAL STANDARDS.
   The overlay districts listed below are hereby established to provide
additional development standards that respond to the unique characteristics of
the properties to which they apply. Overlay districts applicable to the town
include the Highway Corridor Overlay District, Airport Overlay District, and
Town Center Overlay.
   (A)   Applicability. Property located within an overlay district shall be
subject to the standards and regulations of its base zoning district, which
shall include planned unit development districts, and the provisions prescribed
below. In the event that a property is located within one or more overlay
districts, the property shall be subject to the requirements of each applicable
overlay district.
   (B)   Effect on land uses. All permitted, special exception, and prohibited
land uses in any underlying zoning district to which an overlay is applied
shall remain as they are unless otherwise specified by the applicable overlay
district standards.
   (C)   Effect on bulk use standard requirements. All bulk use standards
applicable to an underlying zoning district shall apply unless alternate
standards are provided for by the overlay district(s).
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111020C, passed 12-8-2020)
§ 154.091 HIGHWAY CORRIDOR OVERLAY.
   The visibility and accessibility of the land within the Broadway and CR 600
W highway corridors are unique and therefore command the highest standards of
development to stimulate substantial capital investments, encourage efficient
land use, promote coordinated development, permit innovative site designs,
establish development standards and preserve the integrity of the roadways
within the corridors.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this district is to establish an
overlay district to address the unique characteristics of the properties
adjacent to the two primary transportation corridors that traverse the
McCordsville community. These corridors have unique traffic management needs,
development pressures, and aesthetic characteristics that require the
establishment of additional development standards and regulations. It is the
intent of this district to meet the goals of the Comprehensive Plan and fulfill
the purpose of this chapter. More specifically, this overlay district is
intended to require development along the town's primary transportation
corridors that is aesthetically consistent, responsive to development
pressures, and proportional to the area's traffic management issues.
   (B)   Applicability. The Highway Corridor Overlay District shall apply to
all development sites, buildings, structures, plantings, signs, street
hardware, and any other improvements that are visible to the public and which
affect the physical development of land.
   (C)   Boundary. The rough boundary of the Highway Corridor Overlay District
is as illustrated on the Official Zoning Map. For the purposes of administering
and enforcing this chapter, the physical boundary shall measure 600 feet in
both directions, measured from the centerline of the road.
   (D)   Exemptions. All single and two-family residential uses shall be exempt
from the requirements of the Highway Corridor Overlay District.
   (E)   Uses. All uses permitted in an underlying base zoning district shall
be permitted in the Highway Corridor Overlay District. All special exception
uses in an underlying base zoning district shall be special exception uses in
the Highway Corridor Overlay District.
   (F)   Development standards. Unless specified otherwise, the following
development standards shall apply to developments along Broadway and CR 600 W.
      (1)   Vehicular access. Any access gained from Broadway or CR 600 W shall
be approved by the town, Town Engineer and/or INDOT, depending on the
jurisdiction of each. To provide safe and efficient traffic movement to and
from adjacent lands:
         (a)   Frontage roads, access roads, and distributor roads may have to
be constructed;
         (b)   Shared access shall be coordinated with contiguous lots and
designed to preserve the aesthetic benefits offered by the surrounding area;
         (c)   Access at the side or rear of building is encouraged; and
         (d)   New access points onto Broadway or CR 600 W shall be coordinated
with existing access points whenever possible.
      (2)   Curb cuts.  Curb cuts shall be no closer than one foot for every
400 feet of road frontage. No curb cuts shall be within 200 feet of the
intersection of two public roads. Opposing curb cuts shall align squarely or be
offset no less than 200 feet.
      (3)   Connectivity through stub streets. Stub streets shall be built in
all cases where adjacent lots have reasonable potential for development. For
the purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, the term reasonable
potential shall include any adjacent parcel of adequate size for non-
residential or residential development, as determined by the Plan Commission,
or duly appointed or designated representative.
      (4)   Site layout. All site development plans shall be prepared in
compliance with the requirements of §§
154.200 through
154.210, Procedures and Permits, of this chapter. Site development plans for
parcels located within the Highway Corridor Overlay District shall also comply
with the following:
         (a)   Site layout shall consider the relationship between all
buildings on site;
         (b)   Pedestrian connectivity between uses shall be illustrated;
         (c)   The amount of off-street parking located between the street and
the front façade of the building shall not exceed 80% of the total number of
parking spaces required by this chapter;
         (d)   Internal drive aisles that connect multiple lots shall minimize
points of access for safe vehicular circulation; and
         (e)   The orientation and access for all outlots shall be considered
and illustrated on the plan.
      (5)   Architectural design standards. The following architectural
standards shall apply to all non-residential development within a Highway
Corridor Overlay District. The following architectural standards are in
addition to any architectural design standards imposed by an underlying base
zoning district. In the event that one or more of the following architectural
design standards conflicts with an architectural design standard of an
underlying base zoning district, the standard that imposes the highest or
strictest regulation, shall govern. For the purpose of administering and
enforcing this chapter, the term FRONT FAÇADE shall refer to the façade that
faces the road with the highest thoroughfare classification; with the exception
of outlot buildings. All façades of an outlot building shall be treated as a
front façade.
         (a)   Entry features. Entryway features shall be required at the
primary entrance to the structure and shall include at least three of the
following design elements:
            1.   Raised corniced parapets over the door, peaked roof forms
having an average slope greater than or equal to a minimum 5:12 pitch, arches,
or architectural details such as tile work and moldings that are integrated
into the building structure and design;
            2.   Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped
areas and/or places for sitting;
            3.   Enhanced exterior lighting such as wall sconces, building
mounted accent lights, or decorative pedestal lights;
            4.   Prominent three-dimensional entryway feature, such as a clock
tower or other similar architectural design element, projecting from the plane
of the main exterior walls by a minimum of eight feet and raised above the
adjoining parapet wall/roof by a minimum of three feet; or
            5.   Pilasters projecting from the plane of the wall by a minimum
of eight inches and/or architectural or decorative columns to create visual
breaks and interest in the façade walls.
         (b)   Display windows.  All front facades, and facades (except office,
industrial, and institutional uses) along pedestrian walkways, shall have
display windows, faux windows, or decorative windows for no less than 60% of
the facade's horizontal length.
         (c)   Entrances. All facades that abut a street, public or private,
shall feature at least one customer entrance.
         (d)   Detail features.
            1.   All front facades shall incorporate no less than three of the
changes listed below. All other facades shall incorporate at least one wall
plane change listed below.
               a.   Projections/recesses;
               b.   Columns with trim or accent materials;
               c.   Change in finished material depths;
               d.   Change in material;
               e.   Building overhangs (as an architectural feature, not a
standard roof overhang);
               f.   Materials such as false windows or fenestration with
architectural accents; or
               g.   Other features as approved by the ARC.
            2.   Exceptions may be granted by the ARC for rear elevations which
are not visible to adjacent properties, private streets, and/or public rights-
of-way.
         (e)   Exterior materials. The use of smooth-faced concrete block,
untextured smooth-faced tilt-up panels, and standing seam metal panels shall be
prohibited. The Plan Commission shall approve or deny the use of all composite
and alternative materials that replicate the appearance and durability of those
listed below. All façade wall exterior building materials shall be high
quality, and shall be limited to any combination of the following:
            1.   Brick or face tile;
            2.   Wood;
            3.   Native stone;
            4.   Glass, provided that reflective glass is limited to a maximum
of 50% of the area of any façade wall on which the glass is used;
            5.   Tinted and/or textured concrete masonry units such as split
face block and burnished block;
            6.   Tilt-up concrete panels that are adorned or textured;
            7.   Architectural pre-cast concrete;
            8.   Architectural metal;
            9.   E.I.F.S.; or
            10.   Fiber cement board.
         (f)   Exterior colors. Exterior façade wall colors shall be low
reflectance and subtle tones. The use of high intensity, primary, metallic,
black or fluorescent colors shall be prohibited. Building trim and accent areas
may feature brighter colors not to exceed 10% of any single exterior wall area
excluding all windows, doors, and glass construction materials.
         (g)   Roof design. All roofs or parapets should vary three-
dimensionally to add visual interest to the building and shall include
architectural detailing, cornices, moldings, trims, variations in brick
coursing, and other similar detailing. More specifically, all roofs shall be in
compliance with the following:
            1.   Sloped roofs shall not exceed an average height equal to that
of 1.5 times the height of the supporting walls. Exceptions may be granted by
the ARC for architectural styles that lend themselves to a greater roof height.
            2.   Sloped roofs shall have overhanging eaves that extend a
minimum of 12 inches past the exterior of the exterior siding material.
            3.   Sloped roofs shall either be of architectural standing seam
metal, tile, slate, or dimensional shingles.
            4.   Flat roofs shall feature a parapet with varying heights. The
variations in height shall coincide with wall plane articulation.
      (6)   Pedestrian circulation. The following provisions are intended to
maximize the safety of the site for vehicular and pedestrian users and shall
apply to all non-residential development within a Highway Corridor Overlay
District.
         (a)   Pedestrian facilities.
            1.   A continuous, delineated pedestrian route network no less than
six feet wide, that continues from the perimeter public sidewalk to the
principal customer entrance of all principal buildings on the site shall be
provided.
            2.   Sidewalks no less than six feet wide shall be provided along
the full length of a building along any facade that features a customer
entrance. Sidewalks no less than ten feet wide shall be provided along the full
length of a retail building with more than two tenant spaces or a gross size
greater than 15,000 square feet, along any facade that features a customer
entrance. Sidewalks no less than 12 feet wide shall be provided along the full
length of a retail building with more than three tenant spaces or a gross size
greater than 40,000 square feet, along any facade that features a customer
entrance. All such sidewalks, equal to or greater than ten feet wide shall
feature landscape beds incorporated into the sidewalk. These beds shall not be
wider than half the width of the sidewalk.
            3.   All internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from
driving surfaces through the use of decorative pavers, decorative bricks, or
stamped and colored concrete.
            4.   All internal walkways must feature landscaping, benches, and
other such materials/facilities for no less than 50% of their length. Internal
walkway features can be composed of any combination of the following: benches;
tree plantings; decorative lighting, provided the lighting is no more than ten
feet in height; decorative bollards, shrubs, or hedges.
         (b)   Public spaces. Each lot of at least five acres must contribute
to the enhancement of the community and its public spaces by providing at least
one of the following amenities and each lot of at least ten acres must
contribute to the enhancement of the community and its public spaces by
providing at least two of the following amenities:
            1.   A landscaped patio/outdoor seating area or plaza that is a
minimum of 2,000 square feet in area;
            2.   A water feature, which shall be in addition to any required
detention or retention pond;
            3.   A clock or bell tower or other vertical element either as a
free-standing structure or as a primary entrance feature;
            4.   Bus or public transportation shelter and turn off lanes;
            5.   Public art or sculpture; and/or
            6.   A mini park as defined by the McCordsville Parks and
Recreation Master Plan, as amended from time to time.
      (7)   Outdoor storage, service, and loading areas. Areas for outdoor
storage, truck parking, trash collection or compaction, loading and unloading,
or other such areas shall not be visible from an adjacent street, public or
private, or an adjacent residential district. Service areas such as loading
docks, truck courts, and automobile service bays shall be oriented away from
the view of any public street or adjacent residential district, unless the
entire length of the area is screened by an eight foot masonry wall constructed
of materials compatible with the architecture of the primary structure. The
exterior side of the screening wall shall be planted with landscaping materials
so as to create a 100% opaque landscaping buffer that is at least four feet in
height at the time of planting.
      (8)   Permanent outdoor display, sales and storage. Merchandise may be
stored or displayed for sale to customers only in areas immediately adjacent to
the primary structure, provided that the area is enclosed by an eight foot
wall, or a three foot wall topped by wrought iron or tubular steel fencing. The
materials of the wall shall be consistent in appearance as the primary
structure. The storage of outdoor merchandise for sale elsewhere on the
property shall be prohibited.
      (9)   Decorative lighting. Decorative lighting shall be required along CR
600 W and W. Broadway (unless prohibited by INDOT), in accordance with the
design specifications detailed in Appendix C, Lighting Drawings. Town staff may
approve alternative lighting if the overall design is consistent with the
design and specifications of Appendix C.
      (10)   All standards set forth above shall apply where not in direct
conflict with any other provision of this chapter. In the event that one or
more of the following criteria conflicts with any other requirement of this
chapter, the more restrictive standard shall apply.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 010819,
passed 2-12-2019)
§ 154.092 AIRPORT OVERLAY.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The Airport Overlay District permits operation of
the Mt. Comfort Airport and regulates uses adjacent to the airport to ensure
compatible growth and development. District regulations control building height
and prohibit uses that create electrical interference.
   (B)   Height restriction zones. There are hereby created and established
certain zones which include all of the land lying within and under the approach
surfaces, transition surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces. The
zones and surfaces are shown on the Mt. Comfort Airport Zoning Map. The various
zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
      (1)   Precision instrument approach surface. The land area located at
each end of each instrument runway to be equipped for precision landings, its
surface area having a width of 1,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 200 feet
beyond each end of the runway and widening thereafter uniformly to a width of
16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,200 feet beyond each end of the
runway, its centerline being the continuation of the runway centerline.
      (2)   Non-precision instrument or visual approach surface. The land area
located at each end of each non-precision instrument or visual runway for
landings and take-offs, its surface area having an inner width identical to
width of the primary surface at a width of 4,000 feet at a distance of 10,200
feet beyond the end of the runway. The approach surface centerline is the
continuation of the runway centerline.
      (3)   Primary surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway.
When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway, but when the runway has no
specially prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the primary surface
ends at each end of that runway. The elevation of the nearest point on the
primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline. The width of a primary surface is 500 feet for visual runways and
1,000 feet for all other runways. The width of the primary surface is the width
prescribed for the most precise approach to either end of the runway.
      (4)   Transitional surface. These surfaces extend outward and upward at
right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended from
the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of the approach surfaces.
Transitional surfaces for those portions of a precision approach surface which
project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface extend a distance
of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and
at right angles to the runway centerline.
      (5)   Horizontal surface. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by
swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface of each runway of each airport and connecting the adjacent arcs by
lines tangent to those arcs. The radius of each arc is 5,000 for visual runways
and 10,000 for all other runways.
      (6)   Conical surface. The land area beginning at the periphery of the
horizontal surface area and thence extending outwardly for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet.
   (C)   Height limitations. Except as otherwise provided herein, no structure
or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in any zone
created by this section to a height in excess of the height limit herein
established for the zone. The height limitations are computed from the
applicable runway and elevation or the airport elevation as appropriate, and
are hereby established for each of the zones in question. When an area is
covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation
shall prevail. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the
growth, construction, or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height 50
feet or less above the surface of the land.
      (1)   Precision instrument approach surface. Height limits shall be one
foot in height for each 100 feet in horizontal distance beginning at a point
200 feet from the end of the instrument runway and extending to a distance of
10,200 feet from the end of the runway, thence one foot in height for each 50
feet in horizontal distance to a point 50,200 feet from the end of the runway.
      (2)   Non-precision instrument or visual approach surface. Height limits
shall be one foot in height for each 50 feet in horizontal distance beginning
at a point 200 feet from the end of the non-precision instrument runway and
extending to a point 10,200 feet from the end of the runway.
      (3)   Transitional surface. Height limits shall be one foot in height for
each seven feet in horizontal distance beginning at the primary surface edge,
measured at right angles to the longitudinal centerline of the runway,
extending upward to a maximum height of 150 feet above the established airport
elevation. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits of
one foot in vertical height for each seven feet in horizontal distance measured
from the edges of all approach surfaces for the entire length of the approach
surface and extending upward and outward to the points where they intersect the
horizontal and conical surfaces. Further, where the instrument approach surface
projects through and beyond the conical surface, a height limit of one foot for
each seven feet of horizontal distance shall be maintained beginning at the
edge of the instrument approach surface and extending a distance of 5,000 feet
from the edge of the precision instrument approach surface measured at right
angles to the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
      (4)   Conical surface. Height limits shall be one foot in height for each
20 feet of horizontal distance beginning at the periphery of the horizontal
surface and measured perpendicularly to the periphery of the horizontal
surface.
   (D)   Permitted land uses. Unless otherwise prohibited by this section, all
uses permitted in an underlying base zoning district shall be permitted in the
Airport Overlay District.
   (E)   Special exception uses. The following types of uses shall be special
exceptions within the runway clear zone, provided that they are also listed as
permitted or special exception uses in the underlying standard zones:
      (1)   Mixed non-residential uses;
      (2)   Shopping centers not exceeding 15,000 square feet in gross floor
area;
      (3)   Cemeteries; and
      (4)   Hotels.
   (F)   Land use restrictions.  No land may be used in the Airport Overlay
District in a manner so as to create electrical or radar interference with
radio communication between the airport and aircraft, making it difficult for
flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others, resulting in glare in
the eyes of the flyers using the airport, impairing visibility in the vicinity
of the airport, or otherwise endangering the landing, taking off, or
maneuvering of aircraft. The following land use restrictions shall apply:
      (1)   Bird strike hazards restrictions. No waste disposal site, solid
waste transfer station, recycling facility, or other bird attracting use shall
be located within the Airport Overlay District without approval and proper
authorization by the Federal Aviation Administration.
      (2)   Height restriction exemptions. The following uses and structures
are hereby exempt from the height restrictions of this section:
         (a)   A structure or object that is shielded by existing permanent
structures or by natural terrain or topographic features of equal or greater
height and is located in an area of established development where it is evident
that the shielded structure would not adversely affect aircraft navigation.
         (b)   Any air navigation facility, airport visual approach or landing
aid, aircraft arresting device, or meteorological device of a type approved by
the FAA and the height of which is fixed by its functional purpose.
         (c)   Any structures owned or maintained by the airport or any branch
of government for utility purposes.
      (3)   Prohibited uses. The following types of uses shall be prohibited
within the runway clear zone:
         (a)   Auditoriums;
         (b)   Amphitheaters;
         (c)   Day care facilities;
         (d)   Concert halls;
         (e)   Hospitals;
         (f)   Major residential plats;
         (g)   Major commercial or industrial plats with a residential
component;
         (h)   Mobile home parks;
         (i)   Nursing homes;
         (j)   Outdoor music facilities;
         (k)   Public and private educational institutions;
         (l)   Religious places of worship;
         (m)   Wireless communication facilities;
         (n)   Any uses involving the sales, storage, manufacture, and/or
distribution of gasoline, propane, or other flammable, toxic, explosive,
radioactive, bio-hazardous materials in a quantity and of a type that would
further jeopardize the health of aircraft occupants, bystanders, and emergency
personnel in the event of an aircraft accident; and
         (o)   Any uses not expressly identified above, in addition to all uses
legally existing before the effective date of this chapter, shall be permitted
in the runway clear zone.
      (4)   Noise protection. All structures as defined in the Act permitted in
the Noise Sensitive Zone after effective date of this chapter shall obtain a
noise-sensitive permit from the Indiana Department of Transportation,
Aeronautics Section in accordance with the procedures specified in the Act at
I.C. 8-21-10-3.
   (G)   Nonconforming uses.  The height limits and use limitations established
by this section shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or
other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the
regulations as of the effective date of this subsection, or otherwise interfere
with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein shall require any
change in construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the
construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of
this chapter, and is diligently prosecuted.
   (H)   Safety lights. The owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is
hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon
of markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Indianapolis Airport
Authority to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the
airport the presence of airport hazards. The markers and lights shall be
installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the Indianapolis Airport
Authority.
   (I)   Permits. No permit for construction or alteration of a structure or
use within the Airport Overlay District shall be granted except in accordance
with the following provisions:
      (1)   Airport hazards.  No permit shall be granted for the establishment
or creation of an airport hazard or to permit a nonconforming use, structure,
or tree to be made or to become higher, or to become a greater hazard to air
navigation than it was on the effective date of this chapter or any amendments
thereto, or than it is when the application for a permit is made.
      (2)   Abandonment. Whenever the Administrative Officer or designated
authority determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned
or more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall
be granted that would allow the structure or tree to exceed the applicable
height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
   (J)   Definitions. See §
154.005, Definitions.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.093 TOWN CENTER OVERLAY.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the Town Center Overlay
District is to promote mixed-use, walkable development, while creating a
district that is unique and authentic. This district shall command the highest
standards of development to stimulate substantial capital investments,
encourage efficient land use, promote coordinated development, and permit an
innovative, cohesively designed district.
   (B)   Applicability. The Town Center Overlay District shall apply to all
development sites, buildings, structures, and any other improvements that are
visible to the public and/or which affect the physical development of land.
   (C)   Boundary. The boundary of the Town Center Overlay District is as
illustrated on the Official Zoning Map.
   (D)   Exemptions. All single-family residential uses shall be exempt from
the requirements of the Town Center Overlay District.
   (E)   Uses. All uses permitted in an underlying base zoning district shall
be permitted in the Town Center Overlay District. All special exception uses in
an underlining base zoning district shall be special exceptions in the Town
Center Overlay District.
   (F)   Development standards. Unless otherwise specified, the following
development standards shall apply to developments within the Town Center
Overlay District.
      (1)   (a)   The minimum building height shall be two stories, with the
following exception:
         (b)   Commercial out-lot buildings within 200 feet of the centerline
of SR 234 and/or W. Broadway (US 36) may be single-story.
      (2)   (a)   The amount of off-street parking located between the street
and the front facade of the building shall not exceed 10% of the total number
of off-street parking spaces provided, with the following exception:
         (b)   This restriction shall not apply to any commercial out-lot use
within 200 feet of the centerline of SR 234 and/or W. Broadway (US 36).
      (3)   All development shall be consistent with the Town Center Master
Plan, as amended by the Town Center Drainage Study.
(Ord. 111020C, passed 12-8-2020)
§ 154.094 MT. COMFORT ROAD AND BROADWAY CORRIDOR OVERLAY (MCR-OL).
   The visibility and accessibility of the land within the Mt. Comfort Road (CR
600W) and Broadway corridor is unique and therefore command the highest
standards of development to stimulate substantial capital investments,
encourage efficient land use, promote coordinated development, permit
innovative site designs, establish development standards, and preserve the
integrity of the corridor.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to establish an overlay district to
address the unique characteristics of the properties adjacent to Mt. Comfort
Road and Broadway. The corridor has unique development pressures and aesthetic
characteristics that require the establishment of additional development
standards and land use management to meet the goals of the Comprehensive Plan
and fulfill the purpose of this chapter.
      (2)   The intent of the Mt. Comfort Corridor Overlay District (MCR-OL) is
to require development that is aesthetically consistent, responsive to
development pressures, creates complimentary land uses, and is proportional to
the area’s traffic management issues. Additionally, the desire is for the
overlay to be adopted by all jurisdictions along Mt. Comfort Road to create
consistency.
   (B)   Boundaries and exemptions. The MCR-OL shall apply to all development
sites, buildings, structures, plantings, signs, street hardware, and any other
improvements that are visible to the public and affect the physical development
of land within the Mt. Comfort Corridor as shown on the official zoning map or
as measured one mile from the centerline of the corridor street, as generally
depicted on Exhibit A of Ord. 071222A. All agricultural uses shall be exempt
from the requirements of this overlay district.
   (C)   Uses. All uses permitted in the underlying district(s) are permitted
in the MCR-OL, unless otherwise prohibited or restricted as set fort in Exhibit
C of Ord. 071222A. All uses that are special exceptions in the underlying
district(s) are special exceptions in the MCR-OL, unless otherwise noted in
that Exhibit C. All uses prohibited in the underlining district(s) are
prohibited in the MCR-OL, unless otherwise noted in that Exhibit C. Exhibit C
of Ord. 071222A is not a replacement for the schedule of uses in this chapter,
it is in addition to.
   (D)   Development standards. All development within the boundaries of the
MCR-OL shall comply this section. The visibility and accessibility of the land
within the corridors is unique and therefore commands the highest standards of
development which stimulate substantial capital investments, encourage
efficient land use, promote coordinated development, permit innovative site
designs, establish development standards, and preserve the integrity of the
roadways within the corridors.
      (1)   Vehicular access. The corridor streets which function as primary
thoroughfares must have reasonable restrictions as to the number and location
of access points within the overlay zone. Access shall be approved by the town,
County Highway Engineer or INDOT depending on jurisdiction. To provide safe and
sufficient traffic movement to and from adjacent lands:
         (a)   Frontage roads, access roads, and distributors roads may have to
be constructed.
         (b)   Shared access shall be coordinated with contiguous lots and
designed to preserve the aesthetic streetscape and reduce the amount of
conflicting vehicular turning movements. Furthermore, internal roads shall be
required to be stubbed to adjacent property owners with reciprocal ingress/
egress easements as detailed herein, unless otherwise approved by the Plan
Commission.
         (c)   New access points onto the primary thoroughfares in the
corridors shall be coordinated with existing access points and approved by the
authority having jurisdiction. Furthermore, all road cuts on Mt. Comfort Road
shall comply with the Town Access Management Plan and/or be otherwise approved
by the Town Council.
         (d)   Access to undeveloped sites. Stub streets shall be built in all
cases as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Site layout. Development plans shall include the full development
of the site. Ownership patterns may limit the degree to which this can be
shown. Plans should indicate phasing and be prepared in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
         (a)   Industrial land uses shall comply with the following:
            1.   Site layout shall consider the relationship between all
buildings on site.
            2.   Internal drive aisles that connect multiple lots shall
minimize points of access for safe vehicular circulation.
            3.   No industrial building 100,000 square feet or larger shall be
located closer to the right-of-way line, as denoted in the Thoroughfare Plan,
of Mt. Comfort Road than 100 feet or a distance equal to eight times greater
than the height of the building, whichever is greater.
         (b)   Commercial and institutional land uses shall comply with the
following:
            1.   Site layout shall consider the relationship between all
buildings on site.
            2.   Pedestrian connectivity between uses shall be shown.
            3.   The amount of off-street parking located between the street
and the front facade of the building shall not exceed 80% of the total parking
requirement.
            4.   Internal drive aisles that connect multiple lots shall
minimize points of access for safe vehicular circulation.
            5.   The orientation and access for out-lots shall be considered
and shown on the plan.
         (c)   Residential land uses shall comply with the following:
            1.   Subdivisions shall be designed to reduce the impact of roadway
noise on individual lots or dwelling units. Examples may include but are not
limited to fences, sound walls, enhanced landscaping with berms, and/or
increased setbacks.
      (3)   Architectural standards. The following architectural standards
shall apply to all development in the MCR-OL. These standards are in addition
to any architectural design standards imposed by the underlining zoning
district. In the event that one or more of the following architectural
standards conflicts with another standard of the underlining zoning district,
the standard that imposes the highest or strictest regulation shall govern.
         (a)   Industrial land uses shall comply with the following:
            1.   Front facade. The facade is any wall that fronts on a public
or private street. If the structure fronts onto more than two streets, all
walls that face a street shall be treated as a front facade.
            2.   Recesses/projections. Wall recesses/projections that are at
least 12 inches for every 200 feet of front facade. The projection shall extend
for at least 20% of the length.
            3.   Entry features. Entry way features are only required at the
primary entrance(s) to the structure. For any building adjacent to Mt. Comfort
Road, at least one such primary entrance must be located on the front facade
facing Mt. Comfort Road. All primary entrances, regardless of location or
facade, shall include the following design elements:
               A.   Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped
areas and/or places for sitting;
               B.   Enhanced exterior lighting such as wall sconces, building
mounted accent lights, or decorative pedestal lights;
               C.   Sidelights and/or transoms; and
               D.   Recesses/projections in addition to those required by above
by division (D)(3)(a).
               E.   At least three of the following features:
                  (i)   Raised corniced parapets over the door;
                  (ii)   Peaked roof forms having an average slope greater than
or equal to a minimum 5/12 pitch;
                  (iii)   Arches;
                  (iv)   Prominent three-dimensional entryway feature, such as
a glass-encased entrance or other similar architectural design element,
projecting from the plane of the main exterior walls by a minimum of eight feet
and raised above the adjoining parapet wall/roof by a minimum of three feet;
                  (v)   Canopies or porticos;
                  (vi)   Overhangs or awnings;
                  (viii)   Arcades;
                  (ix)   Columns; and
                  (x)   Other features as approved by the Architectural Review
Committee (ARC).
            4.   Fenestration. All front facade walls shall have windows,
display windows, faux windows, or decorative windows. Portions of the building
front facade adjacent to an office use, within an otherwise industrial
building, shall have a minimum of 40% of that portion of the facade featuring
fenestration. Additionally, warehouse and all other industrial use portions of
the front facade shall feature fenestration at a regular interval in order to
break up the massing of the building facade and provide natural light into the
building.
            5.   Detail features. Building facades shall include a minimum of
two exterior colors and all pre-cast concrete must include embedded reveals on
all elevations at uniform intervals to create visual interest and reduce the
massing of the wall plane. Front facades shall be required to add an additional
exterior color.
            6.   Exterior materials. The use of smooth-faced and split-face
concrete block and standing seam metal panels shall be prohibited. The ARC
shall approve or deny the use of all composite and alternative materials that
replicate the appearance and durability of those listed below. All facade wall
exterior building materials shall be high quality, and shall be limited to any
combination of the following:
               A.   Brick or stone (CMU prohibited);
               B.   Glass (reflective glass shall be limited to a maximum of
50% of the area of any facade wall on which glass is used);
               C.   Structural (pre-cast or tilt-up) concrete panels with
proper form-liners creating banding, horizontal and/or vertical interest
(structural wall panels with brick inlays would also be permitted);
               D.   Architectural precast concrete with multiple colors,
aggregate mixes, textures and/or surface finish treatments;
               E.   Composite architectural metal wall panel systems with
concealed fastening systems (as an accent material only, covering no more than
20% of exterior facade) and composed of aluminum, stainless steel, copper, or
steel (all must be properly coated for corrosion resistance and durability);
and
               F.   E.I.F.S when used in conjunction with brick or stone.
E.I.F.S shall be further limited to be no closer to grade than three feet.
E.I.F.S surfaces shall be scored with proper break lines creating banding,
horizontal and/or vertical visual interest or have mineral additives to provide
the look of a natural stone, stucco, brick or metallic aggregate matrix like
seen within an architectural precast panel.
            7.   Exterior colors. Exterior facade wall colors shall be low
reflectance and subtle tones. The use of high intensity, primary, metallic,
black or fluorescent colors shall be prohibited. Earthen tones are encouraged.
Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors or primary colors.
Such building trim and accent areas shall not exceed 10% of any single exterior
wall area excluding all windows, doors, and glass construction materials. Color
combinations shall be harmonious.
            8.   Roof design. All roofs or parapets should vary three-
dimensionally to add visual interest to the building. All roofs shall comply
with the following:
               A.   All rooftop mechanical equipment, such as HVAC units, shall
be screened from the view of all streets (public and private) by parapets,
dormers, or other screens on properties within the corridor overlay. The
material of all such screens shall be consistent with the exterior materials
used on the facade of the structure. All roof-top equipment screens shall be
constructed so that the equipment screen fully obscures the view of the
equipment from all points of abutting property lines and all points of the
farthest right-of-way line of any adjacent public or private street. The line
of site measurements shall be taken at a height of eight feet from grade along
the applicable property line or right-of-way line. The town may require
multiple line of site exhibits depending upon existing or proposed conditions,
including but not limited to distance from equipment and changes in grade.
Mechanical and utility equipment not shown on plans (due to unknown location or
other reasons) or mechanicals added that were not originally planned for do not
remove the developer's responsibility to comply with these standards.
               B.   Sloped roofs shall not exceed an average height equal to
that of the supporting walls.
               C.   Sloped roofs shall have overhanging eaves that extend a
minimum of 12 inches past the supporting walls. Sloped roofs shall either be of
high quality architectural standing seam metal, tile, slate, or dimensional
shingles.
            9.   Trash receptacles. Trash receptacles shall be enclosed with a
solid enclosure that is of the same materials as the primary structure, is a
minimum of one foot taller than the receptacle and contains an opaque gate.
Furthermore, the enclosure shall be softened with shrub and/or tree plantings
around its perimeter.
         (b)   Commercial and institutional land uses shall comply with the
following:
            1.   Front facade. The facade is any wall that fronts on a public
or private street. If the structure fronts onto more than two streets, all
walls that face a street shall be treated as a front facade.
            2.   Recesses/projections.
               A.   If the length of any elevation is greater than 50 feet it
shall have incorporated into the wall plane at least one projection or recess
of at least three feet in depth and extending a width of at least 20% of the
length of such elevation.
               B.   If the length of any elevation is greater than 100 feet it
shall have incorporated into the wall plane at least two projections or
recesses of at least three feet in depth and extending a width of at least 20%
of the length of such elevation.
               C.   If the length of any elevation is greater than 150 feet it
shall have incorporated into the wall plane at least three projections or
recesses of at least five feet in depth and extending a width of at least 20%
of the length of such elevation.
               D.   If the length of any elevation is greater than 250 feet it
shall have incorporated into the wall plane at least four projections or
recesses of at least five feet in depth and extending a width of at least 20%
of the length of such elevation.
               E.   Parapets on flat roofs shall feature articulation that
coincides with the wall plane articulation.
               F.   For the purpose of administering and enforcing this
requirement, an awning shall not constitute a facade projection. The ARC may
approve wall plan recesses and projection designs that do not meet the above
noted minimums; however, under no circumstance shall the ARC approve a wall
plane design that does not include any projections or recesses, unless the wall
plane(s) are less than 50 feet in length.
            3.   Entry features. Entryway features are only required at the
primary entrance(s) to the structure and shall include at least three of the
following design elements:
               A.   Raised corniced parapets over the door, peaked roof forms
having an average slope greater than or equal to a minimum 5/12 pitch, arches,
or architectural details such as tile work and moldings that are integrated
into the building structure and design;
               B.   Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped
areas and/or places for sitting;
               C.   Enhanced exterior lighting such as wall sconces, building
mounted accent lights, or decorative pedestal lights;
               D.   Prominent three-dimensional entryway feature, such as a
clock tower or other similar architectural design element, projecting from the
plane of the main exterior walls by a minimum of eight feet and raised above
the adjoining parapet wall/roof by a minimum of three feet; and
               E.   Pilasters projecting from the plane of the wall by a
minimum of eight inches and/or architectural or decorative columns to create
visual breaks and interest in the facade walls.
               F.   Other feature(s) as approved by the ARC.
            4.   Display windows. All front facades and facades along
pedestrian walkways (except for office and institutional uses) shall have
windows, display windows, faux windows, or decorative windows for no less than
60% of the facade’s horizontal length. Office and institutional uses shall
feature display windows, faux windows, or decorative windows for no less than
30% of the facade’s horizontal length along all pedestrian walkways and front
facades.
            5.   Entrances. All facades that abut a street, public or private,
shall feature at least one customer entrance.
            6.   Detail features.
               A.   Front facades shall incorporate no less than five of the
elements listed below. All other facades shall incorporate at least three
elements listed below:
                  (i)   Change in color;
                  (ii)   Projection/recess;
                  (iii)   Columns with trim or accent materials;
                  (iv)   Change in finished material depths;
                  (v)   Change in material;
                  (vi)   Building overhangs (as an architectural feature, not a
standard overhang);
                  (vii)   Materials such as false windows or fenestration with
architectural accents;
                  (viii)   Transom windows;
                  (ix)   Pilasters the height of the building (example: a two-
story building would have pilasters two stories high);
                  (x)   Recessed entry bay;
                  (xi)   Two-story projecting bay;
                  (xii)   Dentils;
                  (xiii)   Columns/piers;
                  (xiv)   Canopies/awnings;
                  (xv)   Decorative cornice;
                  (xvi)   Down lit lighting featuring architectural elements;
                  (xvii)   Arches;
                  (xviii)   Brackets/modillions/corbels;
                  (xix)   Hoodmolds;
                  (xx)   Quoins;
                  (xxi)   Pediments;
                  (xxii)   Other features as approved by the ARC.
               B.   Exceptions may be granted by the ARC for rear elevations
which are not visible to adjacent properties, private streets, and/or public
rights-of-way.
            7.   Exterior materials. A minimum of two exterior materials
(excluding glass) is required on all front facades. The use of smooth-faced
concrete block, untextured smooth-faced tilt-up panels, and standing seam metal
panels shall be prohibited on all facades. The ARC shall approve or deny the
use of all composite and alternative materials that replicate the appearance
and durability of those listed below. All buildings shall feature a minimum of
50% brick or stone (not CMU) on all elevations. All facade wall exterior
building materials shall be high quality, and shall be limited to any
combination of the following:
               A.   Architectural metal (as an accent material only, covering
no more than 20% of exterior facade);
               B.   Glass;
               C.   Brick;
               D.   Stone (CMU is not considered stone for this purpose);
               E.   Split-face CMU (as an accent material only, covering no
more than 20% of the exterior facade);
               F.   Stucco;
               G.   E.I.F.S; and
               H.   Fiber cement board.
            7.   Exterior colors. Exterior facade wall colors shall be low
reflectance and subtle tones. The use of high intensity, primary, metallic,
black or fluorescent colors shall be prohibited. Building trim and accent areas
may feature brighter colors or primary colors. Such building trim and accent
areas shall not exceed 10% of any single exterior wall area excluding all
windows, doors, and glass construction materials.
            8.   Roof design. All roofs or parapets should vary three-
dimensionally to add visual interest to the building and shall include
architectural detailing, cornices, moldings, trims, variations in brick
coursing, and other similar detailing. All roofs shall comply with the
following:
               A.   All rooftop mechanical equipment, such as HVAC units, shall
be screened from the view of all streets (public and private) by parapets,
dormers, or other screens on properties within the corridor overlay. The
material of all such screens shall be consistent with the exterior materials
used on the facade of the structure. All rooftop equipment screens shall be
constructed so that the equipment screen fully obscures the view of the
equipment from all points of abutting property lines and all points of the
farthest right-of-way line of any adjacent public or private street. The line
of site measurements shall be taken at a height of eight feet from grade along
the applicable property line or right-of-way line. The town may require
multiple line of site exhibits depending upon existing or proposed conditions,
including but not limited to distance from equipment and changes in grade.
Mechanical and utility equipment not shown on plans (due to unknown location or
other reasons) or mechanicals added that were not originally planned for do not
remove the developer’s responsibility to comply with these standards.
               B.   Sloped roofs shall not exceed an average height equal to
that of the supporting walls.
               C.   Sloped roofs shall have overhanging eaves that extend a
minimum of 12 inches past the supporting walls.
               D.   Sloped roofs shall either be of architectural standing seam
metal, tile, slate, concrete or clay tiles, or dimensional shingles.
            8.   Trash receptacles. Trash receptacles shall be enclosed with a
solid enclosure that is of the same materials as the primary structure, is a
minimum of one foot taller than the receptacle and contains an opaque gate.
Furthermore, the enclosure shall be softened with shrub and/or tree plantings
around its perimeter.
            9.   Special requirements.
               A.   Fuel stations are permitted when allowed by the underlining
zoning district, so long as they include a convenience store and the fuel
canopy features a three-dimensional cornice or a pitched roof and brick wrap on
the canopy columns. Additionally, fuel pumps are not located closer to Mt.
Comfort Road and/or Broadway than the convenience store. The fuel pump location
restriction does not apply south of the centerline of CR 300N and north of the
centerline of CR 200N.
               B.   Drive-thrus are permitted when allowed by the underlining
zoning district so long as the drive-thru window is not visible from Mt.
Comfort Road. Additionally, all menu boards and pre-sale boards associated with
any drive-thru shall be digital and feature a masonry base matching the brick
or stone on the primary structure.
         (c)   Residential land uses shall comply with the following:
            1.   Multi-family. Any multi-family structures shall comply with
the following requirements. Multi-family structures shall include any
residential building with three or more units.
               A.   Feature brick or stone on at least 50% of any facade
visible from a street or adjacent property. Other elevations must feature at
least a brick or stone wainscot.
               B.   Any multi-family structure shall feature a minimum of two
gables and two points of wall articulation of at least two feet in depth and
ten feet in width on any facade that faces Mt. Comfort Road.
               C.   All facades shall feature architectural detailing,
horizontal/vertical off-sets, windows, window details and other features in
order to add character and architectural interest.
               D.   Siding shall be limited to brick, stone (CMU not
permitted), wood, fiber cement, stucco, and E.I.F.S. The ARC may consider other
accent materials such as matching approved materials in scale and decorative
pre-cast panels. Vinyl is prohibited.
               E.   The minimum roof slope on pitched primary roofs shall be 6:
12. Gables shall have a minimum of 8:12. Ancillary roofs may be permitted to be
less by the ARC. Additionally, the ARC may approve exceptions to the primary
roof pitch for structures with a historical architectural style that lends
itself to a shallower roof pitch.
               F.   The minimum roof overhang shall be 12 inches.
               G.   Pitched roofs shall be covered with the highest industry
standard roofing materials, and limited to natural clay tiles, slate, concrete
tiles (with natural color and texture), or three-dimensional asphalt/fiberglass
shingles with at least a 30-year warranty. Synthetic or recycled materials that
simulate tile, stone, shake, or slate may be approved by the ARC. Metal roofing
as an accent material may be allowed by the ARC.
               H.   Pitched roofs shall not exceed an average height equal to
that of one and one-half times the height of the supporting walls. Exceptions
may be granted by the ARC for architectural styles that lend themselves to a
greater roof height.
               I.   Flat roofs shall feature parapets of varying heights. The
articulation of the parapet shall coincide with the articulation of the wall
plane. No parapet shall exceed one-third of the height of the supporting wall,
unless it is necessary to screen RTUs.
               J.   Parapets shall include a three-dimensional cornice.
               K.   All structure shall incorporate wall and roof articulation
to reduce the apparent scale. Elements shall as balconies, porches, arcades,
dormers, cross gables, secondary hipped or gabled roofs can be used to achieve
this appearance.
               L.   All structures shall incorporate a minimum of four of the
following features on any frontage elevation, and side and rear elevations
shall contain at least one architectural feature:
                  (i)   Front porch greater than eight feet by four feet (see
also Section 6.04(A)(4)(f) of the zoning ordinance for column specifications).
                  (ii)   Reverse gables;
                  (iii)   Covered front stoops/steps;
                  (iv)   All garage doors include windows;
                  (v)   Decorative embellishments, consistent the architectural
style of the building, on all garage doors;
                  (vi)   Transom and/or side-lights windows on all exterior
doors;
                  (vii)   Veranda;
                  (viii)   Two or more roof planes;
                  (ix)   Brick or stone on 100% of the elevation, exclusive of
openings;
                  (x)   Two or more dormers;
                  (xi)   At least four feet of relief at one or more points
along the elevation;
                  (xii)   Sunroom, screened-in porch, or balcony; or
                  (xiii)   Overhangs or soffits of at least 15 inches over all
exterior walls;
               M.   Trash receptacles shall be enclosed with a solid enclosure
that is of the same materials as the primary structure, is a minimum of one
foot taller than the receptacle and contains an opaque gate. Furthermore, the
enclosure shall be softened with shrub and/or tree plantings around its
perimeter.
               N.   All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view. For
ground or wall mounted units this can be achieved with fencing or walls,
combined with landscaping. Roof-top units (RTU) shall be screened by parapets,
other portions of the roof, or other screens. The material of such screening
shall be consistent with the exterior materials used on the facade of the
primary building, unless otherwise approved by the ARC. All RTU screens shall
be constructed so that the equipment screen fully obscures the view of the
equipment from all points of abutting property lines and all points of the
farthest right-of-way line of any adjacent public or private street. The line
of site measurements shall be taken at a height of eight feet from grade along
the applicable property line or right-of-way line. The town may require
multiple line of site exhibits depending upon existing or proposed conditions,
including but not limited to distance from equipment and changes in grade.
Mechanical and utility equipment not shown on plans (due to unknown location or
other reasons) or mechanicals added that were not originally planned for do not
remove the developer's responsibility to comply with these standards.
            2.   Single-family or duplex. All single-family or duplex
residential structure whose rear-yard abuts Mt. Comfort Road or is only
separated from Mt. Comfort Road by common area shall feature a gable, at least
one point of wall articulation of at least four feet in depth and ten feet in
width, and at least a brick or stone (not CMU) wainscot wrap.
      (4)   Pedestrian circulation and public spaces. The following provisions
are intended to maximize the safety of the site for vehicles and pedestrians
and shall apply to all new facilities unless otherwise noted.
         (a)   Internal pedestrian facilities. A continuous, delineated
pedestrian pathway network no less than six feet wide, that continues from the
perimeter public sidewalk or path to the principal customer entrance of all
principal buildings on the site shall be provided. Additionally, concrete
sidewalks along building facades shall be required as noted below:
            1.   Commercial and institutional uses under 40,000 square feet,
excluding retail. Sidewalks, no less than six feet wide, must be provided along
the full length of the building along any facade that features a customer
entrance.
            2.   All retail uses, and commercial/institutional uses over 40,000
square feet. Sidewalks, along a front facade or adjacent to public parking,
shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width and shall incorporate landscape areas
covering a minimum of 40% of the walkway area. The landscape areas shall
include benches or similar seating areas, and be planted with flowers, trees,
and shrubs for a minimum of 50% of their area. The remainder may be planted
with grass or other similar groundcover materials.
            3.   Industrial. Sidewalks, no less than six feet wide, must be
provided along the full length of the building along any facade that features a
customer or employee entrance.
         (b)   Perimeter pedestrian facilities. All development shall construct
sidewalks/multi-use paths along public roadways as detailed below:
            1.   Multi-use paths along both sides of Mt. Comfort Road shall be
placed in the public rights-of-way. Paths shall be constructed of asphalt,
unless otherwise directed by the local authority having jurisdiction, and be a
minimum of ten feet wide.
            2.   All other arterial and collector roadways shall feature a
multi-use path or sidewalk as required by this chapter,
Chapter 153, Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan, and/or the County Trail Plan.
            3.   All local roadways shall feature a sidewalk as required by
this chapter and
Chapter 153.
         (c)   Crosswalks. Pedestrian walkways crossing a drive aisle, parking
lot, or other non-public right-of-way driving surface, shall be distinguished
from driving surfaces through the use of special pavers, bricks, or stamped and
colored concrete or asphalt. Pedestrian crossings of any collector or arterial
street located within public rights-of-way shall feature the piano key
crosswalk striping, consistent with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (MUTCD).
         (d)   Connector sidewalks. All internal walkways connecting the public
path/sidewalk system to building facade sidewalk must feature landscaping for
no less than 50% of their length. Internal walkways, on commercial or retail
sites featuring 40,000 square feet or greater shall also feature benches, and
decorative lighting/lighted bollards (no more than ten feet in height).
         (e)   Public spaces.
            1.   Each commercial or institutional lot of at least five acres
must contribute to the enhancement of the community and its public spaces by
providing at least one of the following amenities and each lot of ten acres or
more must provide at least two of the following amenities:
               A.   A landscaped patio/outdoor seating area or plaza that is a
minimum of 2,000 square feet in area.
               B.   A water feature (excluding any required detention/retention
ponds).
               C.   Detention/retention ponds (in a location that makes it
visible and creates a focal point) with added decorative elements, such as but
not limited to pedestrian connections, viewing/seating areas, lighting,
fountains, and the like. Additional safety elements may be required.
               D.   A clock or bell tower or other vertical element (either as
a freestanding structure or in conjunction with the primary entrance features).
               E.   Public art or sculpture.
               F.   A mini/pocket park, consisting of at least 12,000 square
feet, including open greenspace, seating areas, lighting, landscaping, and
other park elements.
               G.   An enhanced trail head when site is adjacent to a regional
trail network as determined by the Director of Planning.
            2.   Each industrial lot of at least ten acres must contribute to
the enhancement of the community by providing at least one of the following on-
site amenities:
               A.   A landscaped patio/outdoor seating area or plaza that is a
minimum of 1,000 square feet;
               B.   Create a trail head when site is adjacent to a regional
trail network as determined by the Director of Planning;
               C.   Significant additional buffering/landscaping along a
perimeter roadway or to screen a lesser intensity land use. This should include
one of the following:
                  (i)   Minimum eight-foot-tall mound with a mix of fencing and
landscaping above.
                  (ii)   A mix of fencing and landscaping to provide a dense
screen. If fencing is selected along a roadway, the fencing shall be comprised
of brick, stone (CMU shall not visible), and/or wrought-iron style.
                  (iii)   Ponds located near the roadway containing a water
feature and additional landscaping to create a parklike atmosphere and/or
create more separation.
         (f)   Outdoor storage, service and loading areas. Areas for outdoor
storage, truck parking, trash collection/compaction, loading and unloading, or
other such ancillary uses to a primary use shall not be visible from abutting
streets (public or private), nor adjacent to non-industrial zoned properties.
Regardless of location, all outdoor storage and trash collection/compaction
areas shall be screened with a solid enclosure constructed of materials
matching those on the primary structure. If landscaping is not already present
around the periphery of the enclosure, then landscaping must be incorporated
along the outside of the enclosure. Landscaping shall consist of shrubs,
ornamental grasses, and trees to create a landscape screen covering at least
50% of the linear perimeter of the enclosure. Regardless of location all truck
parking, loading and unloading areas, and the like shall be screened with
landscaping, and must otherwise comply with the applicable land use regulations
of this chapter.
         (g)   Loading bays/docks. Loading bays/docks and auto service bays
shall be prohibited from directly facing Mt. Comfort Road, Broadway, and/or any
adjacent (or across the street) residentially zoned property. Loading bays/
docks and auto service bays on other facades that are visible from Mt. Comfort,
Broadway, and/or any adjacent (or across the street) to residentially zoned
property shall have their visibility reduced by landscaping and screening walls
such that at least 50% of the facade is screened by perennial or evergreen
vegetation and/or supplemented by walls constructed of materials matching those
on the primary structure.
         (h)   Permanent outdoor display and sales.
            1.   Merchandise may be stored or displayed for sale to customers
only in areas immediately adjacent to the primary structure on each property.
The storage of outdoor merchandise for sale elsewhere on the property shall be
prohibited. The permitted area shall be:
               A.   Enclosed by a brick or stone (not CUM) wall, matching the
materials of the primary structure, that is at least two feet taller than the
material being displayed, and
               B.   Topped by wrought iron style fencing.
               C.   No merchandise other than trees shall be visible above the
wall or fencing.
         (i)   Shopping cart storage. Shopping carts may be stored outside each
entrance to the building provided there are no more than two cart storage areas
(on each side of the entryway) and no single cart storage area exceeds 20 feet
in length. The cart storage areas shall be screened with building materials
substantially similar to the building facade.
         (j)   Shopping cart corrals in parking lots. Any retail user equal to
or greater than 80,000 square feet, who wishes to utilize shopping cart corrals
in the parking lot, shall meet the following standards:
            1.   Corrals shall be powder-coated black;
            2.   Corrals shall be mounted to the pavement; and
            3.   All corrals in the same development shall match in their
appearance.
         (k)   Landscaping standards.
            1.   A minimum of a 50-foot-wide perimeter landscape area shall be
installed adjacent to Mt. Comfort Road for all development. Where mounds are
required they shall be undulating. All perimeter landscaping shall meet the
following minimum requirements:
               A.   Residential uses. This area shall feature mounding at least
four feet in height. This standard shall not apply in the McCordsville Town
Center area, generally defined as north of the centerline of CR 700N and south
of the centerline of CR 800N. Landscaping plantings shall be planted at a rate
of eight trees and six shrubs per 100 lineal feet.
               B.   Commercial and institutional uses. This area shall feature
trees planted 50-feet on-center, in addition to any perimeter parking lot or
other plantings required by the underlining zoning district. Alternate designs
for these tree plantings may be approved by the Plan Commission.
               C.   Industrial uses. This area shall feature mounding at least
three feet in height. Landscaping plantings shall be planted at a rate of five
trees and ten shrubs per 100 lineal feet.
         (l)   Tree preservation. All mature wooded areas shall be preserved
unless otherwise approved by the Plan Commission.
         (m)   Lighting.
            1.   Free-standing site lighting shall be fully shielded, and the
light element fully recessed into the light fixture housing.
            2.   All site lighting, for a development, shall be a consistent
style and shall be required to be black.
            3.   No free-standing site light fixture shall be taller than 30
feet from grade.
            4.   Development along Mt. Comfort Road and Broadway shall be
required to install street lighting consistent with the following requirements:
               A.   Street lighting height shall be between 30 feet and 36 feet
from grade to highest point.
               B.   All poles, fixtures, and components shall be black.
               C.   All light fixtures shall be LED.
               D.   All lighting shall feature a mast-arm.
               E.   All lighting shall be generally consistent with Exhibit D
of Ord. 071222A.
               F.   All lighting along Mt. Comfort Road between CR 75ON and CR
80ON and on W Broadway between CR 75ON and SR 234 may utilize a shorter pole
without a mast arm to provide for the pedestrian scale of the McCordsville Town
Center, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
         (n)   Fencing. All fence materials shall be limited to brick, stone
(not CMU), wrought iron style, vinyl-coated chain-link (single-family
residential zoning only), and wood. Composite or other materials may be
permitted by the Director of Planning so long as the material’s appearance is
consistent/complimentary with a permitted material and/or the materials on the
primary structure. Furthermore, bare chain-link fencing is prohibited within
the overlay, and vinyl coated chain-link, bar-wire, razor-wire, and the like is
prohibited from being visible from Mt. Comfort Road.
         (o)   Street signage.
            1.   All street signs on Mt. Comfort Road, including intersecting
streets shall utilize a background color as determined by the Town Council. The
town reserves the right to require the town logo to be added to such signs.
            2.   Key intersections, identified below, shall have illuminated
street name cabinet signs with, and as generally shown on Exhibit B of Ord.
071222A.
               A.   Mt. Comfort Road and W. Broadway (US 36).
               B.   Mt. Comfort Road and Main Street.
               C.   W. Broadway and Meijer.
               D.   W Broadway and Civic Drive.
         (p)   Intersection street signal installations. Any new street signal
installations at the key intersections, as noted above, shall utilize black
powder coated posts, arms brackets, and signal heads, as generally shown in
Exhibit E of Ord. 071222A.
         (q)   Process/procedures.
            1.   Development plan. Development plan review is required for all
new development.
            2.   Technical/staff review. Planning staff from all jurisdictions
on the corridor that adopt this overlay ordinance shall be invited to attend
the Town’s Technical Advisory Committee review for that project.
            3.   Coordinated plan review. At any point throughout the
development approval process the reviewing jurisdiction may invite planners
from the other corridor jurisdictions to be a part of the review process and
provide non-binding comments.
         (r)   Applicability. This overlay applies to all new construction.
This overlay also applies to all existing structures where new additions
increase the size of the building by a cumulative 35%. The overlay also applies
to increases or decreases in parking by 35%. This shall not apply to any
planned unit development that were approved prior to August 9, 2022.
(Ord. 071222A, passed 8-9-2022)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 154.110 INTRODUCTION AND APPLICATION.
   (A)   Introduction. All structures, land uses, land use changes, structural
alterations, structural relocations, structural additions, and structural
enlargements that are constructed, created, established, or occur after the
effective date of this chapter (except as may otherwise be provided within this
chapter) shall be subject to all development standards and regulations
applicable to the zoning district in which they are located. All projects
approved prior to the effective date of this chapter shall adhere to the terms
and conditions of approval and/or written commitments made under the zoning
ordinance that was in place at the time of filing.
   (B)   Expansion or modification of existing uses and structures. No
structure, parking area, or other site feature regulated by this chapter shall
be enlarged, altered, or expanded unless the minimum improvements required by
this subchapter are provided on the property in a manner equal to the extent of
its alteration or expansion.
   (C)   Requirements for non-conforming uses and uses permitted by special
exception or variance.  Any use which is non-conforming in the zoning district
in which it is located or is permitted by special exception or variance shall
be consistent with the standards for the zoning district in which the use is
permitted by this chapter. The Board of Zoning Appeals may specify the
appropriate standards for all uses permitted by special exception or variance.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.111 BULK USE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Dimensions. The bulk use standards for each zoning district
classification shall be as prescribed by the Bulk Use Standards Matrix located
in
Chapter 154, Appendix B.
   (B)   Encroachment.
      (1)   Residential districts. Balconies, stoops, stairs, chimneys, bay
windows, and roof eaves/overhangs (a maximum of 12 inches measured from
exterior material to fascia board) shall be permitted to extend within a
minimum front yard setback to a maximum of ten feet. Hedges, garden walls, or
fences may be built on property lines or as a continuation of building walls.
      (2)   Non-residential districts. In no instance shall any structure be
allowed to locate within a required setback. For the purposes of administering
and enforcing this chapter, structures in this case shall include, but shall
not be limited to the following: garages, carports, balconies, roofs, decks,
chimneys, fire escapes, and platforms above grade level. Parking spaces,
interior drives, other vehicle use areas and sidewalks may be permitted within
a required setback provided the improvement complies with all applicable
provisions of this chapter.
   Figure 7: Yard and Setbacks Diagram
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-76.jpg]
   Figure 8: Front Yard Setback Diagrams
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-78.jpg]
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111423E, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 154.112 HEIGHT STANDARDS.
   (A)   General height standards. Refer to the Bulk Use Standards Matrix in
Chapter 154, Appendix B of this chapter.
   (B)   Exceptions. No structure may be erected or charged so as to make its
height greater than specified in the applicable zoning district, except as
noted below. For the purpose of this section, the height of church steeples,
chimneys, and other structures which are attached or otherwise a part of
another structure shall be measured from grade level.
      (1)   General exceptions. The following structures may exceed the
permitted height regulations by two-fold (x2):
         (a)   Church steeples;
         (b)   Spires, belfries, and cupolas; and
         (c)   Industrial related storage tanks, mechanical equipment, and
smokestacks.
      (2)   Telecommunications towers and antenna. The height of
telecommunication towers and antenna shall comply with the height requirements
of this chapter. Refer to
Chapter 154, Appendix B, Bulk Use Standards Matrix.
      (3)   Amateur radio towers.  Amateur radio towers shall meet the
requirements of the specific use standards of §
154.064 of this chapter.
      (4)   Necessary appurtenances.  The following structural elements may
exceed the permitted height standards for the zoning district in which they are
located by up to ten feet:
         (a)   Necessary mechanical appurtenances;
         (b)   Utility substations and related essential facilities;
         (c)   Water tanks;
         (d)   Chimneys;
         (e)   Fire towers;
         (f)   Stair towers;
         (g)   Stage bulkheads; and
         (h)   Elevator bulkheads.
      (5)   Agricultural structures. All structures in a zoning district where
agriculture is allowed that are used in agricultural products storage and/or
processing may exceed the permitted height standards for the district in which
they are located and be erected to any height that is necessary for their
operation. This exemption shall not be interpreted as applying to commercial
agricultural structures, such as commercial grain terminals and similar uses.
      (6)   Water towers.  Water towers may exceed the permitted height
standards for the zoning district in which they are located and may be erected
to a maximum height of 200 feet.
   (C)   FAA requirements.  Nothing in this chapter, including the exceptions
listed above shall be interpreted as waiving any height regulations related to
air travel. All applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) restrictions
and regulations shall apply to all structures.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.113 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Architectural standards for single- and two-family residential
developments. It is the intent of these design standards to promote both
technically and aesthetically high quality housing options within the town that
contribute to the character and value of the town. Under conditions where a
strict interpretation of these design standards may be either physically
impossible or contravene the design intent, a modification to the residential
architectural standards may be proposed to maintain the spirit, rather than the
letter, of the law. The request for modification shall be submitted to the
Technical Review Committee for review. Within a reasonable amount of time, the
Technical Review Committee shall review the request for modification making a
recommendation to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the request
to the Plan Commission.
      (1)   Street orientation and massing.
         (a)   Residential uses. All residential construction shall comply with
respect to street orientation and massing to adjacent homes.
         (b)   Institutional use provisions.
            1.   Schools, churches, and government buildings shall be built so
that they terminate a street vista whenever possible, and shall be of
sufficient design to create visual anchors for the community.
            2.   Civic building walls shall be clad in stone, brick, marble, or
cast concrete. Civic building roofs shall be clad in slate, sheet metal,
corrugated metal, or diamond tab asphalt shingles. Flat roof lines are allowed.
            3.   All rooftop equipment on civic buildings shall be enclosed in
building material that matches the structure or is visually compatible with the
structure.
      (2)   Roofs. All roofing materials shall be subject to approval by the
Plan Commission.
         (a)   Two or more roof planes visible on the front of the house shall
be required.
         (b)   The pitch of the largest square footage roof must be 6:12 or
greater with façade gables of 8:12, unless the style of the house warrants a
change. A roof pitch of 3:12 may be permitted for prairie style homes subject
to review by the Architectural Review Committee.
         (c)   There shall be a minimum roof overhang of eight inches, measured
from the exterior surface of the exterior material, on all sides of a house
featuring brick or stone. There shall be a minimum roof overhang of 12 inches,
measured from the exterior surface of the exterior material, on all sides of a
house featuring any type of siding that is not brick or stone.
         (d)   The roof shall be covered with the highest industry standard
roofing materials including, but not limited to natural clay tiles, slate,
concrete tiles (with natural texture and color), wood shakes or shingles (with
adequate fire protection), or high profile, three-dimensional asphalt/
fiberglass shingles with a 30-year warranty, or synthetic or recycled material
that simulates tile, stone, shake or slate.
         (e)   All metal roofing shall be approved by the Plan Commission.
      (3)   Building material requirements.
         (a)   Where two wall materials are combined horizontally on one
elevation, the heavier material must be below.
         (b)   The exterior elevations of all single story residences 1,500
square feet or less in livable floor area shall be masonry. This requirement
shall include all sides of the structure, exclusive of windows, doorways and
bays.
         (c)   The exterior wall surface of the first floor of any multi-story
residence shall be masonry.
         (d)   At least 50% of the front elevation of all residential buildings
greater than 1,500 square feet, exclusive of windows, doorways (other than
garage doors), and bays, shall be masonry. When garage doors are allowed on a
front elevation, in making the calculation, garage doors shall be included as
part of the front elevation.
         (e)   The side and rear elevations of all residences greater than
1,500 square feet that abut a street, open space, trail, or park, shall have at
least 50% masonry as the exterior building material on all visible elevations.
         (f)   All vinyl siding shall be approved and endorsed as meeting or
exceeding ASTM D3679 by the Vinyl Siding Institute through their Vinyl Siding
Certification Program. Vinyl siding shall be a minimum thickness of 0.048
inches. Lap siding shall have a maximum six inch exposed board face. A letter
or certificate stating such shall be attached to each building permit request.
All vinyl siding colors shall be submitted for review by the Architectural
Review Committee.
         (g)   All front elevation returns shall be required to match the front
elevation masonry in style and height.
         (h)   Provide detailing that transition or frame material changes.
Example: decorative caps on brick/stone, trim boards, and the like. Home styles
that do not lend themselves to such transitions may be approved by the ARC.
         (i)   For at least 60% of the building foundation perimeter, use any
combination of concrete, stone, or unique variation of color, texture, or
material, at least ten inches in height, around the base of the building.
Buildings may alternatively incorporate other architectural features such as
ledges, facade reveals, ground level fenestration, raised planters, or
landscaping elements within three feet of finished grade.
   Figure 9: Sample Brick Wrap Calculation
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-80.jpg]
      (4)   Façade design/construction requirements.
         (a)   A single front elevation (denoted as “S” in illustration below)
shall not be repeated unless it is separated by at least two different front
elevations along either side of the subject elevation (S) and three different
front elevations across the street (shown as “1” in the illustration below).
Elevations denoted as “2” in the illustration below may be the same front
elevation; however, the town encourages builders to utilize a different color
package if the same elevation is chosen. The ARC shall have the right to
determine that certain elevations are considered the same elevation, even if
they are named differently by the builder. This determination shall be made by
the ARC in a public meeting.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1257.png]
         (b)   There shall not be more than 10% of the houses in the
subdivision with the same front elevation.
         (c)   The exterior wall surface of the first floor of any multi-story
residence shall have a minimum of one two foot step back on both the front and
rear elevation and a gable on the front and rear elevation, unless the style of
the house warrants a change.
         (d)   Exterior chimneys for fireplaces which abut a public road shall
be made entirely of masonry. Half chimneys for gas appliance fireplaces shall
have a roof and vent on the side, and are hereby expressly prohibited from
being located on the front elevation.
         (e)   All siding shall match in terms of type, color, and texture.
         (f)   Front porches are encouraged, and are to be a minimum of four
feet in depth without columns. In the event that a front porch has columns, the
columns shall be a minimum of six inches by six inches for a single-story
porch, or 12 inches by 12 inches for a two-story porch.
         (g)   Stains and paints used for exterior walls need to comply with
the existing appearance and character of the neighborhood.
         (h)   Monolithic exterior building walls (walls with one type of
siding and no windows or doors) are prohibited. There shall be a change of
siding materials and/or architectural features (such as windows, chimneys,
doors, and the like) on all sides of each house.
         (i)   While two openings (i.e. windows or doors) are preferred, there
shall be a minimum of one opening provided on all elevations of a residential
building, with the exception of elevations that face a street. Any elevation
facing a public street shall have a minimum of three openings.
         (j)   With the exception of large picture windows, casement windows
and small windows that do not open, there shall be permanent external window
treatments on all windows visible from a public street. Acceptable window
treatments include, but are not necessarily limited to shutters and dividers
(i.e. mullions or inserts).
         (k)   Exhaust vents shall not be visible from the front elevation of
the home. Additionally, no wall-mounted vent or louver shall be located on the
first floor exterior of a front elevation.
         (l)   It is required that the workmanship on the exterior of the
building will be of highest industry standard resulting in no visual defects
(such as wavy siding).
         (m)   Unless adjacent to masonry wrap, all windows, doors and corners
shall have a minimum nominal one inch by six inch wood or vinyl surround.
         (n)   All siding must be masonry, wood, cement fiber board, stucco,
matching approved materials in scale, E.I.F.S. All siding shall be reviewed by
the Architectural Review Committee.
      (5)   Mailboxes. The location and construction of mailboxes shall comply
with the rules and regulations of the U.S. Postal Service.
   (B)   Architectural standards for multi-family-1 and multi-family-
2 residential developments/zoning districts. The implementation of various
design standards is a catalyst to ensure quality construction for present and
future developments. This architectural design standards section applies to
multi-family residential uses. Exceptions may be considered for special
developments with distinct and unique architectural designs.
      (1)   Façade design/construction requirements.
         (a)   Architectural detailing, horizontal/vertical off-sets, window
details and other features shall be provided on all sides of the building to
avoid blank walls.
         (b)   All siding must be masonry, wood, fiber cement plank siding,
stucco, decorative pre-cast panels, matching approved materials in scale,
integrally colored block stone, E.I.F.S. Each building must feature a minimum
of 50% brick or stone on all elevations visible from an adjacent property or
street. All siding shall be submitted for review by the Architectural Review
Committee.
         (c)   Projects with multiple buildings must have the site layout and
building orientation reviewed by the Plan Commission.
         (d)   Windows are required on all sides of the dwelling that are
visible from the street.
         (e)   Entries shall be clearly defined and accented with such features
as awnings, porticos, overhangs, recesses/projections, arcades, raised corniced
parapets over the door, peaked roof forms, and arches.
         (f)   Any structure with three or more units shall incorporate wall
articulation to reduce apparent scale. Elements such as wall plane projections,
recesses, significant architectural features that break up the wall plane,
columns, pilasters, and the like can be used to achieve this.
      (2)   Roofs. All roofing materials shall be subject to review by the
Architectural Review Committee.
         (a)   The roof shall be a minimum of 6:12 on sloped roofs; a façade
gable shall be a minimum of 8:12.
         (b)   There shall be a minimum roof overhang of nine inches on all
sides of a multi-family residential building with a sloped roof.
         (c)   The roof shall be covered with the highest industry standard
roofing materials including, but not limited to natural clay tiles, slate,
concrete tiles (with natural texture and color), wood shakes or shingles (with
adequate fire protection), or high profile, three-dimensional asphalt/
fiberglass shingles with a 30-year warranty, or synthetic or recycled material
that simulates tile, stone, shake or slate.
         (d)   Any structure with three or more units shall incorporate roof
articulation to reduce apparent scale. Elements such as balconies, porches,
arcades, dormers, cross gables, secondary hipped or gabled roofs can be used to
achieve this appearance.
      (3)   Dumpsters. Dumpsters shall be enclosed with a solid enclosure that
is of the same material as the primary structure, is a minimum of six feet in
height, and contains a solid gate. Shrub plant material shall be provided where
possible to further enhance the wall enclosure. In no instance shall a dumpster
all enclosure or dumpster plantings be located within a utility and/or drainage
easement.
      (4)   Mechanical screening. All mechanical equipment shall be screened
from view. This can be achieved by solid landscaping, solid fence or walls for
ground placed equipment (provided that the fence or wall is not placed within a
utility and/or drainage easement), and the use of parapet walls or other roof
structures of the same or compatible material of the main structure(s). For the
purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, the term PARAPET is
defined as a portion of the vertical wall of a building which extends above the
roofline.
      (5)   Architectural features. All multi-family residential buildings
shall incorporate a minimum of four of the following features, and side and
rear elevations shall contain at least one architectural feature.
         (a)   Front porch greater than eight feet by four feet (see also §
154.113(A)(4)(f) for column specifications);
         (b)   Reverse gables;
         (c)   Covered front stoops/steps with pathway leading from sidewalk;
         (d)   A separate overhead door for each garage bay;
         (e)   Decorative garage doors or windows in garage doors;
         (f)   Transom windows;
         (g)   Veranda/balcony;
         (h)   Two or more roof planes;
         (i)   Brick or stone on 100% of the front elevation, exclusive of
openings;
         (j)   Two or more dormers;
         (k)   At least four feet of relief at one or more points along the
front elevation;
         (l)   Bay windows;
         (m)   Side-loaded garages with courtyard entry;
         (n)   Full first floor masonry;
         (o)   Sunroom, screened porch, or balcony;
         (p)   Overhangs or soffits of at least 15 inches over all exterior
walls; or
         (q)   Use of brick and stone on the same elevation.
      (6)   Any commercial uses or buildings constructed within a M-1 or M-
2 District, as permitted by this chapter, shall meet the requirements of the
neighborhood commercial architectural standards, and shall have a similar
design or theme, materials, and compatible architecture with that of the multi-
family residential buildings on-site.
      (7)   Stand-alone clubhouses, amenity buildings, and the like shall meet
the architectural requirements of the multi-family-1 and -2 architectural
standards.
   (C)   Architectural standards for professional business office and regional
commercial developments/zoning districts. The implementation of various design
standards is a catalyst to ensure quality construction for future commercial
development. The following design standards apply to commercial uses within the
town. Exceptions may be considered for special developments with distinct and
unique architectural designs.
      (1)   Façade design/construction requirements.
         (a)   Façade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral hues or
colors. The use of high-fluorescent colors shall be prohibited. Building trim
and accent areas may feature brighter colors or primary colors, provided the
building trim and accent areas do not exceed 10% of any single exterior façade
exclusive of all windows, doors, or other building openings. Building trim and
accent areas featuring brighter colors or primary colors in excess of 10% of
any single exterior façade shall be submitted for review by the Architectural
Review Committee.
         (b)   All buildings are to have similar design or theme, materials,
and compatible architecture.
         (c)   All siding must be brick, stone, cement fiber board, stucco,
decorative pre-cast panels, architectural metal panels, matching approved
materials in scale, integrally colored CMU, E.I.F.S., or a combination of these
materials. Each building must feature a minimum of 50% brick or stone on all
elevations. Any smooth-face CMU is limited to use as a trim or accent material.
Changes in material shall be separated with a transition material. All siding
material shall be submitted for review by the Architectural Review Committee.
         (d)   For projects with multiple buildings, site layout and building
orientation will be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee. Attempts shall
be made to incorporate variation in building height, building mass, roof forms
and changes in wall planes.
         (e)   The exterior of all buildings adjacent to residential areas
shall be limited to brick, stone, stucco, E.I.F.S., fiber cement board, or
another material approved by the Plan Commission.
         (f)   If the length of any elevation is greater than 50 feet, it shall
have incorporated into the wall plane at least one projection or recess of at
least three feet and extending a width of at least 20% of the length of any
elevation. If the length of any elevation is greater than 100 feet, it shall
have incorporated into the wall plane at least two projections or recesses with
a depth of at least three feet and a width of at least 20% of the facade
length. If the length of any elevation is greater than 150 feet, it shall have
incorporated into the wall plane at least two projections or recesses with a
depth of at least five feet and a width of at least 20% of the facade length.
If the length of any elevation is greater than 250 feet, it shall have
incorporated into the wall plane at least three projections or recesses with a
depth of at least five feet and a width of at least 20% of the facade length.
Flat roofs shall feature articulation that coincides with the wall plane
articulation. For the purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, an
awning shall not constitute a facade projection. The ARC may approve wall plane
recesses and projections designs that do not meet the above noted minimums;
however, under no circumstance shall the ARC approve a wall plane design that
does not include any projections or recesses, unless the wall planes are less
than 50 feet in length.
         (g)   All commercial buildings of 15,000 square feet or less shall
incorporate four-sided architecture. All buildings elevations shall feature the
same materials and level of architectural detailing as the front elevation.
Exceptions may be granted by the ARC for a side or rear elevation which is not
visible from an adjacent property, or an existing or planned private street or
public right-of-way.
         (h)   Integrate at least one material change, color variation, or
horizontal reveal for every floor of a building facade (greater than two
stones); vertical spacing may be averaged over facade. On such buildings, the
first floor facade shall appear to be greater than the other floor heights.
Integrate at least one material change, color variation, or vertical reveal
every 50 horizontal feet of building facade (greater than 15,000 square feet);
horizontal spacing may be averaged over facade elevation. All buildings,
regardless of size or number of stories, shall use scale and design elements,
such as but not limited to special lighting, awnings, trees, and other
elements, to visually relate the building to the pedestrian scale and visually
anchor the building to the ground/street level. Exceptions may be granted by
the ARC for buildings featuring architectural styles which lend themselves to
less variation.
         (i)   For at least 60% of the building foundation perimeter, use any
combination of concrete, stone, or unique variation of color, texture, or
material, at least ten feet in height, around the base of the building.
Buildings may alternatively incorporate other architectural features such as
ledges, facade reveals, ground level fenestration, raised planters, or
landscaping elements within three feet of finished grade.
      (2)   Roofs.
         (a)   Roof features. Roofs shall have at least two of the following
features:
            1.   Parapets. Parapets shall not exceed one-third of the height of
the supporting wall and must conceal flat roofs and completely screen any and
all rooftop mechanical units.
            2.   Cornice. Cornices shall be three-dimensional.
            3.   Eaves and overhangs. Eaves and overhangs shall extend 18
inches past the supporting walls.
            4.   Cupolas. Cupolas shall not exceed 15 feet past the base
roofline.
         (b)   Roof pitch. The roof shall be a minimum of 6:12 pitch on a
sloped roof; a façade gable shall be a minimum of 8:12 pitch.
         (c)   Roof material. All roofs shall be covered with the highest
industry standard roofing materials including, but not limited to natural clay
tiles, slate, concrete tiles, (with natural texture and color), high quality
architectural standing seam metal roofing, wood shakes or shingles (with
adequate fire protection), or high profile, three-dimensional asphalt/
fiberglass shingles. Metal roofs shall have a low gloss finish to reduce glare.
The following materials shall be subject to review by the Architectural Review
Committee and/or Technical Review Committee: green roofs, solar panel roofing,
wood shake, metal, and synthetic or recycled materials used to simulate natural
materials.
         (d)   Roof access shall be located within the interior space of the
building to eliminate exterior ladders for roof access.
      (3)   Mechanical screening. All mechanical equipment shall be screened
from view. Wall and ground-mounted equipment shall be screened with a wall or
fence consistent with the exterior materials used on the primary building. Such
walls and fences shall be a minimum of one foot taller than the equipment and
softened with landscaping. Roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from the
view by parapets, dormers, portion of roof, or other screens. The material of
all such screens shall be consistent with the exterior materials used on the
facade of the primary building, unless use of such material is deemed not
logical or feasible by the ARC, in which case the ARC may approve an
alternative material. All roof-top equipment screens shall be constructed so
that the equipment screen fully obscures the view of the equipment from all
points of abutting property lines and all points of the farthest right-of-way
line of any adjacent public or private street. The line of site measurements
shall be taken at a height of eight feet from grade along the applicable
property line or right-of-way line. The town may require multiple line of site
exhibits depending upon existing or proposed conditions, including but not
limited to distance from equipment and changes in grade. Mechanical and utility
equipment not shown on plans (due to unknown location or other reasons) or
mechanicals added that were not originally planned for do not remove the
developer's responsibility to comply with these standards.
      (4)   Dumpsters. Dumpsters shall be enclosed with a solid enclosure that
is of the same material as the primary structure, is a minimum of six feet in
height, and contains a solid gate. Shrub plant material shall be provided where
possible to further enhance the wall enclosure. In no instance shall a dumpster
all enclosure or dumpster plantings be located within a utility and/or drainage
easement. In no instance shall a dumpster be located in the front yard.
      (5)   All buildings located on property zoned public/semi-public shall
meet the professional business office/regional commercial architectural
standards.
   (D)   Architectural design standards for neighborhood commercial
developments/zoning district. In addition to the professional business office
and regional commercial standards prescribed above, all neighborhood commercial
developments shall also comply with the following standards:
      (1)   Elements. Architectural elements used on the front elevation shall
be implemented on all elevations and shall incorporate no less than three of
the following architectural elements:
         (a)   Color change;
         (b)   Texture change;
         (c)   Material change;
         (d)   An expression of architectural or structural bays through a
change in roof plane, height, or architectural enhancements, and must be
approved by the Plan Commission;
         (e)   Balconies;
         (f)   Awnings; or
         (g)   Story change wherein a clear delineation between each story of
the structure is provided by a consistent cornice line.
      (2)   Entryways. Each single tenant retail establishment greater than
7,500 square feet shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances
featuring no less than three of the following:
         (a)   Canopies or porticos;
         (b)   Overhangs;
         (c)   Recesses/projections;
         (d)   Arcades;
         (e)   Raised corniced parapets over the door;
         (f)   Peaked or gabled roof forms;
         (g)   Arches;
         (h)   Columns;
         (i)   Awnings;
         (j)   Sidelights, transoms width must equal door width;
         (k)   Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are
integrated into the building structure and design;
         (l)   Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped
areas and/or places for sitting, awnings, porches, plinths, bay windows, or
shutters;
         (m)   Enhanced exterior lighting, such as wall sconces, building
mounted accent lights, or decorative pedestal lights;
         (n)   Prominent 3-D entryway feature such as a clock wireless support
structure or other similar architectural design element projecting from the
plane of the main exterior walls by a minimum of eight feet and raised above
the adjoining parapet wall or roof by a minimum of three feet.
      (3)   Exterior building materials.
         (a)   Exterior building materials shall not include smooth-faced
concrete block, or concrete tilt-up panels. However, concrete tilt-up panels
with brick or stone facing can be used on rear elevations.
         (b)   Exterior building materials shall consist of brick, stone,
integrally colored CMU, pre-cast concrete (must have integral color or and
embedded brick or stone with brick or stone in-print, on rear elevations only),
stucco and external insulation finish system (E.I.F.S) that simulates a stucco
appearance, or a combination of these materials. All siding materials shall be
submitted for review by the Architectural Review Committee.
         (c)   Wood siding or similar materials are permissible in limited
applications, but shall not be used as the primary building material.
      (4)   Display windows. All front façades and facades along pedestrian
walkways shall have display windows, faux windows, or decorative windows for no
less than 60% of the facades’ horizontal length.
   (E)   Architectural design standards for industrial-1 and industrial-
2 developments/zoning districts. The implementation of various design standards
is a catalyst to ensure quality construction for future industrial development.
In addition to all professional business office and regional commercial
standards as prescribed above, the following standards shall also apply to all
industrial uses, including light industrial uses. Exceptions may be made for
special developments with distinct and unique architectural designs.
      (1)   Siding.
         (a)   Exterior siding shall be stone, brick, E.I.F.S., and/or pre-cast
concrete (painted or pigmented). The ARC may also approve buildings with
architectural metal panels if the architectural style of the structure warrants
the use.
         (b)   All pre-cast concrete must include embedded reveals on all
elevations at uniform intervals to create visual interest and reduce the
massing of the wall plane.
      (2)   Entryways. Each single tenant industrial establishment greater than
7,500 square feet shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances
wherein the primary customer entrance features the following:
         (a)   Recesses/projections;
         (b)   Sidelights and/or transoms;
         (c)   Embedded texture or reveal incorporated into the entrance
design, featuring a complimentary accent color;
         (d)   Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped
areas;
         (e)   Enhanced exterior lighting, such as wall sconces, building
mounted accent lights, or decorative pedestal lights.
   (F)   Additional architectural standards for the Town Center and Old Town
Zoning District(s). In addition to the professional business office and
regional commercial, and neighborhood commercial standards prescribed above,
the following standards shall also apply to developments located within the
Town Center District and commercial development in the Old Town District:
      (1)   Exterior building materials. Exterior materials shall be natural in
appearance in keeping with the historical style of the town, if with the Old
Town District. Predominant exterior building materials shall be high quality
materials, including, but not limited to, brick, limestone, other native stone,
and natural wood. Synthetic materials can be used that simulate natural
materials (EIFS, cement fiber board, and cast stone).
      (2)   Entryways. Each building that is greater than 7,500 square feet in
gross floor area shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances
wherein the primary customer entrance features no less than three of the
following:
         (a)   Canopies or porticos;
         (b)   Overhangs;
         (c)   Arcades;
         (d)   Raised corniced parapets over the door;
         (e)   Peaked or gabled roof forms;
         (f)   Arches;
         (g)   Columns;
         (h)   Prominent 3-D entryway feature such as a glass-encased entrance
or other similar architectural design element projecting from the plane of the
main exterior walls by a minimum of eight feet and raised above the adjoining
parapet wall or roof by a minimum of three feet;
         (i)   Other features as approved by the Architectural Review
Committee.
      (3)   Display windows. All front façades and facades along pedestrian
walkways shall have display windows, faux windows, or decorative windows for no
less than 60% of the facades’ horizontal length.
      (4)   Dumpsters. Dumpsters shall be enclosed with a solid enclosure that
is of the same material as the primary structure, is a minimum of six feet in
height, and contains a solid gate. Shrub plant material shall be provided where
possible to further enhance the wall enclosure. In no instance shall a dumpster
all enclosure or dumpster plantings be located within a utility and/or drainage
easement.
      (5)   Street furniture. Street furniture such trash receptacles, benches,
drinking fountains, light standards, flag poles, water features and public art
should be included in plans and designed to be part of the architectural
concept.
      (6)   Buildings must orient, frame, and/or direct pedestrian views to
adjacent buildings, parks, plazas, destinations, and other points of interest.
      (7)   Front elevations shall feature a minimum of three colors. Other
elevations visible from the public right-of-way shall feature a minimum of two
colors.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 041216-A,
passed 4-12-2016; Ord. 010819, passed 2-12-2019; Ord. 111020C, passed 12-8-
2020; Ord. 111423E, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 154.114 PARKING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.  The purpose of these parking standards is to
reduce street congestion, ensure proper vehicular and pedestrian circulation,
and therefore improve public safety by identifying the appropriate number and
location of off-street parking spaces for each zoning district.
   (B)   General requirements.
      (1)   Location.  No off-street parking spaces may be fully or partially
located in an existing or planned public right-of-way, septic field, required
landscape area, buffer yard, utility easement, or drainage easement. In no
instance shall any vehicle be stored or parked in any front yard or side yard
or rear yard. Temporary parking of vehicles in driveways accessed from the
street and passing through the yard are exempt from this requirement.
      (2)   Access. All required parking spaces must be designed to provide
direct access for vehicles. In no case may areas which do not have direct
access be considered a parking space meeting the
requirements of this chapter. For example, a residential driveway shall not be
considered a parking space meeting the requirements of this section if a parked
vehicle in the driveway prevents direct access to a required parking space in a
garage or carport.
      (3)   Parking space dimensions.
         (a)   Each parking space (other than those designed for the disabled)
shall contain a rectangular area at least 19 feet long and nine feet wide.
Lines demarcating parking spaces may be drawn at various angles in relation to
curbs or aisles, so long as the parking spaces so created contain within them
the rectangular area required by this section.
         (b)   Wherever parking areas consist of spaces set aside for parallel
parking, the dimensions of such parking spaces shall not be less the 20 feet
long by nine feet wide.
   (C)   Single and two-family developments. Parking spaces for single- and
two-family residential developments shall be provided on the same lot as the
dwelling unit for which they are required and shall meet the following
standards:
      (1)   Spaces requirements. A minimum of two off-street, paved spaces are
required for each dwelling unit.
      (2)   Access/location requirements.  Parking areas must be designed to
prevent vehicles from having to back into or maneuver in any arterial or
collector street.
      (3)   Driving surface. All parking areas, including parking spaces,
driveways, and ingress/egress into parking areas must be paved with asphalt,
concrete, or other pavement materials that are approved by the Administrative
Officer. Exception: gravel driveways are permitted for single-family home
driveways on lots in excess of two acres.
   (D)   Multi-family developments.  Parking spaces for all multi-family
developments shall comply with the following standards:
      (1)   Space requirements. A minimum of two and one-half off-street
parking spaces are required for each dwelling unit, rounded up to the nearest
complete space. In addition, parking spaces for management offices, sales
facilities, self-service laundries, and other accessory uses shall be equal to
one-half of the requirements for those uses established by this section.
      (2)   Parking of the disabled. The required spaces shall include parking
for the disabled meeting the requirements of this section. The minimum number
of disabled spaces provided shall either be as specified in the American with
Disabilities Act or equal one space for every handicap-accessible dwelling
unit, whichever is greater.
      (3)   Driving surfaces. All parking areas, including parking spaces,
interior drives, and ingress/egress into parking areas must be paved with
asphalt, concrete, or other porous pavement materials that are approved by the
Administrative Officer. All parking areas shall be clearly painted to show each
parking space.
      (4)   Maneuvering. All parking spaces shall be provided with adequate
maneuvering space into which vehicles can back for the purpose of exiting the
parking space. For all multi-family uses, the following interior drive minimums
shall be required:
         (a)   Thirteen feet if one-way traffic and no parking or 45 degree
parking;
         (b)   Eighteen feet if one-way traffic and 60 or 90 degree parking;
         (c)   Twenty-four feet if two-way traffic or accessing a loading berth
(s).
      (5)   Drainage. Parking areas must be constructed to allow proper
drainage, which shall be subject to the review of the Technical Review
Committee and approval of the Town Engineer.
      (6)   Curbs. All parking areas shall generally be completely curbed.
Curbing shall not be required if, in the written opinion of the Town Engineer,
the drainage system for the property shall be best served if curbs were not
present.
      (7)   Lighting. Lighting for parking areas shall be in compliance with
the applicable requirements of this chapter.
      (8)   Landscaping. Landscaping for parking areas shall be in compliance
with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
      (9)   Access/location standards.  Parking areas must be designed to
prevent vehicles from having to back into or maneuver in public streets,
excluding all alleys and any streets that are internal to the development.
   (E)   Non-residential developments. Parking spaces for all non-residential
developments shall comply with the following standards:
      (1)   Location. Parking spaces shall be located on the lot with the use
(s) for which they are required. All parking spaces and interior drives shall
meet the following requirements.
         (a)   Access to public streets. Parking areas must be designed to
prevent vehicles from having to back into or maneuver in public streets (access
to alleys shall be exempt from this requirement).
         (b)   Maneuvering space. All parking spaces shall be provided with
adequate maneuvering space into which vehicles can back for the purpose of
exiting the parking space. For all non-residential uses, and where multi-family
uses permitted in a non-residential district, the following interior drive
minimums shall be required:
            1.   Thirteen feet if one-way traffic and no parking or 45 degree
parking;
            2.   Eighteen feet if one-way traffic and 60 or 90 degree parking;
            3.   Twenty-four feet if two-way traffic or accessing a loading
berth.
         (c)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking in the front set back
shall be prohibited.
      (2)   Driving surfaces. All parking areas, including parking spaces,
interior drives, and ingress/egress into parking areas must be paved with
asphalt, concrete, or porous pavement material that has been previously
approved by the Administrative Officer to the nearest paved street. All parking
areas shall be clearly marked to show each parking space.
      (3)   Drainage. Parking areas must allow proper drainage, and shall be
subject to the review of the Technical Review Committee and approval of the
Town Engineer.
      (4)   Curbs. All parking areas for non-residential uses shall be
completely curbed. Curbing shall not be required if, in the written opinion of
the Town Engineer, the drainage system for the property and surrounding
environment shall be best served if curbs were not present.
      (5)   Minimum number of spaces. The minimum number of parking spaces
required per property shall be determined by the sum of spaces required for
each applicable use of the proposed development or redevelopment as prescribed
by
Chapter 154, Appendix D, Official Parking Schedule.
      (6)   Accessible parking spaces.  Accessible parking spaces for the
disabled shall be provided in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities
Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities.
         (a)   All required parking spaces for the disabled shall be those that
are the closest to the main entrance of the primary structure.
         (b)   Parking spaces for the disabled shall count toward the total
number of spaces required by this chapter.
   (F)   Requirements for non-conforming uses and uses permitted by special
exception or variance.  Any use which is non-conforming in the zoning district
in which it is located or is permitted by special exception or variance shall
provide parking which is consistent with the use and the standards for the
zoning district in which the use would ordinarily be permitted by this chapter.
In no instance shall the number of parking spaces required for non-conforming
uses or those permitted by special exception or variance be solely based on the
standards for the district in which they are located. The Board of Zoning
Appeals shall specify the number of parking spaces for all uses permitted by
special exception or variance consistent with the intent of this section.
However, the Board of Zoning Appeals may grant variances consistent with the
intent of this section.
   (G)   Requirements for uses not specifically listed.  The number of parking
spaces required for uses that are not listed specifically shall be determined
by the Administrative Officer by comparing the proposed use with those that are
specified and further determining the most relevant comparable use.
   (H)   Park use requirements.  Off-street parking space for park and
recreation uses and buildings located in any zoning district shall be provided
consistent with the requirements for business uses provided by this chapter.
   (I)   Vehicle storage requirements. In no instance should the provisions for
stored vehicles be interpreted as enforcement of traffic code provisions for
inoperable vehicles. These provisions are intended to ensure that auto repair
and salvage facilities are operated consistent with the general welfare of the
community. The storage of all motor vehicles shall be consistent with the
following requirements:
      (1)   Primary structure required. Unless expressly permitted by this
chapter, no vehicle, including recreational and commercial vehicles, shall be
parked, stored, or allowed to remain on a lot or parcel of land that does not
contain a primary structure. For the purposes of this chapter a commercial
vehicle is any vehicle in excess of 16,000 pounds.
      (2)   Stored vehicles to be salvaged/repaired. The outdoor storage of
such vehicles associated with permitted auto repair or salvage facilities shall
be consistent with the following requirements:
         (a)   Any automobile awaiting repair shall not be stored outdoors for
longer than five business days.
         (b)   All such vehicles, including antique vehicles, may be stored
within the rear or side yard. In no instance shall such vehicles be stored in
any front yard, buffer yard, required landscape area, utility easement,
drainage easement, or required setback area.
         (c)   All storage areas for such vehicles shall be completely enclosed
with a six foot tall, 100% opaque wood, stone, or masonry fence. Gates allowing
access to the storage areas are permitted, provided they are closed when not in
use, and constructed of six foot tall, 100% opaque wooden doors.
      (3)   Recreational vehicle storage. The storage or parking of
recreational vehicles (including travel-trailers, boats, snowmobile or
motorcycle trailers, and the like) in residential zoning districts and
associated with residential uses is subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   A recreational vehicle may be stored on a residential property
provided the vehicle is not placed on the grass. A recreational vehicle may be
parked in the front yard on a residential lot, outside of an enclosed
structure, for a period not to exceed a total of 48 hours in any one week
period.
         (b)   Not more than one recreational vehicle will be permitted to be
parked or stored in the open on residential property at any one time; however
one additional recreational vehicle is permitted for visitation for up to seven
consecutive days, not to exceed 14 days in any one year.
         (c)   In no instance shall an parked recreational vehicle be occupied
longer than seven hours in any 30 day period of time.
         (d)   The Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, may require
a land owner to verify that the vehicle is licensed and operational.
      (4)   Commercial vehicle storage.  The storage or parking of commercial
vehicles in residential zoning districts and primarily residential planned unit
developments is subject to the following requirements. For the purposes of this
chapter a commercial vehicle is any vehicle in excess of 16,000 pounds.
         (a)   The parking of a commercial vehicle shall be limited to one
standard sized vehicle including cars, SUVs, step-up vans, work vans, and pick-
up trucks. The parking of automobile trailers shall be prohibited. As an
exception, any commercial vehicle may be stored within an enclosed structure.
         (b)   This regulation shall not be interpreted to apply to commercial
vehicles used for conveying the necessary tools and materials to premises where
labor, using such tools and materials, is to be performed during the time of
parking such vehicles, or to commercial vehicles in the process of temporarily
loading or unloading deliverable goods.
   (J)   Off-site and shared parking provisions. Under certain conditions, off-
site and shared parking may be allowed on another lot that is within 500 feet
of the lot occupied by the uses(s) for which they are required.
      (1)   Off-site parking. Two or more uses may provide off-site parking
collectively on one lot, provided the total number of spaces is not less than
75% of the sum of the spaces required for each use.
      (2)   Shared parking. To the extent that developments wish to make joint
use of the same parking spaces operate at different times, up to one-half of
the parking spaces may be credited to both uses if one use is a church,
theater, or assembly hall whose peak hours of attendance will be at night or on
Sundays, and the other use or uses are ones that will be closed at night or on
Sundays.
      (3)   Approval. All off-site and shared parking space arrangements are
subject to the approval by the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee.
Approvals shall be based on the determination that the use of off-site and/or
shared parking will not provide hardships for pedestrians, will not result in
potentiality hazardous traffic conditions, and will provide an adequate number
of parking spaces for the uses involved. The parking needs of possible future
uses of the property shall also be considered by the Administrative Officer, or
his or her designee.
      (4)   Required documentation.  Permanent documentation of any off-site
and/or shared parking agreement must be signed by all involved property owners.
The permanent written agreement shall include, but is not limited to the
following items: maintenance, snow removal, ownership, and liability. The
agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the Administrative Officer and the
Town Attorney. A recorded copy of the agreement shall be retained for the files
of the Plan Commission. Cross access easements shall be provided and recorded
by each property owner to enable the sharing of parking facilities. Recorded
copies of the cross easements shall be provided to and retained by the
Administrative Officer. Amendments to the agreement shall be subject to
Administrative Officer approval and be duly recorded with the County Recorder.
   (K)   Bicycle parking requirement. All non-residential uses shall provide
one designated bicycle parking area for every 30 vehicle parking spaces
required by this chapter, with a minimum area for two bicycle spaces. Each
bicycle parking area shall provide adequate facilities for securing the parked
bicycle.
   (L)   Parking space requirements.
      (1)   Minimum number of spaces. Total off-street spaces required for each
lot shall be calculated by adding the applicable requirements established by
Chapter 154, Appendix D, Official Parking Schedule.
      (2)   Dimensions. Parking space size shall be a minimum of 171 square
feet and dimensions shall be in conformance with the following table.
   Table 2: Parking Space Dimension Requirements
 
Parking Space Dimension Requirements
Angle of Parking                   Minimum Parking Space Size
                                   Width (ft.) Length (ft.)
Parallel                           10          18
                                   9           19
90 Degree, 60 Degree, or 45 Degree 10          20
Disabled                           Per ADA
 
   (M)   Commercial developments featuring a minimum of 30,000 square feet of
restaurant, retail, office, commercial services, and/or combination thereof
shall be required to feature a dedicated area for vehicular pick-up and drop-
off of visitors to the development. This pick-up/drop-off area shall not impact
other on-site vehicular circulation. A pick-up/drop-off area shall not be less
than 40 feet long and eight feet deep. Any adjacent curb shall meet ADA
accessibility guidelines.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 041216-A, passed 4-12-2016; Ord.010819,
passed 2-12-2019)
§ 154.115 LOADING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of these loading requirements is to
provide minimum standards for the loading and unloading of materials at
commercial, industrial, and institutional facilities, with the exception of
such facilities which are located in any Town Center District or other mixed-
use district. These requirements are intended to prevent loading and unloading
from occurring on a public street or in other locations that would present a
danger to persons or property. Commercial, industrial, and institutional
facilities located within a Town Center District or other mixed-use district
shall be exempt from the standards and regulations of this section.
   (B)   Loading birth requirement.  Adequate off-street loading berths and
areas shall be provided for any building or structure which requires the
receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar
vehicles. Off-street loading berths may be provided either within or outside of
structures on the property.
   (C)   Location. All required off-street loading berths shall be located on
the same lot as the use to be served. They shall be designed so that no portion
of a loading/unloading vehicle projects into a street, alley, or other public
rights-of-way. No loading space may be located in any front yard or any
required buffer yard. Shared truck courts between adjacent properties shall be
permitted.
   (D)   Design and construction. All off-street loading berths shall meet the
following design and construction requirements:
      (1)   Size requirements. All interior and exterior off-street loading
berths for over-the-road tractor-trailers shall be a minimum of 13 feet in
width and 140 feet in length including the apron. For local pick-up and
delivery trucks, off-street loading berths shall be at least 12 feet in width
and 60 feet in length including the apron.
      (2)   Vertical clearance. All loading spaces shall be provided with a
vertical clearance of not less than 15 feet.
      (3)   Driving aisle requirements. All loading berths shall be accessed by
a driving aisle that is a minimum of 24 feet in width for two-way traffic or 13
feet in width for one-way traffic at all points between the accessed public
street and the loading berth.
      (4)   Surfacing requirements. All off-street loading berths shall be
paved with concrete, asphalt or other appropriate material meeting the
durability requirements of the Town Engineer, or his or her designee.
   (E)   Access. Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner that
will not interfere with traffic movements. There shall be no maneuvering within
any existing or planned public right-of-way. In no case shall a loading berth
be located in such a manner as to require loading/unloading vehicles to back
into an existing or planned public right-of-way or overhang adjacent property.
   (F)   Space allowed. Space provided for use as any off-street loading berth
shall not be used to satisfy any off-street parking space requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.116 ENTRANCE/DRIVE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of these entrance and drive standards
is to provide for a safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian transportation
system by establishing minimum standards for site entrances, driveways, and
interior drives.
   (B)   General requirements.  Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, all
driveways and interior drives shall comply with the following design
requirements:
      (1)   Entrance widths. No entrance shall exceed the following pavement
widths at the point which they intersect an existing or planned public right-
of-way. The distances for these standards shall be determined by measuring from
the outside edges of the curb or pavement (whichever is greater) of the
entrance or drive at an existing or planned public right-of-way which it
accesses, and shall not include any acceleration or deceleration lanes or
turning radii:
         (a)   Fourteen feet per lane (exclusive of any medians) if from a non-
residential or multi-family residential use onto any type of street, and
         (b)   Twenty-four feet total if from a single-family or two-family use
onto any type of street.
      (2)   Travel direction. The direction of travel for vehicles using
entrances shall be as follows:
         (a)   All entrances providing access to an existing or planned public
right-of-way from all lots used for purposes other than single or two-family
residences shall be designed so that vehicles are traveling in a forward
direction when entering and leaving.
         (b)   In no case may any entrance for any use be designed to require a
vehicle to back onto any arterial or collector street.
      (3)   Shared entrances and drives.  Shared entrances and drives are
encouraged for all uses in all zoning districts, specifically for any multi-
family residential or non-residential use accessing a major collector or
arterial street.
         (a)   Access easements. All shared entrances and drives shall be
constructed only in appropriate access easements which easements must be
recorded before usage commences.
         (b)   Required documentation.  A permanent documentation of any shared
entrance and drive agreement must be signed by all involved property owners.
The permanent written agreement shall include, but is not limited to the
following items: maintenance, snow removal, ownership, and liability. The
agreement, which can be amended and assigned shall be reviewed and approved by
the Town Engineer and duly recorded with the County Recorder. Any changes to
the agreements must be accomplished with the consent of the Administrative
Officer. A copy of the agreement shall be retained for the files of the Plan
Commission. The agreement shall be recorded prior to the issuance of the
occupancy permit.
      (4)   Interior drive widths. The minimum pavement width shall be
exclusive of any parking spaces. For single- and two-family residential uses
the minimum driveway width shall be 12 feet. For all multi-family uses refer to
the §
154.114, Parking Standards, of this chapter.
   (C)   Curbs. All entrances and interior drives for property used for
purposes other than agriculture, single-family residential or two-family
residential shall generally be completely curbed. Curbing shall not be required
if, in the written opinion of the Town Engineer/County Highway Engineer, the
drainage system for the property shall be best served if curbs were not
present.
   (D)   Commercial area internal linkages. For all uses located in a
commercial zoning district there shall be interior drives that allow access
between existing and proposed commercial uses on adjacent properties.
      (1)   Cross-access required. The drives must be designed as a single two-
way drive or a pair of one-way drives that provide access between the parking
lots and interior drives of all adjoining commercial uses.
      (2)   Separation. Interior drives providing cross-access between adjacent
parcels shall be separated from an existing or planned right-of-way of any such
street by a minimum distance specified by the Town Engineer based on the
vehicle stacking requirements of the entrance(s) to the property from the
public street.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.117 SIGHT VISIBILITY STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of these sight visibility standards is
to contribute to a safe vehicular and pedestrian transportation system by
ensuring clear visibilities at street intersections and the vehicle entrances
to properties.
   (B)   Sight visibility triangle requirement. All properties shall maintain
an area, otherwise referred to as the "sight visibility triangle," at every
intersection of an adjoining street with other streets and entrance drives. The
sight visibility triangle shall be free of structures, vegetation (including
crops), signs (other than street signs), and other opaque or partially opaque
objects between a height of 2-1/2 and 12 feet measured from the nearest top-of-
curb, or edge of pavement where curbs are not present.
   (C)   Sight visibility triangle dimensions.  The sight visibility triangle
shall be established by connecting points located along the intersecting
rights-of-way (or edge of pavement in the case of entrances). The dimensions of
the triangle vary depending on criteria such as design speed. Refer to the
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets by the AASHTO (American Association of
State Highway and Transportation Officials) latest edition, for intersection
sight distance.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.118 FENCE AND WALL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of these fence and wall standards is
to provide minimum requirements in order to provide adequate light, air
circulation, and privacy; and to protect the public welfare by preventing
visual obstructions along public ways.
   (B)   Applicability. All fences and walls are subject to review by the
Technical Review Committee. Unless otherwise noted in this chapter, fences and
walls are permitted in the various districts subject to the regulations of this
section.
   (C)   Measuring fence and wall height. The purpose of these fence and wall
standards is to provide minimum requirements in order to provide adequate
light, air circulation, and privacy; and to protect the public welfare by
preventing visual obstructions along public ways.
   (D)   Residential uses.
      (1)   Rear and side yard fences and walls.
         (a)   Height. The maximum height of all rear and side yard fences and
walls associated with a residential use shall be six feet. In instances where a
residential use directly abuts a non-residential use an eight foot fence may be
approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
         (b)   Materials. All front yard fences and walls shall be constructed
out of wrought iron, wood, stucco, brick, stone, or combination thereof,
provided the heavier material is located on the bottom. Furthermore, any
portion of a fence above two feet from grade, shall have a maximum opaqueness
of 50%. Front yard fences in neighborhood common area or on privately-owned
properties greater than one acre shall be permitted up to six feet in height,
so long as materials are limited to wrought iron (aluminum), brick, and/or
natural stone.
      (2)   Front yard fences and walls.
         (a)   Height. The minimum height of all front yard fences and walls
associated with a residential use shall be two feet. The maximum height shall
be four feet.
         (b)   Materials. All front yard fences and walls shall be constructed
out of wrought iron, wood, stucco, brick, stone, or combination thereof,
provided the heavier material is located on the bottom.
      (3)   Location. Fences and walls shall not be located within any
designated, dedicated, and/or apparent utility and/or drainage easement, except
as set forth below:
         (a)   A fence and/or wall may encroach into a designated, dedicated,
and/or apparent utility and/or drainage easement if approved by the Public
Works Commissioner or his or her designee, who shall base his or her
determination on site conditions including, but not limited to, the location of
existing utilities or infrastructure, the size and scope of the utilities or
infrastructure, the potential location of future utilities or infrastructure,
and/or the absence of utilities or infrastructure.
         (b)   Any property owner receiving approval from the Public Works
Commissioner or his or her designee to construct or install a fence and/or wall
within a designated, dedicated, and/or apparent utility or drainage easement
within the town, shall be required to comply with the provisions of §
150.03, and in addition, as a precondition to obtaining a fence or wall
construction permit, shall be required to acknowledge that they understand the
legal rights and restrictions associated with a designated, dedicated, and/or
apparent utility and/or drainage easement and the conditions and/or limitations
placed upon the encroachment of a fence and/or wall within such an easement,
which acknowledgment shall be executed in writing by the owner on the form
provided by the Public Works Commissioner or his or her designee. The written
acknowledgment shall be recorded within the office of the Hancock County
Recorder and shall run with the land the be binding upon the applicant owner(s)
and all legal successors in interest to the owner(s).
   Figure 10: Location of Residential Fences and Walls
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-82.jpg]
   (E)   Commercial and industrial uses.
      (1)   Rear and side yard fences and walls.
         (a)   Height. The maximum height of any fence associated with a
commercial or industrial use shall be 12 feet.
         (b)   Materials. All rear and side yard fences and walls associated
with a commercial or industrial use shall be constructed out of vinyl-coated
chain link, wrought iron, stucco, brick or combinations of the above, provided
the heavier material is placed on the bottom. Barbed wire may be permitted for
rear yard fences not visible from a street, as determined by the Plan
Commission.
      (2)   Front yard fences and walls.
         (a)   Height. The maximum height of all fences and walls located
within the front yard of a commercial or industrial use shall be six feet
height, with the exception of walls and fences used for screening as required
by this chapter.
         (b)   Materials. Wrought iron, wood, stucco, brick, stone, or
combination thereof, provided the heavier material is located on the bottom.
      (3)   Location. In no instance shall a fence be located within a utility
or drainage easement. The location of walls and fences for commercial and
industrial developments shall be as illustrated below.
   Figure 11: Location of Commercial and Industrial Fences and Walls
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-84.jpg]
   (F)   Civic and institutional developments. The following standards shall
apply to all yards of a civic or institutional development.
      (1)   Height. The minimum height shall be two feet, while the maximum
shall be seven feet, with the exception of walls and fences used for screening
as required by this chapter.
      (2)   Materials. Wrought iron, brick, stone, or combination thereof,
provided that the heaviest material is located along the bottom. Any fence or
wall portion above four feet shall be a minimum of 50% opaque.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 070913A, passed 8-13-2013; Ord. 111020C,
passed 12-8-2020)
§ 154.119 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS.
   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to impose any liability
upon the town, its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of any
private property from the duty to keep any tree, shrub or plant upon any street
tree area on his or her property or under his or her control in such condition
as to prevent it from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or
vision upon any public roadway or alley within the town.
   (A)   Landscape plan requirement.  A landscape plan shall be prepared by a
landscape architect registered with the State of Indiana and submitted to the
Plan Commission for approval at the same time other plans (i.e. architectural
design, lighting, parking, signage, and site plans) are submitted. This plan
shall be drawn to scale with the scale clearly indicated and a graphic scale
for reference, and shall delineate all existing and proposed structures,
parking areas, walks, ramps for the handicapped, terraces, driveways, signs,
lighting standards, steps and other similar structures, and shall delineate the
location, size, and description of all landscape materials, including any
existing trees the owner wishes to apply towards the landscape requirements.
Landscape treatments for plazas, roads, paths, service and parking areas shall
be designed as an integral and coordinated part of the landscape plan for the
entire lot. The landscape plan shall ensure that sight distances are not
obstructed for drivers of motor vehicles.
   (B)   Landscaped areas. The following areas shall be landscaped as
prescribed. The following landscaping standards are in addition to any
buffering or screening requirements prescribed on the following pages.
      (1)   Public rights-of-way. No person shall plant a tree or otherwise
allow a tree to grow within a dedicated public right-of-way with the exception
of a designated street tree corridor as established from time to time by the
town in accordance with the street design specifications of the McCordsville
Subdivision Control Ordinance, as amended from time to time. In no instance
shall a tree be planted or allowed to grow above underground utilities.
      (2)   Planting adjacent to free-standing, non-residential buildings. A
planting area five feet wide shall be installed along all sides of buildings.
Sidewalks may be permitted in these areas, but shall not occupy the entire area
on any side of the building. These adjacent planting areas need not be
rectangular in shape as long as the required amount of space is landscaped.
Innovative and original designs are encouraged. The adjacent planting area at
the rear of a structure may be excluded if that structure is located less than
40 feet from the rear property line and sufficient peripheral planting is
included to compensate for its removal. Front elevations of all industrial
buildings are required to plant a minimum of three shrubs, two ornamental
trees, or a mix thereof approved by staff per 12 lineal feet of building
perimeter, exclusive of loading docks.
      (3)   Plantings adjacent to free-standing, single-family residential
buildings. Each single-family residential lot shall have the following minimum
specifications:
         (a)   A minimum of one shade tree.
         (b)   A minimum of two ornamental trees, two evergreen trees, or one
ornamental tree and one evergreen tree.
         (c)   A minimum of 12 shrubs, planted along the foundation of the
primary building.
         (d)   A minimum of one deciduous tree, planted in the front yard.
         (e)   Any front-loading garage that protrudes a minimum of eight feet
in front of the front elevation shall feature a minimum of eight shrubs along
the foundation of side elevation (nearest the side-yard property line) of the
garage.
      (4)   Interior parking lot plantings. All parking lots with more than ten
spaces shall be landscaped as follows:
         (a)   Parking areas that are visible from any existing or planned
public right-of- way or any existing or planned private street easement and/or
abut any side or rear property line shall have a planted screen between the
parking perimeter and the street yard, side yard, and/or rear yard. Screening
must be at least three feet high with no gaps except for drive-aisles,
sidewalks, and the like. Brick or stone walls not to exceed four feet in height
may be used to substitute for shrubbery. Additionally, at least one tree for
each 50 lineal feet shall be planted along the peripheral of such parking area.
         (b)   Planting areas shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the
parking area. Not less than 5% of the parking lot shall be landscaped.
Landscape buffers and landscaping adjacent to buildings and on the periphery of
the parking lot shall not be included toward the interior parking lot planting
requirements. Landscaping shall be specifically provided at the ends of parking
rows and as a means of separating parking from major circulation aisles within
parking lots. One shade tree per 2,400 square feet of surface area is required.
One shrub per 500 square feet of surface area is required. No parking space
shall be further than 60 feet from the trunk of a shade tree. Existing shade
trees over 12 inches in caliper may be used to fulfill these requirements. Any
parking area that exceeds the town's parking quantity regulations shall
increase the interior landscaping areas by the same percentage, subject to the
approval of the Zoning Administrator. Interior landscape areas may be
consolidated, or intervals expanded in order to preserve existing trees.
         (c)   Median landscape island. A landscaped median island shall be
provided every six single parking rows. The median island shall be a minimum of
six feet wide (back of curb to back of curb). The median island may also serve
as the location for a sidewalk connecting the parking and use/building served
by the parking area. In such a case, the sidewalk must be a minimum of six feet
wide, and the median island expanded to a width of 11 feet. Landscaping shall
consist of a mixture of grass and mulched planting beds. A mixture of trees,
shrubs, ornamental grass, and perennial flowers shall be planted, subject to
the approval of the Zoning Administrator. Median islands may be consolidated,
or intervals expanded in order to preserve existing trees. Flexibility shall be
granted for accessibility/maneuvering of large commercial vehicles.
   (C)   Landscaping requirements.
      (1)   Placement. The interior dimensions, specifications, and design of
any planting area shall be sufficient to protect the trees and shrubs planted
and provide for their proper growth.
      (2)   Plant materials.
         (a)   The primary plant materials used in and around parking areas
shall be shade trees that provide shade at maturity. Ornamental shrubs and
other plantings may be used to compliment tree landscaping, but shall not be
the sole contribution to the landscaping.
         (b)   Plant materials should be appropriate to local growing and
climatic conditions. Whenever appropriate, existing trees greater than 12
inches in caliper should be conserved and integrated into the landscape plan.
Plant materials shall be selected for their purpose, structure, texture,
hardiness, and appearance.
         (c)   Plant materials shall comply with the requirements described in
the latest edition of the American Standard Nursery Stock, which is published
by the American Association of Nurserymen.
      (3)   Plant specifications.
         (a)   Shade trees shall have a minimum caliper of two and one-half
inches. Shade tree selections can be made from Hard Maples, Oak, Skyline
Locust, and Linden trees.
         (b)   Ornamental trees shall have a minimum caliper of one and one-
half inches.
         (c)   Ornamental shrubs shall have a minimum height of at least 24
inches as measured from the base of the trunk, and a minimum spread of at least
18 inches as measured by the average width diameter of the shrub foliage.
      (4)   Ground cover.
         (a)   All plantings will be mulched in with a natural material.
         (b)   For lots 15,000 square feet or less, the front yards and side
yards to the building back corners of all single family residential homes shall
be entirely sodded. The remainder of the yard may be sodded or seeded. All
seeded areas shall be covered with straw or seeded by an equivalent or better
method.
         (c)   Front yards of all non-residential buildings shall be entirely
sodded. Any side yards to the building back corners will be sodded at least 20
feet from the building foundation, if these side areas are to be landscaped
with turf. The remainder of the yard shall be seeded and covered with straw or
seeded by an equivalent or better method.
      (5)   Prohibited plant materials. As a matter of best practice and in
accordance with state and federal regulations plants that are classified as
being illegal in the State of Indiana or as a federal noxious weed are hereby
prohibited from being planted on public or private property in the jurisdiction
of the town.
   (D)   Supplemental tree plantings provisions. All lots, including common
areas, within subdivisions shall be planted with supplementary shade trees if
less than the required number of trees exists on the lot after construction is
complete. For design flexibility, one shade tree may be substituted for two
ornamental trees or two evergreen trees for up to 50% of the required
supplemental trees. Existing deciduous trees at least eight inches in caliper
may be used to fulfill the supplemental tree planting requirements. Existing
deciduous trees over 12 inches in caliper may reduce by one the required number
of supplemental trees. Existing evergreen trees over eight feet in height may
also be used to fulfill supplemental tree planting requirements.
Table 3: Supplemental Tree Plantings Provisions
 
Supplemental Tree Plantings
Lot Size                 Shade Trees
                         qty.
< 12,000 sq. ft.         1
12,001 to 20,000 sq. ft. 2
20,001 to 1 acre         3
> 1 acre                 3 per acre
 
   (E)   Preservation of topographic patterns and existing trees. Where natural
or existing topographic patterns contribute to the beauty and/or utility of a
development, they shall be preserved and protected. Modification to topography
shall be permitted where it contributes to the design. Existing trees eight
inches or greater in caliper that have good form and will be protected in place
may count toward the landscape requirements.
   (F)   Installation and maintenance.
      (1)   Installation. All landscaping required by the approved landscaping
plan shall be installed prior to the issuance of a building occupancy permit if
said permit is issued during a planting season, or within six months of the
date an occupancy permit is issued if issued during a non-planting season.
      (2)   Maintenance.
         (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the owners and their agencies
to insure proper maintenance of the landscaping, in accordance with the
standards set by this chapter and as indicated on the landscaping plan which
has been approved by the Plan Commission. This includes, but is not necessarily
limited to, replacing dead plantings with identical varieties or a suitable
substitute, and keeping the area free of refuse and debris.
         (b)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of every person owning
or occupying any real property within the town to keep all trees and plants on
their respective property trimmed in such a manner that there is a clearance of
at least 14 feet above any street or alley, and a clearance of at least seven
feet over any sidewalk. It shall also be the duty and responsibility of every
person owning or occupying any real property within the town to keep all trees
on their respective property trimmed in such a manner that they do not obstruct
the view of any traffic sign or device for vehicular or non-vehicular traffic
in the direction controlled by that traffic sign or device.
         (c)   The practice of topping or other especially destructive
maintenance practices such as severely trimming trees is strictly forbidden.
For the purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, the phrase
severely trimmed shall include cutting of the branches or trunk of a tree in a
manner which will substantially reduce the overall size of the tree area so as
to destroy the existing symmetrical appearance or natural shape of the tree in
a manner which results in the removal of main lateral branches leaving the
trunk of the tree in a stub appearance.
         (d)   All trees shall be trimmed so as to comply with the ANSI A300
standards, as amended from time to time.
      (3)   Changes after approval.  No landscaping that has been approved by
the Plan Commission may later be altered, eliminated, or sacrificed, without
first obtaining further Plan Commission approval.
      (4)   Inspection.  The Administrative Officer, or his or her designee,
shall have the authority to visit any lot within the Commission's jurisdiction
to inspect the landscaping and check it against the approved plan on file.
   (G)   Diseased or hazardous trees and plans. The town shall have the
exclusive authority to destroy any plants in or on public streets, alleyways,
places or parks if infected by disease or injurious insects, or if in the
judgment of the Public Works Commissioner, or his or her designee, represents a
dangerous condition or hazard to the public. Such destruction may also be
effected when necessary for the protection of other flora or in any other case
when the public safety, health, or welfare is or may be adversely affected, as
determined by the Public Works Commissioner, or his or her designee.
   (H)   All landscape installations shall review the McCordsville Preferred
Planting Guide. This guide is not exhaustive and inclusive of all appropriate
selections; therefore, proposals for additions and/or substitutions to the
guide may be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for consideration. However,
any species which is listed as invasive or having poor characteristics shall be
avoided and will not be counted towards any landscape requirements.
   (I)   All industrial zoned lots shall incorporate a minimum 20 foot wide
perimeter landscape area along all perimeter road frontages. This perimeter
landscape area shall include mounding and landscape plantings. Mounding shall
be undulating, with at least 50% of the length of the mounding a minimum of
three feet higher than average adjacent grade of the property. The required
landscape material shall be no less than five trees and ten shrubs per 100
lineal feet. Plantings shall feature a mix of evergreen and deciduous
plantings.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 010819,
passed 2-12-2019; Ord. 111020C, passed 12-8-2020)
§ 154.120 BUFFERING AND SCREENING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Buffering standards.
      (1)   Applicability. Undeveloped properties, expansions of more than 40%
of existing floor area, and rezoned property are subject to the provisions of
this section. Developed lots or lots with unexpired permits at the effective
date of this chapter are hereby exempt from this requirement.
      (2)   Buffer yard requirement.  Where a commercial office, commercial
neighborhood, public/semi-public or multifamily use directly abuts a single-
family or two-family residential use, or an industrial use directly abuts a
commercial use, the subject property shall provide a landscape buffer 20 feet
wide planted with five trees and ten ornamental shrubs per 100 lineal feet of
buffer yard, and undulating mounding of at least three feet in height between
the conflicting uses. Where an industrial use or commercial regional use
directly abuts any residential use or public/semi-public use, the subject
property shall provide a landscape buffer 30 feet wide planted with eight trees
and ten ornamental shrubs per 100 lineal feet of buffer yard, and mounding of
at least five feet in height with a minimum six-foot fence constructed on top
of the mounding between the conflicting uses. The fence shall be constructed of
100% brick and/or stone, or brick or stone columns with wood or wood-like
composite material between the columns (spaced no more than 50 foot on center).
One hundred percent of the required shrubs and at least 50% of the required
trees must be located between the fence and the residential, institutional, or
public/semi-public use. It shall be the responsibility of the new land use
creating the incompatibility to construct and maintain the landscape buffer.
Where an industrial use is not immediately adjacent to a single-family or two-
family use, but is separated from the residential use by only public right-of-
way, the industrial land use shall provide a landscape buffer 30 feet wide
planted with eight trees and ten ornamental shrubs per 100 lineal feet of
buffer yard, and mounding of at least five feet in along the adjoining right-
of-way. This buffer yard can be waived by the Administrative Officer if the
property owner of the neighboring lower-intensity use requests, in writing to
the Administrative Officer, to not have the buffer yard constructed along their
property line.
      (3)   Buffer yard width reduction provision. The width of the required
buffer and the number of shrubs may be reduced by half with the construction of
an opaque wall or fence. The fence or wall shall be opaque (solid) and
constructed of material compatible with the principle building in composition
and color. The wall shall have a minimum height of five feet and a maximum
height of seven feet.
   (B)   Screening of loading and storage areas. Screening shall be by opaque
wall or fence six to eight feet in height. One-third of the surface area of the
wall or fence must be screened from an existing or planned public right-of-way
with plants within six months of the date of the occupancy permit being issued.
Screening shall be evergreen, and planted at a maximum spacing of four feet on
center.
Figure 12: Buffer Yard Location
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-86.jpg]
Figure 13: Buffer Yard Example
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-88.jpg]
 
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 111020C,
passed 12-8-2020)
§ 154.121 EXTERIOR LIGHTING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of these exterior lighting standards
is to provide minimum outdoor lighting standards that protect the public safety
and the general welfare of the community by reducing unsafe and unpleasant
lighting conditions, such as light trespass and light pollution, while also
promoting the safe and efficient movement of vehicles and pedestrians and the
security of local properties.
   (B)   General requirements. All exterior lighting shall comply with the
following requirements:
      (1)   Mounting height measurement. For the purposes of this section, the
MOUNTING HEIGHT of all light fixtures shall be defined as the vertical distance
between the grade level of the surface being illuminated and the top of the
lighting fixture (luminaire).
      (2)   Use of timers/dimmers. Wherever practicable, exterior lighting
shall include timers, dimmers, and/or sensors to reduce overall energy
consumption and eliminate unnecessary lighting.
      (3)   Electrical service. The electrical service to all outdoor lighting
fixtures shall be underground, unless the fixtures are mounted directly on
buildings or utility poles.
      (4)   Holiday lighting. Holiday lighting shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section.
      (5)   Light trespass. Light trespass into the night sky and onto
neighboring properties shall be prevented through the use of such techniques as
horizontally mounted lamps with reflectors, glass, polycarbonate or acrylic
refractors, louvered optics, and house-side shields.
   (C)   Streetlights. Streetlighting shall comply with the following design
criteria and be required as described herein:
      (1)   Streetlighting shall be adequate to light all road intersections,
curves, cul-de-sacs, and entrances into, along, and within a development.
      (2)   Light column foundations shall extend no more than four inches
above finish grade, unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator, and
shall be installed in accordance to the Building Code and/or manufacturer
specifications.
      (3)   Luminaire light source shall be composed of high-power LEDs, or
light emitting diodes.
      (4)   All equipment, including but not limited to the light column,
luminaire and additional fixtures shall remain the property of the developer,
property owner, or the homeowners association who shall be responsible for all
of the maintenance of the equipment as well as all operational cost of the
equipment.
      (5)   Record drawings shall be provided in digital format to the Town
Manager upon completion of installation of the lighting system, the format to
use the Auto-Cad software program or its approved equivalent.
      (6)   Streetlighting shall be placed away from the street on the backside
of the curb a minimum of one and one-half feet. If there is not a curb, the
lighting shall be placed one and one-half feet off of the roadside of the
sidewalk or multi-use path.
      (7)   At the time a subdivision or development is transferred from the
builder/developer to the HOA, the streetlights and all their components shall
be owned fee simple. Streetlight leases may not be transferred to an HOA.
      (8)   Notwithstanding other requirements of this section all streetlight
units shall include a pole, luminaire, and all other necessary parts and
equipment, and shall be placed at a minimum at all intersections, curves, cul-
de-sacs, and entrances to any development.
      (9)   All luminaires shall have a full cutoff light fixture and meet the
backlight, uplight, and glare ratings, commonly referred to as BUG rating,
specified below. The metrics for determining compliance with these ratings
shall be determined using the testing procedures and requirements identified by
the Illuminating Engineering Society (IES), and confirmation of compliance with
the ratings shall be provided by the lighting vendor, lighting manufacturer, or
other lighting professional.
         (a)   Backlight (B). Equal to or less than four;
         (b)   Uplight (U). Zero;
         (c)   Glare (G). Equal to or less than two.
      (10)   Streetlights, shall be required along CR 900N, CR 750N (W.
Broadway to eastern-end of Town Center), CR 600N, CR 600W (from the railroad
tracks to CR 750N), W. Broadway (from CR 750N to SR 234), and SR 234 (from SR
67 to the eastern-end of Town Center) as further described below:
         (a)   Streetlights shall be placed every 125 feet on center, directly
across the street from existing or planned streetlights;
         (b)   If a median is present, the Town Council may elect to allow
streetlighting to be placed within the median, at similar spacing. The Council
may require dual luminaires on such streetlights to ensure appropriate lighting
levels, or elect to use a streetlight with a mast arm(s);
         (c)   Streetlights shall have a maximum mounting height of 18 feet;
         (d)   All poles, bases, and components shall be black;
         (e)   All luminaires shall be LED;
         (f)   Direct-burial poles shall be prohibited;
         (g)   Streetlights shall be as shown in Exhibit A of Appendix C to
this chapter, or as otherwise approved by the Plan Commission.
      (11)   Streetlights, shall be required along CR 600W (from CR 1000N to
the railroad tracks and from CR 750N to the southern corporate limits) and W.
Broadway (from CR 700W to CR 750N and from SR 234 to the eastern corporate
limits) as further described below:
         (a)   Streetlights shall be placed every 125 feet on center, directly
across the street from existing or planned streetlights;
         (b)   If a median is present, the Town Council may elect to allow
streetlighting to be placed within the median, at similar spacing, or in
addition to the streetlight noted above. The Town Council may require dual
luminaires on such streetlights to ensure appropriate lighting levels, or elect
to use a streetlight with a mast arm(s);
         (c)   Streetlights shall have a maximum mounting height of 30 feet;
         (d)   All poles, bases, and components shall be black;
         (e)   All luminaires shall be LED;
         (f)   Direct-burial poles shall be prohibited;
         (g)   Streetlights shall be as shown in Exhibit B of Appendix C to
this chapter, or as otherwise approved by the Plan Commission.
      (12)   Streetlights shall be required along all new (public) local
streets as further described below:
         (a)   Streetlights shall be placed at a minimum of every 200 to 250
feet on property lines staggered on opposite sides of the street and at
intersections, curves, cul-de-sacs, and entrances to any development.
         (b)   Streetlights shall have a maximum mounting height of 18 feet;
         (c)   All poles, bases, and components shall be black;
         (d)   All luminaires shall be LED;
         (e)   Direct-burial poles shall be prohibited;
         (f)   Streetlights shall be as shown in Exhibit A of Appendix C to
this chapter, or as otherwise approved by the Plan Commission.
      (13)   If streetlighting is not required along a roadway, a streetlight
shall be installed at all intersections along the perimeter of proposed
development project. The type of streetlight, for perimeter intersections,
shall be determined by the Plan Commission.
   (D)   Illuminated canopy requirements. Lighting levels under canopies for
gas stations, convenience stores, drive-up banking centers, and similar
locations shall be adequate to facilitate the activities taking place on the
property and shall not be used for the purpose of illuminating signs. Such
lighting shall be in compliance with the following requirements:
      (1)   Lighting fixtures. Lighting fixtures on canopies shall comply with
either of the following requirements:
         (a)   All light fixtures mounted on the canopies shall be recessed so
that the lens cover is recessed or flush with the bottom surface (ceiling) of
the canopy, or
         (b)   The lighting of the canopy shall use indirect lighting through
which light is beamed upward and then reflected down from the underside of the
canopy by light fixtures that are shielded so that illumination is focused
exclusively on the underside of the canopy.
      (2)   Fixture location. Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides
of any canopy and the sides of the canopy shall not be illuminated. In no
instances shall this be interpreted as prohibiting the placement of signs on
the canopy which are illuminated consistent with the standards for sign
illumination in this section.
   (E)   Lighting of outdoor athletic/performance facilities. Lighting for all
outdoor athletic and performance facilities and events shall provide adequate
light for the event or facility while minimizing light pollution and the
illumination of adjacent streets and properties.
      (1)   Play/performance area lighting. Lighting fixtures for the playing
fields and/or performance areas shall be specifically mounted and aimed so that
their beams fall directly within the play/performance area and its immediate
surroundings and does not spill onto adjacent streets or properties.
      (2)   Dual lighting system. The use of spotlights and/or floodlights to
illuminate the play/performance area shall be permitted. However, each facility
shall be designed and constructed with a dual lighting system which permits the
main lighting for the event (spotlighting, floodlighting, and the like) to be
turned off, with an alternate low level lighting system used for clean-up,
night maintenance and other activities.
      (3)   Exemptions. Outdoor athletic fields and courts established as
accessory uses to single and two-family residences shall be exempt from these
requirements.
   (F)   Security lighting. Security lighting shall be coordinated with other
lighting on the property to the extent possible and shall otherwise be in
compliance with the following requirements:
      (1)   Non-residential lighting fixtures. All security lighting in non-
residential areas shall be shielded and specifically aimed so that illumination
is directed only to the intended area. The light source for any security
lighting shall include shields that prevent their light source or lens from
being visible from adjacent properties and/or streets. Security lighting
fixtures may be mounted on poles located no further than ten feet from the
perimeter of the area intended to be illuminated.
      (2)   Residential lighting fixtures. Security lighting fixtures in
residential areas shall make use of indirect and reflected lighting techniques
to provide soft lighting under canopies, entry porches, or soffits.
   (G)   Lighting of building facades. Building facades may be illuminated,
subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Lighting fixtures. Lighting fixtures shall be located, aimed, and
shielded so that light is directed only onto the building facade. Lighting
fixtures shall not be directed toward adjacent streets or roads.
      (2)   Lighting direction. Lighting fixtures shall be designed to wash the
facade of the building with light (rather than providing a spot or floodlight
affect) and may be directed upward or downward onto the facade. Exterior facade
lighting shall be contained on the building facade or in the landscape areas
adjacent to the building and shall focus on entries and architectural features.
   (H)   Sight lighting. Lighting for parking lots and other on-site lighting
not addressed elsewhere in this chapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   All light fixtures shall be fully recessed into the fixture
housing;
      (2)   All lighting fixtures and poles within a single development shall
be consistent in style, color, size, height, and design;
      (3)   All lighting fixtures and poles shall be decorative and compatible
with the architecture of the building;
      (4)   The maximum mounting height for free-standing lighting fixtures is
25 feet;
      (5)   Shielding may be required by the Administrative Officer to prevent
glare and other lighting concerns on adjacent properties and for the benefit of
the motoring public;
      (6)   Required pedestrian facilities in Town Center or Old Town must be
illuminated with pedestrian scaled lighting;
      (7)   Light levels at property lines (except along rights-of-way) are
limited to 0.3 footcandles. If a neighboring property is used for or zoned
residential the light level is further limited to 0.1 footcandles.
      (8)   If the development is an apartment complex, condominium or other
form of multi-living arrangement, the same requirements as set forth above
shall apply in addition to which the lighting fixtures at the entrances shall
be 5.0 foot-candles, the lighting around parking and building areas shall be
1.0 foot-candles.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 041216-A,
passed 4-12-2016; Ord. 111020C, passed 12-8-2020; Ord. 111423E, passed 12-12-
2023)
SIGN STANDARDS
§ 154.140 SIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   The intent of this subchapter is to further the goals of the
Comprehensive Plan; avoid the proliferation of signage; encourage signs to be
compatible with the scale of buildings and the surrounding features; maintain
and enhance the aesthetic environment of the community; eliminate potential
hazards to motorists and pedestrians resulting from signs; and promote the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents of McCordsville. Anyone wishing to
vary from the following standards is hereby required to obtain a development
standards variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Noncommercial messages may be displayed on any sign authorized to
display commercial messages.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 041216A, passed 4-12-2016)
§ 154.141 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   Refer to
Chapter 154, Appendix E, Sign Standards Matrix, for a list of permitted signs,
by zoning district. The following types of signs are hereby expressly
prohibited from being located within the jurisdiction of the Plan Commission.
   (A)   Individual pole signs. Individual pole signs, or individual free-
standing signs, are hereby prohibited from being located within the
jurisdiction of the Plan Commission.
   (B)   Portable signs. Unless expressly permitted by this subchapter, all
portable signs, including those involving any element of human movement are
hereby prohibited from being located within the jurisdiction of the Plan
Commission.
   (C)   Animated signs. Signs that utilize any flashing lights, motion
picture, laser, or visual projection of images or copy in conjunction with any
business or advertisement.
   (D)   Emissions. Signs that emit audible sound, odor or visible matter.
   (E)   Imitation of official signs. Signs that purport to be, are an
imitation of, or resemble an official traffic sign or signal or which bear the
words “Stop”, “Slow”, “Caution”, “Danger”, “Warning”, or similar words.
   (F)   Imitation of emergency vehicles. Signs that may be construed as a
light of an emergency or road equipment vehicle.
   (G)   Visual impairment. Signs that hide any traffic or roadway sign, signal
or device from view, or that interfere with the sight visibility standards as
defined by this chapter (see §
154.116).
   (H)   Encroachment. Unless otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter,
signs that are located in any planned right-of-way including those posted on
utility poles or street signs are prohibited. Projecting signs specified as
permitted in this subchapter and approved by the Town Council may be allowed to
encroach on the public rights-of-way, provided they remain otherwise lawful.
   (I)   Obstruction. Signs that obstruct any door, fire escape, stairway, or
any opening intended to provide entrance or exit for any structure.
   (J)   Vehicle signs. Signs placed on vehicles or trailers parked on public
or private property primarily for the purpose of displaying the sign, as
determined by the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee. Prohibited
vehicle signs do not include those displayed on vehicles parked for the purpose
of lawfully making deliveries, or sales or service calls. Prohibited signs do
not include vehicles which are customarily used for transporting persons or
properties, or vehicles parked at a driver’s place of residence during non-
business hours.
   (K)   Poster signs.  Posters, placards and other similar signs attached to
light poles, gas station canopy supports, trees, and elsewhere outdoors that
are not included as permitted temporary or permanent signs as described by this
subchapter.
   (L)   Permanent roof-mounted signs. Signs that are mounted to the roof of a
structure or are mounted to the wall of a structure and extend higher than the
wall of the structure.
   (M)   Inflatable signs. Inflatable signs are hereby expressly prohibited
from locating within the jurisdiction of the Plan Commission.
   (N)   People signs. Signs which are held by people, and not attached to a
building or the ground, that are within the right-of-way are expressly
prohibited.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 041216A, passed 4-12-2016)
§ 154.142 EXEMPT SIGNS.
   The following signs are exempt from all provisions of this chapter if in
compliance with the conditions specified for each. A sign permit shall not be
required.
   (A)   Minor wall signs. Permanent wall signs constructed using stone,
concrete, bronze, precious metals, brick, or other similar material and made an
integral part of the structure shall be permitted. No more than one such sign
shall be permitted per frontage, per building. The maximum size shall be four
square feet in a commercial, industrial, public/semi-public, or Town Center
zoning district, and one square foot in a residential and Old Town zoning
district.
   (B)   Minor ground signs. Minor ground signs, which shall be permanent in
manner, are permitted in commercial, industrial, and Town Center zoning
districts. Such signs are limited to no more than two and one-half square feet
of sign area and three and one-half feet in height, as measured from grade.
Such signs may be non-illuminated or internally illuminated. Internally
illuminated signs shall only illuminate sign content, not the entire sign
cabinet. Such signs shall be no closer than two feet from any existing or
planned right-of-way. No property, parcel, or lot shall have more than three
minor ground signs.
   (C)   Public signs. Public signs erected by or on the order of public
official(s) in the performance of public duty, such as signs to promote safety,
no trespassing, or traffic signs; memorial plaques; signs of historical
interest; and signs directing people to public facilities. All such public
signs shall require approval of the Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee.
   (D)   Utility marker signs. Utility signs necessary to mark cables and lines
for public and private utilities unless such signs are determined to be a
hazard by the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee.
   (E)   Emergency signs. Emergency signs, such as those used and authorized by
the Administrative Officer, Public Works Department, Utilities, Fire Department
or Police Department, or those places of employment that are required by law to
display emergency information for their employees.
   (F)   Window signs. No window sign shall exceed 10% of the window area, nor
shall any individual letter be greater than three inches in size.
   (G)   Yard signs. A free-standing sign constructed of lightweight and/or
non-durable materials intended to be displayed for a short period. All
properties may display a yard sign. Such signage shall be limited to three
square feet in sign area, and no more than four feet in height, as measured
from grade level. No more than one such sign, per frontage, shall be displayed
at one time. Such sign shall be allowed to be displayed no more than three
times per calendar year. Each time the sign is displayed is limited to no more
than 35 consecutive days. All such signs shall be placed a minimum of two feet
from any property line or right-of-way line. In no instance shall such a sign
be placed within an existing or planned right-of-way or private street. Such
sign shall not be illuminated. Additionally, any residential property of less
than one acre that is for-sale/lease is permitted an additional yard sign, in
compliance with the standards noted above, until the transaction closes.
   (H)   Supplementary wall signs. Each property in any residential and Old
Town zoning district is entitled to supplementary wall signage. Such signage
shall be limited to three square feet in sign area, and must be attached to the
primary structure of the lot. Additionally, the wall sign shall be located no
higher than 12 feet from grade. No more than one supplementary wall sign is
permitted per lot at any time. Supplementary wall signs shall be permitted up
to two times per calendar year. In no such instance shall a wall sign be up for
more than 120 consecutive days. Such sign shall not be illuminated.
   (I)   Traffic signs and pavement marker. Private directional traffic signs
and pavement markings intended to direct and control the movement of traffic
into, out of, and within the site shall comply with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices as published by the Indiana Department of
Transportation.
   (J)   Pond warning sign. Permanent pond safety signs are required for all
ponds constructed after the effective date of this chapter. The minimum size is
one square foot and the maximum size is two square feet. Such signs shall be
placed no more than 500 feet apart, with no less than four signs per pond. A
sign must be placed at all public access areas to the pond. Signs must be
constructed of wood, composite wood, or metal. At a minimum such signs shall
have the words “No Swimming” and “No Ice Skating,” along with the “No Swimming”
symbol. Such signs shall be installed by the developer and the subsequent
maintenance of such shall be the responsibility of the homeowners’ association
or property owners’ association. “No Swimming” and “No Ice Skating” signs shall
be posted at all detention and retention ponds in all developments. In
instances where a pond will be stocked with fish or where fishing may otherwise
be possible, a sign shall be installed warning that “anyone under the age of 18
must be accompanied by an adult.”
   (K)   A-frame signs. One A-frame sign may be permitted for each occupied
tenant space located on a property in a commercial, industrial, or Town Center
zoning district, provided the sign area does not exceed six square feet, and
the height does not exceed four feet, as measured from grade level. Such signs
are to be displayed outside only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(EST) or 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. (EDT). A-frame temporary signs may be located
within the right-of-way, provided the sign is at least five feet from the
nearest roadway’s travel or parking lane. Under no circumstance can any A-frame
sign be located more than ten feet from a primary structure. A-frame signage
cannot be displayed at the same time other temporary signage is displayed.
   (L)   Ground sign. As detailed in §
154.145(A)(3).
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 041216A,
passed 4-12-2016; Ord. 111020C, passed 12-8-2020)
§ 154.143 GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS.
   Except as otherwise expressly provided for by this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any property owner(s) to erect, construct, enlarge, move or
convert any sign within the jurisdiction of the Plan Commission, or cause the
same to be done without first obtaining a sign permit as required by this
chapter. The following general sign standards apply to all signs within the
jurisdiction of the Plan Commission.
   (A)   Measuring sign area and height. The sign area shall be calculated by
multiplying the maximum vertical dimension by the maximum horizontal dimension
including the extreme limits of characters, lettering or figures. The sign
height shall be measured from the grade at the edge of the adjacent right-of-
way to the highest point of the sign, and include any poles or other supports
unless otherwise specified in this subchapter. In no case shall sign height be
measured from the top of any berm or other artificial grade.
   (B)   Inspection. Signs for which a permit is required may be inspected
periodically by the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, for
compliance with this chapter.
   (C)   Removal of sign. The Administrative Officer, or his or her designee,
may order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of this
subchapter, at the cost of the property owner(s), consistent with the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (D)   Maintenance. All signs and their components shall be kept in good
repair and in safe, neat, clean, attractive, and structurally sound condition
as determined by the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee. Owners
shall repair or otherwise cause any sign not found to be in good repair and in
safe, neat, clean, attractive and structurally sound condition to comply with
this subchapter within ten days of notice of violation by the Administrative
Officer. Owners shall, within 30 days of the removal of a sign, and at the
owner's expense, patch and paint damaged areas when signs are removed.
   (E)   Abandoned sign structures. A sign structure, including all poles,
frames, supports, and other structural, electrical, mechanical, and other
elements, shall be removed by the owner(s) of the premises, at the owner’s
expense, upon which it is located if the property is unused for a period of six
months or longer. A sign face is also considered abandoned when the use to
which it relates is no longer in existence or operational for a period of at
least 30 days. In such a scenario the owner(s) of the sign structure shall have
the sign area noting the use no longer in existence or operational removed from
the sign structure and replaced with another sign or a sign blank. Under no
circumstances shall a sign face be removed and the inside of a cabinet sign be
exposed.
   (F)   Illuminated signs.  Internally and externally illuminated signs shall
be permitted, provided the illuminated sign complies with the following
provisions:
      (1)   All illuminated signs shall meet the standards as specified in the
National Electrical Code. Signs that are only partially illuminated shall meet
all electrical requirements for that portion that is illuminated.
      (2)   All electrical wiring shall be in conduit and not exposed to the
elements or external stress.
      (3)   The full number of illuminating elements shall be kept in
satisfactory working condition or immediately repaired or replaced.
      (4)   Neither the direct nor reflected light from an illuminated sign
shall create a traffic hazard to operators of motorized vehicles on any
roadway.
      (5)   The light from any illuminated sign in any zoning district shall be
shaded, shielded, or directed to prevent spillage onto adjacent properties. In
no instance shall the light intensity or brightness exceed 0.3 foot-candles at
the property line of any adjacent property located in a residential zoning
district, or 0.5 foot candles at the property line of any adjacent property
located in a non-residential zoning district.
      (6)   All illuminated signs shall have a disconnecting switch located in
a readily accessible place.
      (7)   See additional limitations set forth for changeable copy and
electronic message board signs in this subchapter.
   (G)   Enforcement. The enforcement of violations of the provisions of this
subchapter shall be as provided by this chapter.
   (H)   Vacant land. Properties without a primary structure shall not be
permitted a permanent sign.
   (I)   Sign tags/stickers. The Zoning Administrator and/or his or her
designee may place tags/stickers indicating a sign is approved and, if the sign
is temporary or exempt, the applicable expiration date on any sign within town
limits.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 041216-A, passed 4-12-2016)
§ 154.144 SIGN DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS, GENERAL.
   (A)   Design. All signage shall be designed to be an integral part of the
architectural and landscaping plans.
   (B)   Compatibility. The colors, materials, and style of signage shall be
architecturally compatible and accentuate the buildings and landscaping on the
site. The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and
harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates. In no
instance shall a sign compete with or obstruct the visibility of the signage of
an adjacent property so long as the signage of the adjacent property is also in
compliance with this chapter.
   (C)   Scale and proportion.  Every sign shall be designed so as to be
proportionate with the scale and design of the principal building to which it
relates as well as the surrounding area, as determined by the Administrative
Officer, or his or her designee.
   (D)   Graphic elements. The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be
held to the minimum needed to convey the sign’s major message and shall be
composed in proportion to the area of the sign face.
   (E)   Sign components. All sign components shall meet or exceed Underwriters
Laboratories (UL) specifications.
   (F)   Double-faced sign. Unless otherwise prohibited by this subchapter, all
signs permitted by this subchapter may be constructed as a double-faced sign.
In these instances, only the sign area of one of the two sides shall be used to
calculate sign area, provided that the two sides are identical and placed back-
to-back, and that the maximum distance between the two sides does not exceed
two feet at any point.
   (G)   Wall sign dimension. All wall signs using letters shall utilize
individually mounted letters affixed directly on a wall or raceway. A wall sign
may incorporate the use of a cabinet sign; however, the cabinet is limited to
25% of the permitted sign area.
   (H)   Sign removal. When a wall sign is removed from the façade of a
building all previous mounting holes and ghosting images shall be removed and
the façade shall match the existing condition of the building. The property
owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and restoration of the building
façade at the time the existing sign is removed.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 041216-A, passed 4-12-2016)
§ 154.145 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   In addition to the signs permitted by this subchapter, the following
temporary signage may be permitted as described and restricted below. A permit
shall be required each time a temporary sign is to be used, unless otherwise
denoted herein. All temporary signs shall meet the following requirements:
   (B)   Temporary signs are permitted in all zoning districts as detailed
herein.
      (1)   Types of temporary signs permitted:
         (a)   Ground sign. A free-standing sign constructed of rigid materials
intended to be displayed for a designated period.
         (b)   Wall sign. A hanging, or mounted sign, usually to a building,
constructed of vinyl, fabric, or similar material intended to be displayed for
a designated period. Such signs are not to be attached to fences, balconies,
railings, or grounds.
      (2)   Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
      (3)   Sign standards.
         (a)   Residential lots less than three acres in size shall be
permitted to display one ground sign per frontage, at a time. Ground signs are
limited to five feet in height and six square feet in sign area. Ground signs
on such properties are considered exempt signs and do not require a permit.
         (b)   Residential lots three acres or larger shall be permitted to
display one ground sign per frontage, at a time. Ground signs are limited to
eight feet in height and 32 square feet in sign area. ground signs on such
properties require a temporary sign permit.
         (c)   Non-residential lots less than one acre in size shall be
permitted to display one ground sign per frontage, at a time. Ground signs are
limited to six feet in height and 12 square feet in sign area. Ground signs on
such properties require a temporary sign permit.
         (d)   Non-residential lots one acre or larger in size shall be
permitted to display one ground sign per frontage, at a time. Ground signs are
limited to eight feet in height and 32 square feet in sign area. An additional
ground sign shall be permitted to be displayed so long as the sign does not
face a public right-of-way or adjacent property and is located at least 50 feet
from any property line. This additional sign is permitted to be constructed of
non-rigid material. Ground signs on such properties require a temporary sign
permit.
         (e)   In addition to the allowances above for non-residential lots,
such non- residential lots which also feature a non-residential primary
structure(s) shall be permitted one wall sign per occupied tenant space on the
ground floor, but under no circumstance shall more than three wall signs be
displayed on one property at a time. Wall signs are limited to 24 square feet
in sign area and require a sign permit.
         (f)   Subdivision entrance common area lots shall be permitted to
display one ground sign per frontage, at a time. Ground signs are limited to
eight feet in height and 32 square feet in sign area. Ground signs on such
properties require a temporary sign permit.
         (g)   Residential properties featuring a model home shall be permitted
to display one additional ground sign meeting the size limitations detailed
above. Both ground signs may be permitted to remain on the property until the
model home is no longer available for viewing by the public.
         (h)   Setbacks. Ground signs greater than 12 square feet shall be
required to be setback a minimum of five feet from the right-of-way. Ground
signs 12 square feet or less shall be required to be setback a minimum of two
feet from the right-of-way. No signage shall be located in the vision clearance
triangle or allowed to restrict driver views as determined by the Town
Engineer.
         (i)   Time limits. Ground sign displays shall be limited to the
duration of the requested advertisement period, but under no circumstance shall
exceed 12 months. A ground sign permit may be extended administratively for up
to an additional 12 months by the Zoning Administrator. Any further extensions
require the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals. Wall signs display shall
be limited to 30 days. A wall sign permit may be extended administratively for
up to an additional 30 days by the Zoning Administrator. Any further extensions
require the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
         (j)   Removal. Temporary signs must be removed upon conclusion of
their permitted display duration and may not be issued another permit for a
minimum of 30 days, unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator.
         (k)   Conversion to a permanent sign. No sign manufactured, designed,
or otherwise intended for use as a temporary sign shall be used as a permanent
sign.
         (l)   Any non-residential tenant, who has been issued a new
certificate of occupancy from the town, shall be granted an additional
temporary ground sign for a period up to 30 days. This additional sign
allowance must occur within 90 days of the certificate of occupancy being
issued and may be displayed at the same time other permitted temporary signage
is displayed. Sign size shall be limited as set forth above in divisions (B)(3)
(c) and (d).
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 041216-A,
passed 4-12-2016; Ord. 010819, passed 2-12-2019; Ord. 111020C, passed 12-8-
2020)
§ 154.146 SIGNS FOR GROUND FLOOR USES.
   The signs for ground floor uses shall meet the following standards. These
standards shall also apply to any business use occupying multiple floors, and
including ground floor uses. A permit shall be required unless otherwise
specified in this subchapter.
   (A)   Sign area.  The aggregate sign area shall be equivalent to one and
one-half square feet for every one linear foot per tenant/business use with
frontage on a public right-of-way or private street.
      (1)   In no instance shall the aggregate sign area for any tenant/
business use exceed the aggregate sign area denoted in
Appendix E following this chapter.
      (2)   The number of graphic elements per sign shall be held to the
minimum needed to convey the sign's primary message and shall be composed in
proportion to the overall sign area.
   (B)   Number of signs. A maximum of two signs, selected from the list of
permitted sign types below, shall be allowed per tenant/business use.
Additionally, no parcel, lot, or site shall feature more than one ground sign
per frontage. No tenant/business shall have more than one wall sign per
frontage.
   (C)   Sign types permitted.  The following types of signs or sign components
are permitted as regulated by this chapter and
Appendix E  following this chapter:
      (1)   Wall sign;
      (2)   Awning sign;
      (3)   Projecting sign;
      (4)   Free-standing/unified development sign;
      (5)   Ground/monument sign;
      (6)   Changeable copy;
      (7)   Electronic message board sign;
      (8)   Time and temperature sign component; or
      (9)   Fuel station LED pricing component.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014)
§ 154.147 SIGNS FOR UPPER-FLOOR USES.
   (A)   Signage for an upper-floor use may be permitted provided:
      (1)   The upper-floor of the structure is occupied by a single use that
is separate and distinct from the use located on the ground floor;
      (2)   There is only one square foot of sign area for every one linear
foot of building frontage; and
      (3)   The total square footage of the upper-floor sign does not exceed 50
square feet in total area.
   (B)   In the event that the upper-floor sign is a wall sign, the wall sign
shall be located on the structure between the eaves, cornice or other roof
element and the top of windows on the uppermost floor.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.148 SIGN DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS, BY TYPE.
   (A)   Below are the permanent sign standards for commercial, industrial and
Town Center zoning district. Only the sign types below are permitted.
      (1)   Unified development sign. All freestanding unified development
signage shall be permitted in lieu of other ground signage. Unified
developments must be of a size of at least five acres to erect a unified
development sign for the purpose of allowing several businesses the ability to
use the sign on a single sign structure. All other signage for the development
shall be as prescribed by this chapter; however, as noted above unified
development signage is only permitted in lieu of other ground signage. All
free-standing unified development signs shall comply with the following
provisions:
         (a)   Free-standing unified development signs. Free-standing unified
development signs shall be ground-mounted monument style signs and meets the
following minimum standards:
            A.   The maximum height of a free-standing unified development sign
shall be ten feet for all unified developments greater than five acres and less
than 20 acres. The maximum height of a free-standing unified development sign
shall be 16 feet for unified developments equal to or greater than 20 acres. In
no instance shall a free-standing unified development sign exceed the height of
the tallest building.
            B.   The maximum surface area of all free-standing unified
development signs shall be 100 square feet for all unified developments greater
than five acres and less than 20 acres. The maximum surface area of all free-
standing unified development signs shall be 150 square feet for all unified
developments greater than 20 acres.
      (2)   Ground sign. A maximum of one ground sign per public roadway
frontage is permitted for each lot, property, parcel, or site provided it does
not exceed 36 square feet in sign area or six feet in height as measured from
grade level. Ground signs shall be no closer than ten feet from any existing or
planned public right-of-way. All ground sign structures shall be constructed of
decorative brick, stone, or other masonry, stucco, wood or metal, with the base
of the structure constructed of decorative brick or stone. Landscaping
consisting of shrubs and perennial groundcover shall be provided at the base of
all ground/monument signs with a minimum of two square feet per one square foot
of sign area. Under no circumstance shall any lot, parcel, property, or site
have more than two ground signs.
      (3)   Wall sign. A maximum of one wall sign per public roadway frontage
is permitted for each primary structure or occupied tenant space (within a
primary structure). Wall signs shall be located on the façade of the primary
structure facing a public street. In no instance shall a wall sign exceed 50%
of the maximum sign area, nor shall a wall sign project more than 12 inches
from the wall. Additionally, no sign shall be placed in or on an architectural
designed area of a structure that is created for the sole purpose of gaining
more signage or additional height for the wall sign. Wall sign area shall be
limited as follows:
         (a)   The aggregate sign area shall be equivalent to one and one-half
square feet for every one linear foot per tenant space with frontage on a
public right-of-way street.
         (b)   In no instance shall the aggregate sign area for any tenant
space exceed the aggregate sign area noted in
Appendix E following this chapter.
         (c)   The number of graphic elements per sign shall be held to the
minimum needed to convey the sign’s primary message and shall be composed in
proportion to the overall sign area.
      (4)   Awning sign. Awning signs shall be considered as a type of wall
sign and shall count toward the total number and total area of wall signs
permitted by this subchapter. Awning signs shall be limited to those printed or
sewn on awnings mounted on the façade of the principal structure. In no
instance shall an awning sign be backlit, nor shall the awning itself be closer
than eight and one-half feet from grade level.
      (5)   Projecting sign. No projecting sign shall, at its lowest point with
the exception of the supporting building, structure, or column, be less than
eight and one-half feet above grade level. A maximum of one such sign per
business or building shall be permitted. In no instance shall a projecting sign
exceed 24 square feet, nor protrude more than four feet from the building.
Proof of insurance shall be required for all projecting signs. For the purpose
of administering and enforcing this provision, proof of insurance shall mean
proof of insurance with liability limits in amounts subject to the
Administrative Officer’s approval or as established by the Board of Zoning
Appeals. Projecting signs shall be considered wall signs.
      (6)   Changeable copy. Changeable copy signs are permitted provided the
changeable copy does not change more than once in 60 minutes time and does not
exceed 50% of the aggregate permitted sign area. For the purposes of
administering and enforcing this chapter, changeable copy signs shall display a
static message rather than a message that imitates movement and shall not be
interpreted as electronic message boards.
      (7)   Electronic message boards. Electronic message boards are permitted
provided they meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Location. In any district, an EMB shall be located on the site
of the use identified or advertised by the sign. EMBs shall only be permitted
in commercial regional and public/semi-public districts. In no instance shall
an EMB be located within 125 feet of a signalized intersection.
         (b)   Setback from residential districts. The leading edge of any EMB
shall be a minimum distance of 300 feet from any single-family residential
district or use and 200 feet from any multi-family residential district or use
unless the multi-family district or use is part of a mixed use development.
         (c)   Setback from other electronic message boards. An EMB shall be
separated from all other EMBs by at least 300 feet.
         (d)   Orientation. When located within 500 feet of a single-family
residential use wherein the residential use is located within a residential
district, all parts of the electronic message board shall be oriented so that
no portion of the sign face is visible from any existing or permitted principal
structure on the residential lot.
         (e)   Duration. In no instance shall the image of an EMB update,
flash, scroll, twirl, change color, fade in or out, or be anything other than
static, more than once in 60 minutes time.
         (f)   Hours of operation. When located within 500 feet of a
residential use, an EMB shall not be illuminated between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
         (g)   Brightness. In no instance shall an EMB exceed 460 foot-candles
during daylight hours or 46 foot-candles for the time period between one-half
hour before sunset and one-half hour after sunrise. For the purposes of
administering and enforcing this provision, all EMBs shall be equipped with an
ambient dimmer control and a black background.
         (h)   Size. The maximum EMB sign area shall be 24 square feet.
      (8)   Fuel station pump decals. In addition to the signage permitted
elsewhere in this chapter, fuel stations may incorporate the following into
their fuel pumps:
         (a)   Fuel stations may place a maximum of two square feet of signage
on each vehicle fuel dispenser (double-sided) having a maximum of two square
feet per side of each dispenser.
      (9)   Pedestrian blade signs. In addition to signage permitted elsewhere
in this subchapter, multi-tenant commercial buildings may feature pedestrian-
oriented blade signage on the ground floor with the following restrictions:
         (a)   One sign per tenant.
         (b)   Max sign area of four square feet.
         (c)   Maximum projection from the building facade of three feet.
         (d)   Minimum eight feet from grade.
         (e)   Non-illuminated.
   (B)   Below are the permanent sign standards for residential and Old Town
zoning districts:
      (1)   Types of signs. One double-faced or two single-sided ground type
signs shall be permitted at each entrance to a platted subdivision, apartment
complex, or other residential development from a public roadway that is
classified as a collector or arterial, as identified on the Town’s Thoroughfare
Plan Map. However, under no circumstance shall any subdivision, apartment
complex, or other residential development be permitted more than three double-
faced or six single-sided ground mounted type signs. The sign structure, or
structures, shall require a sign permit. Subdivision entrance signs,
landscaping, and decorative walls shall be shown on development plans, site
plans, and subdivision plats. No other permanent signs are permitted in the
residential of Old Town zoning districts.
      (2)   Sign area. In no instance shall the sign area of a subdivision
entry ground sign exceed 32 square feet.
      (3)   Height. In no instance shall the height of a subdivision entry
ground sign exceed six feet as measured from grade level. In no instance shall
mounding or other alterations of the natural grade level be used as a point of
reference for measuring sign height.
      (4)   Setback. With the exception of subdivision entry ground signs
placed within a median of a boulevard, each sign structure shall be set back a
minimum of two feet from any planned right-of-way of any public street. In no
instance shall a subdivision entry ground sign be placed within a required
sight visibility standard (§ 154.117).
      (5)   Features. Ground mounted subdivision entry signs shall incorporate
design features into the structure such as decorative brick or stone walls,
lighting and landscaping.
      (6)   Landscaping. A minimum of two square feet of landscaping consisting
of shrubs and perennial ground cover at the base of the sign structure shall be
required for every one square foot of sign area.
   (C)   Below are the permanent sign standards for public/semi-public zoning
districts:
      (1)   Types of signs.
         (a)   One ground type sign shall be permitted per parcel, lot,
property, or site. A parcel, lot, property, or site greater than five acres may
feature one ground sign per public roadway frontage, but under no circumstance
shall any parcel, lot, property, or site exceed two ground signs.
         (b)   One wall sign shall be permitted per primary structure.
         (c)   No other permanent signs are permitted in the public/semi-public
zoning district.
      (2)   Sign area. In no instance shall a ground sign exceed 36 square
feet. In no instance shall a wall sign exceed one and one-half square feet of
sign area per one lineal foot of building frontage, nor shall it exceed 50% of
the maximum sign area, nor shall a wall sign project more than 12 inches from
the wall.
      (3)   Height. In no instance shall the height of a ground sign exceed six
feet as measured from grade level. In no instance shall mounding or other
alterations of the natural grade level be used as a point of reference for
measuring sign height. Wall signs shall be located on the facade of the primary
structure facing a public or private street. Additionally, no sign shall be
placed in or on an architectural designed area of a structure that is created
for the sole purpose of gaining more signage or additional height for the wall
sign.
      (4)   Setback. With the exception of subdivision entry ground signs
placed within a median of a boulevard, each sign structure shall be set back a
minimum of two feet from any planned right-of-way of any public street. In no
instance shall a subdivision entry ground sign be placed within a required
sight visibility standard (§
154.117).
      (5)   Features. Ground mounted subdivision entry signs shall incorporate
design features into the structure such as decorative brick or stone walls,
lighting and landscaping.
      (6)   Landscaping. A minimum of two square feet of landscaping consisting
of shrubs and perennial ground cover at the base of the sign structure shall be
required for every one square foot of sign area.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 041216-A,
passed 4-12-2016; Ord. 111020C, passed 12-8-2020)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
§ 154.160 PURPOSE, INTENT, USES, AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and Intent. The purpose of these regulations is to provide
greater design flexibility in the development of land when consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan and the intent of this chapter and
Chapter 153, the zoning and subdivision control ordinances. Planned unit
development (PUD) regulations are intended to encourage innovations in land
development techniques so that unique opportunities and circumstances may be
met with greater flexibility. Planned unit developments should be used to
address unique environmental concerns, provide a unique mix of land uses, and
implement the Comprehensive Plan in ways not considered by the established
zoning districts. A planned unit development should not be used if the proposed
development can be created using established zoning districts.
   (B)   Uses. All uses are subject to the discretion and approval of the Town
Council. Once uses are approved by the Council, they are granted by right or by
special exception, as outlined in this subchapter. All land uses proposed in a
planned unit development should be compatible with the intent of the
Comprehensive Plan and the characteristics of surrounding land uses and zoning
districts.
   (C)   Development requirements. Development requirements for all proposed
planned unit developments shall be created by the applicant as part of the PUD
submittal. All proposed development requirements are subject to the review and
approval of the Plan Commission and the Town Council. Generally, the planned
unit development shall provide standards for the development that replace (1)
the lot standards established by §§
154.040 and
154.041, and (2) each topic area regulated by §§
154.110 through
154.121.
   (D)   Rules and procedures. All proceedings brought under this subchapter
are subject to the rules and procedures of the Plan Commission.
   (E)   Limitation of subchapter amendments. Any initiative of the Plan
Commission to amend this subchapter that would affect an approved planned unit
development before its completion shall not be enforced on the planned unit
development, except unless so provided within this subchapter. New amendments
to this subchapter shall only apply to planned unit developments that have been
declared abandoned, or for which an approval has expired.
   (F)   Origination of proposals. Any applicant may propose a planned unit
development district in accordance with the procedures established in this
subchapter. A parcel or site proposed for a planned unit development may or may
not be under single ownership. However, if not under single ownership, the
multiple owners must have a contractual agreement (1) not to develop the
parcels separately, but in accordance with a single, unified plan, and (2) in
which the separate owners have given their express intentions to enter into
such private agreements and to assure its completion as planned and to the
satisfaction of the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 121322C, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.161 GENERAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All applications may be obtained through the town online permit system. Fees
shall be paid prior to the public hearing or when invoiced by the town,
whichever occurs first.
   (A)   Application forms. All applications shall be made on forms provided by
the Administrative Officer. All applicants shall submit applications by
electronic means.
   (B)   Review schedule. All applications shall be assigned reference and/or
docket numbers by the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee.
Applications shall be scheduled by the Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee, for the appropriate public hearings based on the completeness of the
application consistent with the requirements of this subchapter and the adopted
calendar of filing and meeting dates for the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 121322C, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.162 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the planned unit development
ordinance is to provide a formal opportunity for the applicant and the Plan
Commission to discuss the elements of the proposed PUD ordinance. The PUD
ordinance dictates all design and development standards that will apply to the
real estate.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting required. A PUD ordinance shall only be filed
after the petitioner has met with the Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee, to discuss the request.
   (C)   Application. The applicant shall submit a PUD ordinance application,
an affidavit and consent of property owner(s) (if the owner is someone other
than the petitioner), concept plan (as described herein), and any other
supporting information.
   (D)   PUD ordinance data. The PUD ordinance may take the form of a booklet
filed electronically. The following shall be included in the PUD ordinance
submission:
      (1)   Site description. A description of the property involved,
including:
         (a)   The legal description of the subject property and common address
of the site; and
         (b)   The proposed name of the development (if applicable).
      (2)   Common holdings map. A map of any property adjacent to the property
subject to the PUD ordinance owned or otherwise controlled by any or all of the
petitioners. The common holdings map shall be accompanied by a general
description of the future development of that property and its relationship to
the area included in the PUD ordinance.
      (3)   Sewerage verification. A letter verifying that proper waste
disposal will be available to the property. A letter from the Sewer Utility
shall be included verifying that the proposed development shall be served, if
requested by the Town Engineer.
      (4)   Existing site conditions. Aerial imagery of the subject site, with
the following information superimposed on the imagery:
         (a)   Easements. All existing easements and an indication of their
purpose.
         (b)   Topography. A topographic survey of the area with contour lines
a maximum of two feet apart.
         (c)   Natural features. The location of natural streams, regulated
drains, 100-year floodplains and floodways, water courses, wetlands (as
identified by IDNR, IDEM, or an individual with a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Regulation 4 Jurisdictional Wetland Certification), wooded areas, and isolated
trees that are able to be preserved (with greater than an eight-inch DCH).
         (d)   Historic features. An identification of any historic features,
specifically those listed as outstanding, notable, or contributing on the
Indiana Historic Sites and Structures Inventory - Hancock County Interim Report
or listed in the National Register of Historic Places and/or Indiana Register
of Historic Sites and Structures.
         (e)   Right-of-way. Dimensioned measurements depicted existing rights-
of-way either on the subject parcel or immediately adjacent.
         (f)   Utilities. Any utilities or utility facilities existing on the
subject property.
         (g)   Other significant features. Any other significant feature(s)
that may influence the design of the development.
      (5)   Proposed development. A concept plan of the proposed development of
the property, including:
         (a)   Street systems. The layout and design of proposed street systems
(including on-street parking, sidewalks, and the like);
         (b)   Land uses. The land use areas and number of acres within the
development (including a specific list of the individual land uses permitted in
each area and densities of any proposed residential uses);
         (c)   Open space. The proposed location, improvements to open space
(including park facilities, natural areas, trail systems, and other common
areas);
         (d)   Landscaping. The conceptual design of landscaping, buffering,
and/or screening proposed for the development, wooded areas to be preserved;
         (e)   Natural features. Any natural features that will be preserved,
conserved, or impact the overall site design shall be shown. A tree inventory
may be required at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, Plan Commission,
or Town Council.
         (f)   Historic features. Any historic features that will be preserved,
conserved, or impact the overall site design shall be shown.
         (g)   A concept plan which complies with §
153.016 and provides all necessary information for consideration as a primary
plat, may be considered a primary plat. If the Plan Commission finds the
concept plan meets the requirements for a primary plat, provides a favorable
recommendation on the PUD ordinance, and the Town Council adopts the PUD
ordinance, the concept plan shall be considered the approved concept plan and
primary plat for the applicable real estate. In the case that the Plan
Commission finds the concept plan not in compliance, but otherwise provides a
favorable recommendation on the PUD ordinance, the petition shall be required
to file a primary plat and follow the procedures of §§
153.015 through
153.017. If the Plan Commission offers a negative recommendation or no
recommendation on the PUD ordinance, and the Town Council approves the PUD
ordinance, the primary plat shall be required to be re-filed with the Plan
Commission and a new public hearing date set. If the Town Council denies the
PUD ordinance, regardless of the Plan Commission’s action on the petition both
the PUD ordinance and the primary plat shall be considered denied.
      (6)   Development requirements. Detailed text documenting the development
requirements that will apply to development (including general lot size and
dimensions, building setbacks, off-street
parking requirements, lighting standards, sign standards, landscaping
requirements, and the like).
      (7)   Written commitments. A description of any written commitments that
are being proposed as part of the development that are not encapsulated within
the PUD ordinance.
      (8)   Covenants. A description of any private covenants and restrictions
that will be established for the development, may be required at the rezone
stage if requested by the Zoning Administrator.
      (9)   Drainage. A detailed drainage concept meeting the requirements of
the Town Engineer.
      (10)   Project phasing. A statement of the proposed order of development
of the major elements of the project, including phasing, if applicable, and the
order and content of each phase.
      (11)   Supplemental information. Any other information requested by the
Administrative Officer, Plan Commission, or Town Council to aid in the review
of the PUD ordinance. This may include, but is not limited to: topic areas such
as traffic; utilities; tree preservation; flood hazards; and architectural
design standards.
   (E)   Technical Review Committee review. The concept plan shall be reviewed
by a Technical Review Committee.
   (F)   Concept plan requirements. Planned unit developments shall be required
to comply with
Chapter 153, the subdivision control ordinance, (per I.C. 36-7-4-1513) and the
provisions of § 154.208, or this chapter. In no instance shall the approval of
a PUD be interpreted as waiving or modifying any subdivision control ordinance
or site development plan processes. The concept plan and/or site development
plan may be filed simultaneously for review by the Plan Commission.
   (G)   Architectural Review Committee review.
      (1)   Any proposed project shall provide architectural renderings and
drawings of the proposed product to be constructed. If a specific product has
not been selected, the petitioner shall provide illustrative architectural
renderings or pictures that are in keeping with architectural elements and
character required by the PUD ordinance.
      (2)   The Architectural Review Committee (ARC) shall review the materials
to determine whether the proposed architectural character, building massing,
scale, and overall aesthetic is appropriate for the subject real estate and
whether the proposal is in keeping with the spirit and intent of the PUD
ordinance. Any elements of the Comprehensive Plan, related to building massing,
scale, building form, and the like shall also be taken into consideration.
      (3)   The ARC shall provide a recommendation no later than 60 days
following the date the of the petition’s complete application filing.
      (4)   Possible action.
         (a)   Favorable recommendation. The proposed architectural elements
shall be forwarded with a favorable recommendation if it is found to be
consistent with the decision criteria listed above. Favorable recommendations
may include suggested conditions for the Plan Commission’s consideration.
         (b)   Unfavorable recommendation. The application shall be forwarded
with an unfavorable recommendation if it is found to be inconsistent with the
decision criteria listed above. Unfavorable recommendations may include
suggested conditions for the Plan Commission’
         (c)   No recommendation. The application may be forwarded with no
recommendation if it is found that the application includes aspects that the
ARC is not able to evaluate. The ARC may also forward a no recommendation in
the event the ARC would like to request the Plan Commission provide the ARC
with additional time to review the petition. The Plan Commission shall not be
bound to provide a continuance. No recommendations may include suggested
conditions for the Plan Commission’s consideration.
         (d)   Continued. The application may be continued based on a request
by the ARC, Administrative Officer or petitioner. The application shall be
continued in the case of an indecisive vote wherein the item is essentially
tabled, a determination by the ARC that additional information is required
prior to action being taken on the request, or if an appropriate representative
of the application fails to appear at the public hearing.
      (5)   Following an ARC recommendation, the petition shall be placed on
the next available Plan Commission agenda and set for a public hearing.
   (H)   Public hearing notification. Notification for the scheduled public
hearing regarding the PUD ordinance shall be completed consistent with the
requirements of this chapter and the rules and procedures of the Plan
Commission.
   (I)   Plan Commission public hearing. The Plan Commission will, in a public
hearing scheduled consistent with the adopted calendar of filing and meeting
dates (but no later than 60 days following the receipt of a complete PUD
ordinance application), review the application and required supporting
information.
      (1)   Representation. Either the applicant or a representative of the
applicant must be present at the public hearing to present the application and
address any questions the Commission may have.
      (2)   Presentations. The Plan Commission shall consider a report from the
Administrative Officer and/or Technical Review Committee and testimony from the
petitioner, remonstrators, and other interested parties at the hearing. The
presentation of reports and testimony and all other aspects of the public
hearing shall be consistent with the rules and procedures of the Plan
Commission.
      (3)   Possible action. The Plan Commission will in concurrence with
established rules and procedure review the application and required supporting
information. The PUD ordinance shall be forwarded to the Town Council with a
favorable recommendation, forwarded with an unfavorable recommendation,
forwarded with no recommendation or continued by the Commission. Per I.C. 36-7-
4-1512 the Plan Commission may impose conditions or require written commitments
from the applicant.
         (a)   Favorable recommendation. The PUD ordinance application shall be
forwarded with a favorable recommendation if it is found to be consistent with
the decision criteria listed below.
         (b)   Unfavorable recommendation. The application shall be forwarded
with an unfavorable recommendation if it is found to be inconsistent with the
decision criteria listed below.
         (c)   No recommendation. The application may be forwarded with no
recommendation only if it is found that the application includes aspects that
the Commission is not able to evaluate.
         (d)   Continued. The application may be continued based on a request
by the Administrative Officer or petitioner. The application shall be continued
in the case of an indecisive vote wherein the item is essentially tabled, a
determination by the Plan Commission that additional information is required
prior to action being taken on the request, or if an appropriate representative
of the application fails to appear at the public hearing.
            1.   Additional legal notice shall not be required unless specified
by the Plan Commission.
            2.   The continuing of all applications shall be consistent with
the adopted rules and procedures of the Plan Commission.
      (4)   Certification of recommendations. The Plan Commission shall certify
its recommendation by resolution to the Town Council within ten business days
of its decision. The Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, shall
forward to the Town Council appropriate copies of the Plan Commission certified
decision.
   (J)   Town Council meeting. The Town Council shall hold a meeting and vote
on the proposed PUD district ordinance (rezoning) within 90 days of its
certification by the Plan Commission.
      (1)   Legal notice. Legal notice of action on the ordinance shall be
provided consistent with Indiana law.
      (2)   Possible action. The Town Council may either approve or deny the
PUD district ordinance (rezoning) consistent with the decision criteria
provided by this section. The Town Council also may approve with modifications
per I.C. 36-7-4-1512: such as impose conditions, require written commitments
from the applicant, and/or condition the release of improvement location
permits on the provision of adequate surety for any public improvements.
         (a)   Failure to act. If the Town Council fails to act within the 90-
day time frame the ordinance shall become effective or be defeated consistent
with the recommendation of the Plan Commission and the provisions for rezoning
petitions of I.C. 36-7-4-608.
         (b)   Denial. If a PUD district ordinance (rezoning) is denied by the
Town Council a one-year waiting period shall be imposed prior to the filing of
a new preliminary plan for the same development.
         (c)   Reject or amend. If the Town Council rejects or amend the
proposal, it shall be returned to the Plan Commission for its consideration,
with a written statement of the reasons for the rejection or amendment. The
Commission has 45 days in which to consider the rejection or amendment and
report to the Town Council as follows:
            1.   If the Commission approves the amendment or fails to act
within the 45-day period, the ordinance stands as passed by the Town Council as
of the date of the filing of the Commission’s report of approval with the Town
Council or the end of the 45-day period.
            2.   If the Commission disapproves the rejection or amendment, the
action of the Town Council on the original rejection or amendment stands only
if confirmed by another vote of the Town Council within 45 days after the
Commission certifies it disapproval. If the Town Council fails to confirm its
action, then the ordinance takes effect in the manner provided by I.C. 36-7-4-
606(f).
         (d)   Approval. If the Town Council approves the rezoning, the land is
officially rezoned upon the recording of the rezoning ordinance and any written
commitments. The official zoning map must be amended to reflect the zoning
change, the date of approval by the Town Council, and the ordinance number.
   (K)   PUD ordinance decision criteria. In reviewing the PUD ordinance
petition, the Plan Commission and Town Council shall pay reasonable regard to
the following, consistent with I.C. 36-7-4-603:
      (1)   Requirements and intent. The extent to which the proposal fulfills
the requirements and intent of this subchapter and
Chapter 153.
      (2)   Planning documents. The Comprehensive Plan and any other
applicable, adopted planning studies or reports.
      (3)   Characteristics. The current conditions and the character of
current structures and uses in each zoning district.
      (4)   Desired use. The most desirable use of which the land in each
district is adapted.
      (5)   Property values. The conservation of collective property values
throughout the town.
      (6)   Growth management. Responsible growth and development.
      (7)   Overlay requirements. Consistency with the requirements of all
applicable overlay districts.
   (L)   Expiration of PUD ordinance. The development plan filing shall occur
within 18 months of the date of PUD ordinance approval. If no development plan
filing has occurred within that period, the PUD ordinance approval shall
expire. An extension may be granted upon request to the Plan Commission at
their discretion without the need for a public hearing. If the project is
phased and was part of the PUD ordinance, the petitioner may submit partial
development plans which correspond to the phases involved.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 121322C, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.163 DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Shall follow the process and procedures outlined in §
154.208. If subdivision of land is required the process and procedures for
primary and secondary platting, outlined in
Chapter 153 shall apply.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting required.  A planned unit development final
detailed plan shall only be filed after the petitioner has met with the
Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, to discuss the request.
   (C)   Application. The final detailed plan filing shall occur within 18
months of the date of preliminary plan approval. The petitioner shall submit a
final detailed plan review application, affidavit and consent of property owner
(s) (if the owner is someone other than the petitioner), a copy of the deed(s)
for the property involved, the required filing fee, the final detailed plan,
and any other supporting information.
   (D)   Final detailed plan data. The final detailed plan may take the form of
a set of 24 inch by 36 inch sheets. The final detailed plan may include any
graphics that will explain the features of the development. The following shall
be included in the final detailed plan submission.
      (1)   Cover page and index. The cover sheet shall indicate that it is the
final detailed plan for that particular development and include the date of
submittal, an index identifying all sections/phases included in the final
detailed plan document, and references to any separate sheets of information.
      (2)   Site description. A description of the property and petitioners
involved, including:
         (a)   The name, mailing address, e-mail address, and telephone number
of the applicant;
         (b)   The name, mailing address, e-mail address, and telephone number
of any land surveyors, engineers, or other professionals responsible for the
final detailed plan design;
         (c)   The legal description of the subject property and common address
of the site; and
         (d)   The proposed name of the development (if applicable).
      (3)   Vicinity map. A vicinity map showing the use and zoning of all
properties within 1,320 feet (1/4 mile) of the property subject to the final
detailed plan. A site location diagram shall also be included.
      (4)   Common holdings map. A map of any property adjacent to the property
subject to the final detailed plan that is owned or otherwise controlled by any
or all of the applicants. The common holdings
map shall be accompanied by a general description of the future development of
that property and its relationship to the area included in the final detailed
plan. The general description may be in either text or map form and shall
include, at a minimum, general land uses, general street patterns and access
points, and general drainage designs.
      (5)   Existing site conditions. A site survey of all existing conditions
on the subject property, including:
         (a)   Built features. All existing streets (including travel lanes,
sidewalks, street trees, rights-of-way, and the like), established open spaces,
structures, wells, utility lines and facilities, fire hydrants, and street
lights.
         (b)   Easements. All existing easements and an indication of their
purpose.
         (c)   Topography. A topographic survey extrapolated from USGS data or
otherwise meeting the requirements of the Town Engineer.
         (d)   Natural features. The location of natural streams, regulated
drains, 100-year floodplains and floodways (extrapolated from FEMA maps), water
courses, wetlands (general locations as indicated by the National Wetlands
Inventory), and wooded areas.
         (e)   Utilities. The general location of utilities serving the site,
including sanitary sewer, water, electricity, natural gas, and data
transmission.
         (f)   Historic features. An identification of any historic features,
specifically those listed as outstanding, notable, or contributing on the
Indiana Historic Sites and Structures Inventory - Hancock County Interim Report
or listed in the National Register of Historic Places and/or Indiana Register
of Historic Sites and Structures.
         (g)   Other features. Any other significant feature(s) that may
influence the conceptual design of the development.
      (6)   Proposed development. A description of the proposed development of
the property, including:
         (a)   Street systems.  The general plan, profile, and description of
proposed street systems.
         (b)   Land uses. The general land use areas within the development,
including proposed densities of residential uses.
         (c)   Open space. The general location of open space.
         (d)   Landscaping. Detailed plan areas of landscaping, buffering, and/
or screening proposed for the development.
         (e)   Lighting. A site lighting plan prepared by an electrical
engineer licensed by the State of Indiana drawn to an appropriate scale with
the scale clearly indicated and a graphic scale for reference, showing the type
and location of all exterior lighting fixtures (site and building lighting).
The lighting plan shall include a photometric drawing.
         (f)   Natural features. A description of the general accommodation of
natural streams, regulated drains, 100-year floodplains and floodways, water
courses, wetlands, and wooded areas identified above.
         (g)   Historic features. A description of the general accommodation of
historic features, specifically those listed as outstanding, notable, or
contributing on the Indiana Historic Sites and Structures Inventory - Hancock
County Interim Report or listed in the National Register of Historic Places
and/or Indiana Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
         (h)   Written commitments. A description of any written commitments
that are being proposed as part of the development.
         (i)   Covenants. A general description of any private covenants and
restrictions that may be established for the development.
         (j)   Drainage. A drainage plan meeting the requirements of the Town
Engineer.
      (7)   Supplemental information. Any other information requested by the
Administrative Officer or Plan Commission to aid in the review of the final
detailed plan. This may included, but not be limited to, topic areas such as
traffic, utilities, tree preservation, flood hazards, and architectural design
standards.
   (E)   Administrative review by staff. Upon review, the Administrative
Officer, or his or her designee, shall approve, approve with modifications, or
deny the final detailed plan application.
      (1)   Approve. The application may be approved if it is found to be
consistent with all applicable requirements and the intent of this chapter and
the Comprehensive Plan. Staff may accept or require written commitments in
recordable form from the petitioner as part of the approval. The Administrative
Officer may require certain additional written commitments to be lettered on
the plat of record.
      (2)   Approve with modifications.  The application may be approved with
modifications if it is generally consistent with all applicable requirements of
this chapter. Staff may impose conditions on the approval of the final detailed
plan, which shall become written commitments in a recordable format of the
applicant. The Administrative Officer may require certain additional written
commitments to be lettered on the plat of record.
      (3)   Deny. The application may be denied if it is found to be
inconsistent with any applicable requirements and/or the intent of this chapter
and/or the Comprehensive Plan.
      (4)   Continue. The application may be continued and referred back to the
Plan Commission based on a request by the Administrative Officer, the
petitioner, or the Town Council. The application shall be continued in the case
of an indecisive vote wherein the item is essentially tabled, a determination
by the Commission that additional information is required prior to action being
taken on the request, or if an appropriate representative of the applicant
fails to appear at the public hearing.
         (a)   Additional legal notice shall not be required unless specified
by the Plan Commission.
         (b)   The continuing of all petitions shall be consistent with the
adopted Rules and Procedures of the Commission.
      (5)   Re-filing following denial. If staff determines that there is not
compliance with the ordinance, the applicant may re-file a revised final
detailed plan within 90 days of the date of denial. The revised final detailed
plan shall be reviewed as if it were a new application. final detailed plan
applications that have been denied and not re-filed within the specified
deadline shall not be re-filed for a period of one year from the date of the
denial.
   (F)   Recording. All approved final detailed plans and modifications thereof
shall automatically expire and become null and void unless recorded in the
office of the Hancock County Recorder within two years of approval.
      (1)   Failure to record.  Failure to record the plans and modifications
in the time provided for above shall automatically void the approval of the
final detailed plan.
      (2)   As-built drawings.  If, upon completion of all development, the
exact measurements as to the location of buildings or structures erected during
the development are deemed desirable for public record by recording thereof,
the developer shall submit a copy of the approved final detailed plan to the
Administrative Officer as an amended approved final detailed plan with the
exact measurements thereon shown, and upon being satisfied that the
measurements are substantially the same as indicated on the original approved
final detailed plan, the Administrative Officer shall re-approve, date, and
sign the amended approved final detailed plan, which the developer shall then
record.
   (G)   Improvement location permit. Final detailed plan approval is required
prior to the issuance of an improvement location permit. An improvement
location permit (consistent with this chapter) is required prior to any
construction activity occurring on the subject property.
      (1)   Plat approval required.  If a subdivision plat is required, plat
approval consistent with the Subdivision Control Ordinance must also be
obtained prior to the receipt of any improvement location permits.
      (2)   Supporting information. The Plan Commission may require any
additional supporting information not already stated by this subchapter to be
provided prior to the issuance of an improvement location permit.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 121322C, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.164 WRITTEN COMMITMENTS.
   The applicant in any planned unit development may make written commitments
in recordable form regarding the characteristics of the proposed future use of,
or the resolution of outstanding issues in existence on, the subject property
consistent with I.C. 36-7-4-615. Commitments made by the applicant and
conditions of approval established by the Plan Commission or Town Council shall
be considered written commitments for the purpose of this subchapter.
   (A)   Commitment proposals. Written commitments may be proposed by the
applicant as an element of the initial submittal of application materials, as a
response to comments made by the Administrative Officer, or in response to any
modifications requested by the Plan Commission or Town Council.
   (B)   Consideration of commitments. Any commitments shall be considered by
the Plan Commission and Town Council if they have been established at the time
of the review. Written Commitments shall be included as an element of the PUD
district ordinance (rezoning) establishing the PUD zoning and shall be recorded
in the office of the Hancock County Recorder by the petitioner. A copy of the
recorded commitments shall be provided to the Administrative Officer.
   (C)   Enforcement of commitments. The written commitments shall be
considered part of this subchapter binding on the subject property.
      (1)   Applicability. The written commitments shall be binding on the
owner(s) of the subject property, any subsequent owners of the subject
property, and any property owner(s) or entity that acquires an interest in any
portion of the subject property.
      (2)   Enforcement. The written commitments shall be enforceable by the
Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals consistent with the adopted
provisions for the enforcement of this subchapter.
      (3)   Modification. The recorded written commitments may be modified only
through the planned unit development process described by this subchapter.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 121322C, passed 12-13-2022)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 36-7-4-615 was repealed by P.L.126-2011, Sed. 68.
§ 154.165 COVENANTS.
   Covenants shall be set forth in detail. The Plan Commission may review
covenants that pertain to any written commitments, development requirements
and/or common areas, swales, or drainage systems. A copy of the recorded
covenants shall be provided to the Administrative Officer by the petitioner for
the records of the Plan Commission.
   (A)   Lot owner’s association. Adequate provision shall be made for a
private organization (i.e., lot owner’s association) with direct responsibility
to, and control of, the lot owners involved. The lot owner’s association shall
provide for the operation and maintenance of all common facilities, such as any
common areas and ponds, in the best possible manner. Legal assurances shall be
provided which show that the private organization is self-perpetuating.
   (B)   Service access to common areas. The covenants shall state that all
common facilities and drainage systems not dedicated to the public shall be
maintained by the private lot owner’s organization in such a manner that
adequate access is provided for fire, police, health, sanitation, and public
utility vehicles to service them. All streets, roadways, and common facilities
not dedicated to the public shall be operated and maintained at no expense to
any governmental unit.
   (C)   Enforcement. Covenants shall be distinguished from written commitments
and development requirements. Written commitments and development requirements
are elements of the PUD approval and are enforceable by the Plan Commission.
Covenants are private agreements that are not enforceable by the Plan
Commission.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 121322C, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.166 MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Minor modifications.
      (1)   (a)   Administration. The Administrative Officer may from time to
time approve minor modifications of the concept plan consistent with I.C. 36-7-
4-1511(i). The modifications shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of
the overall development and the approved PUD ordinance. Such modifications
shall not include any change in type of use, any increase in density, any
lessening of aesthetic treatments, any alteration of frontage location, any
change in the proportion or allocation of land uses, any change in location of
uses outside the parameters set forth in the PUD, any change in functional use
of open space, wherein the change constitutes an intensification of use in the
open space, any change in the concept plan that creates a conflict with the
intent of the PUD, or any alteration of the development requirements outside
the parameters set forth in the PUD.
         (b)   Procedure. To request a minor modification, the property owner
(s), developer, or applicant shall provide the Administrative Officer with a
letter that identifies the PUD and the requested minor modification. The letter
shall be accompanied by any necessary supporting drawings or other materials.
The Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, shall provide a written
response within 15 business days informing the applicant if the minor
modification has been approved. All materials relating to the minor
modification shall be kept on file with the other PUD materials in the office
of the Plan Commission. The Administrative Officer shall place the written
decision regarding the minor modification on the next available Technical
Advisory Committee meeting. The Administrative Officer shall detail the
findings of the decision at the meeting and advise any interested individuals
or parties how they may appeal the decision.
      (2)   Appeal. Any affected party may appeal any minor modification
decision by the Administrative Officer in accordance with the procedures
outlined in §
154.204.
      (3)   Rules and procedures. The Plan Commission may, through its rules
and procedures, establish rules governing the nature of proceedings required to
make a minor modification under this subchapter.
   (B)   Major modifications. Major modifications shall include any change not
considered a minor modification by the Administrative Officer, including, but
not limited to, any change in type of use, any increase in density, any
lessening of aesthetic treatments, any alteration of frontage location, any
change in the proportion or allocation of land uses, any change in location of
uses outside the parameters set forth in the PUD, any change in functional use
of open space, wherein the change constitutes an intensification of use in the
open space, any change in the concept plan that creates a conflict with the
intent of the PUD, or any alteration of the development requirements outside
the parameters set forth in the PUD, or any alteration of the development
requirements. All major modifications shall require an amendment to the planned
unit development ordinance, which shall follow the same process for an initial
approval of the PUD ordinance.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 121322C, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.167 EXPIRATION, ABANDONMENT, AND EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   Expiration. Approval of a development plan shall expire after a period
of five years from the approval of the PUD ordinance, unless the development is
50% completed in terms of improvements including streets, parks, walkways,
utility installations, and sanitary sewers. Determination of the amount of
completion shall be made by the Plan Commission upon a recommendation by the
Administrative Officer. Following expiration of a development plan, the Town
Council of the Advisory Plan Commission may declare the bond to be in default
and cause all public improvements to be installed according to the development
plans.
   (B)   Abandonment. The planned unit development may be considered officially
abandoned if, in the written opinion of the Administrative Officer, the
development is incomplete and no, or minimal construction activity has occurred
for a period of five consecutive years. Any outstanding surety for the project
may be utilized by the Town Council in any manner deemed appropriate and
associated with the project.
   (C)   Extensions. An extension, not to exceed six months, for accomplishing
any processes required by this subchapter, or for resuming construction
activity in an abandoned development may be granted by the Plan Commission upon
a written request from the petitioner. All requests for extensions must occur a
minimum of 30 days prior to the applicable deadline.
   (D)   Plan Commission rezoning. The Plan Commission, Town Council, or
landowner may initiate a rezoning for any property included in a planned unit
development that has been abandoned or for which the development plan approval
has expired. Any rezoning by the Plan Commission shall meet all applicable
requirements for the rezoning process provided by this subchapter.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 121322C, passed 12-23-2022)
NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS
§ 154.180 NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS.
   Upon adoption of this chapter some structures, lots, and uses that were
previously established and maintained consistent with all applicable
requirements of ordinances past may no longer comply with the regulations of
the zoning district in which they are located. For this reason, this subchapter
has been written to provide the rules, policies and regulations that apply to
all legal nonconforming structures, lots, uses and other legal nonconforming
situations. This subchapter may be referred to as the "grandfather" clause. If
a structure, lot, or use was established legally under a previous ordinance, it
is described as "grandfathered" (legal nonconforming). These regulations are
intended to inform property owner(s) about the options for using and modifying
nonconforming properties and to support the eventual elimination of all
nonconforming structures, lots and uses rather than encourage their survival.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.181 NONCONFORMING STATUS.
   (A)   Illegal nonconforming described.  With the exception of structures,
lots and uses established prior to 1979 when the town enacted land use
controls, a structure, lot, or use that is nonconforming and that was
established or constructed prior to the adoption of this chapter and without an
approved improvement location permit or approval from the Board of Zoning
Appeals or Plan Commission is considered illegal nonconforming. An illegal
nonconforming situation shall be subject to actions and penalties allowed by
this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, and shall be altered to be in
compliance with all applicable standards and regulations of this chapter.
   (B)   Legal nonconforming described. Legal nonconforming situations differ
from illegal nonconforming situations in that the reason for the noncompliance
is caused by the enactment of a Zoning Ordinance or a change to the Zoning
Ordinance (including amendments to the Official Zoning Map). The structure, lot
or use has not changed, but due to the Zoning Ordinance enactment or change,
the property no longer complies with the standards of the zoning district in
which it is located. When this situation occurs, the property is deemed legal
nonconforming or "grandfathered". Legal nonconforming structures, lots and
uses, may continue in the manner and to the extent that they existed or were
used at the time the change in the Zoning Ordinance was enacted, provided they
are in compliance with this subchapter; however, should the legal nonconforming
structure(s), lot(s), and/or use(s) be altered in any way, including but not
limited to, the size or scope of the structures, lots, and/or use(s), such
legal nonconforming status shall immediately terminate.
   (C)   Effect on past variances, special exceptions, or other approvals.
Structures, lots and uses, and other property features that are nonconforming
due to prior variance, special exception, or other approvals, shall not be
subject to the provisions of this subchapter, but shall be considered
conforming as long as they continue to comply with the terms, conditions, and
scope of their initial approval; however, such nonconforming status shall
terminate immediately if the structure(s), lot(s), and/or use(s) is modified in
any manner or is abandoned for a period of six continuous months.
   (D)   Effect on repairs and maintenance.  Work may be done for ordinary
repairs or replacement of walls, heating, fixtures, wiring, plumbing, and the
like provided that the nonconformities, such as setbacks, lot coverage, land
use, and the like, are not increased.
   (E)   Effect on unsafe structures. Nothing in this subchapter shall be
deemed to prevent the strengthening, repairing, or restoring to a safe
condition of any structure that has been declared unsafe by the appropriate
official.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 010819, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 154.182 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   All lots legally established and recorded with the Hancock County Recorder
prior to the effective date of this chapter, as amended from time to time, that
no longer meet an applicable provision of this chapter, such as minimum area,
width, or depth, shall be deemed legal nonconforming lots of record. Legal
nonconforming lots of record may be built upon only if the proposed use is
permitted and all development standards of the applicable zoning district, as
prescribed by this chapter, are met.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.183 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Any structure, such as a primary structure, accessory structure, fence, and
the like, lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter, as
amended from time to time, that no longer meets the development standards, such
as setbacks, height, and the like, shall be deemed a legal nonconforming
structure.
   (A)   Continuation of nonconforming structures. The continuation and
modification of nonconforming structures shall be consistent with the following
requirements.
      (1)   Increases in nonconformity. No legal nonconforming structure shall
be enlarged or altered in a manner that increases its nonconformity without the
approval of a variance by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Any structure may be
altered to decrease its nonconformity.
      (2)   Intentional alterations. Any legal nonconforming structure that is
intentionally altered, moved for any distance, or replaced shall comply with
the regulations of the district in which it is located. Any legal nonconforming
structure that is intentionally altered, moved for any distance, or replaced
shall not have the discontinued legal nonconforming features resume.
      (3)   Accidental alterations. Legal nonconforming structures that are
required to be altered or removed due to government action or damage from fire,
flood, other natural disaster, or criminal act may be restored to their legal
nonconforming condition. Such structures, if rebuilt or restored, shall be
identical or smaller in volume, height, setback, scale, and all other aspects
to that which was altered or removed.
   (B)   Effect on single-family residences in non-residential districts. A
legal nonconforming single-family residence located in any non-residential
zoning district may be expanded by up to 50% of the pre-expansion living area,
one time in any five calendar year period provided the expansion is for the
purpose of continuing the residential use of the property. For the purposes of
administering and enforcing this chapter, compliance with this chapter shall
only be required of the expanded portion of the residence. With respect to
building setbacks, the minimum setbacks for the expanded portion of the
residence shall be as established by the current zoning, unless a development
standards variance is obtained from the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.184 NONCONFORMING SITE FEATURES.
   Any site feature or improvement, such as landscaping, dumpster enclosures,
parking space dimensions, and the like, lawfully established prior to the
effective date of this chapter, as amended from time to time, that no longer
meets the development standards shall be deemed a legal nonconforming site
feature. The continuation and modification of nonconforming site features shall
be consistent with the following requirements.
   (A)   Increases in nonconformity. No legal nonconforming site feature shall
be altered, removed, or otherwise modified in a manner that increases the
features nonconformity. Site features may be modified in a manner that
maintains or lessens the extent of the nonconformity.
   (B)   Site modifications. If building expansions or other changes to the
property occur that require corresponding site feature improvements, the
affected features shall only be required to be modified to the extent necessary
to accommodate the property changes. The required installation of new site
features shall not require the entire site to be brought into compliance with
this chapter. For example, parking lot landscaping would only be required for
new portions of a parking lot that was required to be expanded due to a change
in the use of the property, to the extent that the amount of landscaping in the
pre-existing parking areas will be unaffected.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.185 NONCONFORMING USES.
   Any lawful use of structures, land, or structures and land in combination
established prior to the effective date of this chapter, as amended from time
to time, that is no longer a permitted use in the district where it is located
shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use. A legal nonconforming use may
continue provided that it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
conditions:
   (A)   Modification of structures. No existing structure devoted to a legal
nonconforming use shall be enlarged, expanded, increased, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except as to change
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located, or as otherwise specified in this section.
   (B)   New structures.  No new structure shall be constructed in connection
with an existing legal nonconforming use of land.
   (C)   Expansion within structures.  Any legal nonconforming use may be
extended throughout any parts of an existing structure that were plainly
arranged or designed for such use on or before the effective date of this
chapter, as amended from time to time, but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside the structure.
   (D)   Expansion on the property.  No legal nonconforming use of land shall
be enlarged, increased, extended to occupy a greater area of land, or moved in
whole or in part to any other portion of a lot that was occupied on or before
the effective date of this chapter.
   (E)   Expansion of non-conforming residential use. A legal nonconforming
single-family residence located in any commercial, industrial, or institutional
zoning district may be expanded by up to 50% of the pre-expansion living area
one time in any five calendar year period provided the expansion is for the
purpose of continuing the residential use of the property. Required setbacks
for the expansion shall be either those established by the zoning on the
property, or those provided by the pre-expansion structure, whichever is less
restrictive.
   (F)   Change of use (to another nonconforming use). If no structural
alterations are made, it is possible to change a nonconforming use to another
nonconforming use. Nonconforming uses may be changed to another nonconforming
use (similar or dissimilar) with the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
In addition to the statutory criteria for acting on a development standards
variance request, the Board may approve the change of use if it finds that the
proposed use is equally or more appropriate to the district in which it is
located than is the existing use. The Board shall consider development
standards applicable to the proposed use established by this chapter and may
make reasonable conditions pursuant to this chapter.
   (G)   Change in use (to a permitted use). When a legal nonconforming use is
replaced by a permitted use, it shall thereafter comply with the regulations of
the district in which it is located, and the legal nonconforming use may not be
resumed.
   (H)   Discontinuation of use. If a legal nonconforming use is intentionally
discontinued for six continuous months or longer, any subsequent use of such
land, structure, or land and structure in combination shall comply to the
provisions of this chapter, with the exception of uses that are required to be
discontinued due to a governmental action that impedes access to the premises
due to damage from fire, flood, other natural disaster. Such exempt uses, if
restored, shall be identical in scale, lot coverage, and all other aspects to
that which was discontinued.
   (I)   Nonconforming structures and land in combination. Where legal
nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, an
intentional removal or alteration of the structure, or its use, that
establishes conformity shall also eliminate the legal nonconforming status of
the land. Legal nonconforming uses located in structures specifically
constructed or modified to suit only such uses are exempt from this provision
and may be resumed if the structure has not been intentionally altered to serve
other uses, used to house a permitted use, or used to house another
nonconforming use with the approval of a special exception by the Board of
Zoning Appeals as specified in this section.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.186 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   Any sign, lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter,
as amended from time to time, that no longer meets the requirements of this
chapter shall be deemed a legal nonconforming sign. For the purposes of this
subchapter, a sign shall include the sign face and any supports, poles, frames,
or other associated lighting, electrical, mechanical, and structural features.
The continuation and modification of nonconforming signs shall be consistent
with the following requirements:
   (A)   Increases in nonconformity. No legal nonconforming sign shall be
enlarged or altered in terms of face area, height, or any other aspect that
increases its nonconformity. For the purposes of administering and enforcing
this chapter, a change in the sign faces message or content shall not be
considered to increase the signs nonconformity.
   (B)   Intentional alterations. Any legal nonconforming sign that is
intentionally altered, moved for any distance, or replaced shall comply with
the regulations of the district in which it is located, and the discontinued
legal nonconforming features may not be resumed.
   (C)   Accidental alterations.  Legal nonconforming signs that are required
to be altered or removed due to government action or damage resulting from
fire, flood, other natural disaster, or a criminal act may be restored to their
legal nonconforming condition. Such signs, if rebuilt or restored, shall be in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, or shall be identical in
scale and all other aspects to that which was altered or removed.
   (D)   Sign faces and messages. The sign faces and/or message on a legal
nonconforming sign may be altered, replaced, repainted, and repaired provided
that the nonconformity of the sign is not increased, and that a static display
is not converted to an electronic message board. Otherwise, nothing in this
section shall be interpreted as requiring a sign to be brought into compliance
with this chapter if it is changed only to the extent that the face area is
changed, but not increased in size or altered in shape or made to be an
electronic message board.
   (E)   Temporary signs. Any signs in existence at the time this chapter
becomes effective that were previously permitted as temporary signs may only
remain in use consistent with the requirements of this chapter. Any temporary
signs that are no longer permitted shall be removed within 30 days of the
effective date of this chapter. Any nonconforming temporary signs shall be
considered to be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
provisions of §§
154.225 through
154.228, Enforcement and Penalties.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
PROCEDURES AND PERMITS
§ 153.200 PETITION AND PERMIT APPLICATION TYPES.
   (A)   Petition applications required. The town requires that an application
and subsequent fee be submitted for the following types of petitions:
      (1)   Development standards variance.
      (2)   Administrative appeal.
      (3)   Zoning Map Amendment (rezoning).
      (4)   Planned unit development.
      (5)   Subdivisions, primary plat.
      (6)   Subdivisions, secondary/final plat.
   (B)   Permit applications required.  The town requires that an application
and subsequent fee be submitted for the following types of permits:
      (1)   Special exception use.
      (2)   Improvement location permit.
      (3)   Sign permit.
      (4)   Temporary use permit.
      (5)   Occupancy permit.
      (6)   Change in use permit.
   (C)   Application materials. All applications may be obtained from the Plan
Commission Office. Fees shall be paid to The Town of McCordsville at the time
all petition applications are submitted and at the time all permits are issued.
      (1)   Application forms. All applications shall be made on forms provided
by the Plan Commission Office. All applicants shall submit original
applications that are completed in their entirety in ink or typed.
      (2)   Copies of materials. All applicants shall submit copies of
applications and necessary plans and attachments as required by the adopted
policies of the Administrative Officer and the applicable Rules and Procedures
of the Plan Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (3)   Scheduling. All applications shall be assigned reference and/or
docket numbers by the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee.
         (a)   Petition applications. Petition applications shall be scheduled
by the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, for the appropriate
public hearings based on the completeness of the application consistent with
the requirements of this subchapter and the appropriate adopted Calendars of
Filing and Meeting Dates for the Board of Zoning Appeals and/or Plan
Commission.
         (b)   Order of action taken. Action shall be taken on all applications
in the order in which they were received.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.201 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   For all public hearings, the notice shall be provided to the public
consistent with the requirements of this chapter and the Rules and Procedures
of the Board of Zoning Appeals and Plan Commission. Required public notice
shall include the following:
   (A)   Legal notice.  The Administrative Officer, or his or her designee,
shall prepare and submit a legal notice consistent with the requirements of
I.C. 5-3-1 for publication in the local newspaper, and the American with
Disabilities Act. The applicant shall pay for the legal notice. The legal
notice shall appear in the newspaper no less than one time at least ten days
prior to the public hearing, not including the date of the hearing. Legal
notices shall include each of the following:
      (1)   Property location.  The general location of the subject property,
including its common address and a legal description of the included land.
      (2)   Available plans. That the project plans are available for
examination at the office of the Plan Commission.
      (3)   Hearing information. That a public hearing will be held, giving the
date, place, and hour of the hearing.
      (4)   Written comments.  That written comments on the application will be
accepted prior to the public hearing and may be submitted to the Administrative
Officer.
   (B)   Notice to interested parties. The applicant shall prepare and
distribute written notice of the application to all interested parties. The
written notice shall be distributed at least ten days prior to the
public hearing, not including the date of the hearing. In no instances shall
streets, alleys, streams, or other features be considered boundaries for
precluding notification.
      (1)   Notice information. The notice shall contain the same information
as the legal notice that is published in the newspaper as outlined in division
(B) above.
      (2)   Responsibility. The distribution and cost of the notice shall be
the responsibility of the applicant.
      (3)   Notification requirements. Notification shall be provided to owners
of all parcels of land adjoining the subject property to a depth of two
ownerships or 600 feet, whichever is less, from the exterior boundaries of the
subject property. The most current list of property owners can be obtained from
the County Auditor's Office. For the purposes of notification, where any
adjacent parcels of land are owned by the applicant(s), subject property shall
be deemed to include adjacent land owned by the applicants.
      (4)   Notification certification.  A copy of the materials provided to
each property owner, the completed mailing and/or delivery forms, and a
completed Affidavit of Notice certifying the correctness of the mailing list
shall be provided to the Administrative Officer by the applicant a minimum of
two business days prior to the date of the public hearing.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.202 VARIANCE.
   In no case shall any variance to the terms of this chapter be authorized
without the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals. Further, no decisions on
previous applications shall serve to set a precedent for any other application
before the Board. The following procedure shall apply to all variance
applications:
   (A)   Pre-application meeting required. A petition for a variance shall only
be filed after the petitioner has met with the Administrative Officer, or his
or her designee, to discuss the request.
   (B)   Application. The applicant shall submit a variance application,
affidavit and consent of property owner (if the owner is someone other than the
applicant), a copy of the deed for the property involved, the required filing
fee, and required supporting information. Supporting information shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Site plan. A site plan shall be signed and dated. The site plan
shall be drawn to scale with the scale clearly indicated and a graphic scale
for reference, and/or fully dimensioned to the satisfaction of the
Administrative Officer and clearly show the entire layout of the property with
all features relevant to the variance request.
      (2)   Statement of intent.  A statement of intent to the Board of Zoning
Appeals describing the details of the variance being requested and stating how
the request is consistent with the required statutory considerations. The
statement should include any written commitments being made by the applicant.
   (C)   Notification. Notification for the scheduled public hearing regarding
the variance request shall be completed consistent with §
154.201 of this chapter.
   (D)   Public hearing. The Board of Zoning Appeals will then, in a public
hearing scheduled consistent with the adopted Calendar of Filing and Meeting
Dates, review the variance application and required supporting information.
      (1)   Representation. The applicant and any representative of the
applicant must be present at the public hearing to present the petition and
address the findings of the Plan Commission.
      (2)   Testimony. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider a report from
the Administrative Officer and testimony from the applicant, remonstrators,
members of the public and interested parties at the hearing.
      (3)   Procedures. The presentation of reports and testimony and all other
aspects of the public hearing shall be consistent with the Rules and Procedures
of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (4)   Possible action.  The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve, approve
with conditions, deny, or continue the application in accordance with I.C. 36-
7-4-918.4.
         (a)   Approval. The application shall be approved if a determination
is made consistent with the decision criteria listed in this section.
         (b)   Approval with modifications. The application shall be approved
with modifications if the Board of Zoning Appeals determines that the
requirements of this section may be met if certain conditions are applied to
the application. The Board may make reasonable conditions related to the
required decision criteria in this section, part of its approval and/or accept
written commitments from the applicant.
         (c)   Denial. The application shall be denied if a determination is
made that any requirement of this section has not been met. Applications that
are denied shall not be eligible for consideration again by the Board of Zoning
Appeals for a period of 12 months from the date of denial.
         (d)   Continued. The application may be continued by the Board of
Zoning Appeals based on a request by the Administrative Officer or applicant;
an indecisive vote wherein the item is essentially tabled; or a determination
by the Board that additional information is required prior to action being
taken on the request.
            1.   Additional legal notice shall not be required unless specified
by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
            2.   The continuing of all applications shall be consistent with
the adopted Rules and Procedures of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (E)   Decision criteria.  In taking action on all variance requests, the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall use the following decision criteria, consistent
with the requirements of the Indiana Code.
      (1)   Development standards variance.  The Board of Zoning Appeals may
grant a variance from the development standards of this chapter (such as
height, bulk, area, and the like) if, after a public hearing, it makes a
determination (consistent with I.C. 36-7-4-918.5), that:
         (a)   General welfare.  The approval will not be injurious to the
public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community;
         (b)   Adjacent property. The use and value of the area adjacent to the
property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially
adverse manner; and
         (c)   Practical difficulty. The strict application of the terms of
this chapter will result in a practical difficulty in the use of the property.
This situation shall not be self-imposed, nor be based on a perceived reduction
of, or restriction on, economic gain.
   (F)   Conditions.  The Board of Zoning Appeals may impose such reasonable
conditions upon its approval as it deems necessary to find that the decision
criteria for approval have been met.
   (G)   Commitments. The Board of Zoning Appeals may require the owner(s) of
the property to make written commitments in recordable form concerning the use
or development of the property as specified under I.C. 36-7-4-921. Such
commitments shall be recorded in the Hancock County Recorder's Office. A copy
of the recorded commitments shall be provided to the Administrative Officer for
inclusion in the petition file at the time of application for an improvement
location permit. No improvement location permit shall be issued for a permit
application which does not comply with the recorded commitments.
   (H)   Limitation. A development standards variance granted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals and executed in a timely manner as described in this subchapter
shall run with the parcel until the property complies with this chapter as
written.
   (I)   Successive applications. No variance may be reviewed by the Board of
Zoning Appeals for the same cause more than once in any one year period.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 36-7-4-921 was repealed by P.L.126-2011, Sec. 68.
§ 154.203 SPECIAL EXCEPTION.
   In no case shall special exception uses be authorized without the approval
of the Board of Zoning Appeals. Further, no decisions on previous applications
shall serve to set a precedent for any other application before the Board. The
following procedure applies to special exception applications:
   (A)   Application. The applicant shall submit a special exception
application, affidavit and consent of property owner(s) (if the owner is
someone other than the applicant), a copy of the deed for the property
involved, the required filing fee, and required supporting information.
Supporting information shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Site plan. A site plan shall be signed and dated, and clearly show
the entire layout of the property and all features relevant to the special
exception request.
      (2)   Statement of intent.  A statement of intent to the Board of Zoning
Appeals describing the details of the special exception request including, but
not limited to:
         (a)   The ways in which the special exception shall comply with the
applicable development standards of this chapter;
         (b)   The ways in which the special exception shall be consistent with
the required determination described by this chapter; and
         (c)   Any written commitments in a recordable format being made by the
applicant.
      (3)   Fiscal Impact Study. A Fiscal Impact Study may be required in
accordance with the Town of McCordsville Code.
   (B)   Notification. Notification for the scheduled public hearing regarding
the special exception request shall be completed consistent with this chapter
and the Rules and Procedures of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (C)   Public hearing.  The Board of Zoning Appeals will then, in a public
hearing scheduled consistent with the adopted Calendar of Filing and Meeting
Dates, review the special exception application and required supporting
information.
      (1)   Representation. The applicant, or a representative of the
applicant, must be present at the public hearing to present the application and
address the findings.
      (2)   Testimony. The Board shall consider a report from the
Administrative Officer and testimony from the applicant, applicant's
representative, remonstrators, members of the public, and interested parties at
the hearing.
      (3)   Procedures. The presentation of reports and testimony and all other
aspects of the public hearing shall be consistent with the Rules and Procedures
of the Board.
      (4)   Possible action. The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve, approve
with conditions, deny, or continue the application.
         (a)   Approval. The application shall be approved if a determination
is made consistent with the requirements of this section.
         (b)   Approval with modifications.  The application may be approved
with modifications if the Board of Zoning Appeals determines that the required
determination may be made only if certain conditions are applied to the
application. The Board may make reasonable conditions related to the required
determination, part of its approval and/or accept written commitments from the
applicant.
         (c)   Denial. The application shall be denied if a determination is
made that any requirement of this section has not been met. Applications that
are denied shall not be eligible for consideration again by the Board for a
period of 12 months from the date of denial.
         (d)   Continued. The application may be continued by the Board based
on a request by the Administrative Officer or applicant; an indecisive vote
wherein the item is essentially tabled; or a determination by the Board that
additional information is required prior to action being taken on the request.
            1.   Additional legal notice shall not be required unless specified
by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
            2.   The continuing of all applications shall be consistent with
the adopted Rules and Procedures of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (D)   Decision criteria. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to
authorize special exceptions. In approving special exceptions, the Board of
Zoning Appeals may attach any conditions to the special exception as it deems
necessary to assure compliance with the purpose of this chapter. If the
conditions of the special exception are not completely and continuously adhered
to after the granting of the special exception, the special exception shall
become null and void upon notice to the property owner from the Board of Zoning
Appeals and completion of the termination process consistent with division (I),
of this section. The following requirements shall be met:
      (1)   The special exception shall be permitted by this chapter;
      (2)   The special exception can be served with adequate utilities, access
roads, drainage, and other necessary facilities;
      (3)   The special exception shall not involve any element or cause any
condition that may be dangerous, injurious, or noxious to any other property or
persons, and shall comply with the development standards of this chapter;
      (4)   The special exception shall be sorted, oriented, and landscaped to
produce a harmonious relationship of buildings and grounds to adjacent
buildings and properties;
      (5)   The special exception shall produce a total visual impression and
environment which is consistent with the environment of the neighborhood;
      (6)   The special exception shall organize vehicular access and parking
to minimize traffic congestion in the neighborhood;
      (7)   The special exception shall preserve the purpose of this
subchapter.
   (E)   Other considerations. When considering a special exception the Board
of Zoning Appeals may consider the following items as they relate to the
proposed use:
      (1)   Topography and other natural site features;
      (2)   Zoning of the site and surrounding properties;
      (3)   Driveway locations, street access and vehicular and pedestrian
traffic;
      (4)   Parking (including amount, location, and design);
      (5)   Landscaping, screening, buffering;
      (6)   Open space and other site amenities;
      (7)   Noise production and hours of any business operation;
      (8)   Design, placement, architecture, and building material of the
structure;
      (9)   Placement, design, intensity, height, and shielding of lights;
      (10)   Traffic generation;
      (11)   General site layout as it relates to its surroundings; and
      (12)   Any other criteria deemed relevant by the Board.
   (F)   Conditions. The Board may impose such reasonable conditions upon its
approval as it deems necessary to find that the criteria for approval in this
section have been satisfied.
   (G)   Commitments. The Board may require the owner(s) of the property to
make written commitments in recordable form concerning the use or development
of the property as specified under I.C. 36-7-4-921. Such commitments shall be
recorded in the Hancock County Recorder's Office. A copy of the recorded
commitments shall be provided to the Administrative Officer for inclusion in
the petition file at the time an application is submitted and prior to the
issuance of any improvement location permit. No improvement location permit
shall be issued for a permit application which does not comply with the
recorded commitments.
   (H)   Limitations.  Unless otherwise specified by the Board, special
exception approvals shall be limited to, and run with the applicant at the
location specified in the application. The Board may also limit special
exceptions to a specific time period and a specific use. Special exceptions
shall also be invalid if:
      (1)   The property is in compliance with the chapter as written; or
      (2)   The special exception approval is terminated.
   (I)   Termination. A special exception use may be terminated by the Board of
Zoning Appeals under the following procedures:
      (1)   Public hearing.  Upon determination by the Administrative Officer
that possible grounds for termination exist, the matter shall be placed on the
Board of Zoning Appeals agenda for a public hearing. The Administrative
Officer, or his or her designee, shall notify the applicant and all adjacent
properties previously noticed, of the hearing via Certified Mail a minimum of
ten days prior to the hearing.
      (2)   Grounds for termination. At the public hearing the special
exception use shall be revoked if a finding is made by the Board that one or
more of the following is true:
         (a)   The execution of the approval is not consistent with any
requirement of this chapter;
         (b)   The execution of the approval is not consistent with any
condition of approval;
         (c)   The execution of the approval is not consistent with any written
commitment; or
         (d)   The approved was the result of fraud or the misrepresentation of
facts.
   (J)   Special exception use expansion.  A use authorized as a special
exception may not be expanded, extended, or enlarged unless reauthorized by the
Board under the procedures set forth in this subchapter for granting a special
exception.
   (K)   Successive applications. No special exception use may be reviewed by
the Board of Zoning Appeals for the same cause more than once in any one year
period.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 36-7-4-921 was repealed by P.L.126-2011, Sec. 68.
§ 154.204 APPEAL PROCESS AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Administrative appeal. The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant an appeal
of any decision, interpretation, or determination made by the Administrative
Officer, other Plan Commission staff members, or any other administrative
official or board charged with the duty of enforcing and interpreting this
chapter. The following procedure shall apply to all appeals of administrative
decisions:
      (1)   Application. The appellant shall submit an administrative appeal
application within 30 days of a decision along with the required supporting
information. Supporting information shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
         (a)   Original submittals.  Copies of all materials upon which the
decision being appealed was based.
         (b)   Written decisions.  Copies of any written decisions that are the
subject of the appeal.
         (c)   Appeal basis. A letter describing the reasons for the appeal
noting specific sections of this chapter or other standards applicable in the
town upon which the appeal is based.
      (2)   Board review and action. The Board of Zoning Appeals will then, at
a regularly scheduled meeting, review the administrative appeal application and
supporting information.
         (a)   Representation. The appellant, or applicant's representative,
must be present at the meeting to present the appeal.
         (b)   Testimony. The Board shall consider a report from the
Administrative Officer and testimony from the applicant, or the applicant's
representative, at the meeting.
         (c)   Procedures. The presentation of reports and testimony and all
other aspects of the meeting shall be consistent with the Rules and Procedures
of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
         (d)   Possible action.  The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant, grant
with modifications, deny, or continue the appeal by a majority vote of the
Board.
            1.   Granted. The appeal shall be granted if the determination is
made consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
            2.   Granted with modifications.  The appeal shall be granted with
modifications if the Board of Zoning Appeals determines that the proper
interpretation of the provision(s) that are subject to the appeal is consistent
with neither the administrative decision nor the requested interpretation of
the applicant.
            3.   Denied. The appeal shall be denied if the determination is
made supporting the administrative decision.
            4.   Continued. The appeal shall be continued based on a request by
the Administrative Officer or applicant; an indecisive vote wherein the item is
essentially tabled; or a determination by the Board that additional information
is required prior to action being taken on the request. The continuing of all
applications shall be consistent with the adopted Rules and Procedures of the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (3)   Decision criteria. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall only grant an
appeal of such an administrative decision based on a determination that the
decision of the administrative staff or Board was inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Board of Zoning Appeals.  Every decision of the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be subject to review by a court of competent jurisdiction (writ
of certiorari) as prescribed by the 1000 Series of I.C. 36-7-4.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 36-7-4-921 was repealed by P.L.126-2011, Sec. 68.
§ 154.205 ZONING MAP AMENDMENT (REZONING).
   The following procedure shall apply to all Zoning Map amendments (rezoning)
applications.
   (A)   Application initiation.  Proposals for Zoning Map amendments may be
initiated by either the Plan Commission, the Town Council, or through an
application signed by property owners of at least 51% of the land involved.
      (1)   Town Council initiation.  The Plan Commission shall prepare the
application for Zoning Map amendment if either the Commission or Town Council
has initiated the application. The Administrative Officer shall serve as the
representative of the applicant for such proposals.
      (2)   Property owner initiation. Any property owners requesting a Zoning
Map amendment shall be the applicants and assume responsibility for preparing
application materials.
   (B)   Application. The applicant shall submit a rezoning application,
affidavit and consent of property owner(s) (if the owner is someone other than
the applicant), to the Advisory Plan Commission and/or the Town Council, a copy
of the deed for the property involved, the required filing fee, and required
supporting information. Supporting information shall include, but not be
limited to the following:
      (1)   Site plan. A conceptual site plan showing all features relevant to
the application.
      (2)   Vicinity map.  A vicinity map showing the use and zoning of all
properties within 600 feet of the property subject to the rezoning request.
      (3)   Letter of intent. A letter of intent to the Plan Commission stating
the reasons for the rezoning, including a detailed description of any proposed
development for which the rezoning is sought. The letter should include any
written commitments in recordable form being made by the applicant.
      (4)   Fiscal Impact Study. A Fiscal Impact Study (FIS) may be required in
accordance with this chapter.
   (C)   Plan Commission public hearing.  The Plan Commission will then, in a
public hearing scheduled consistent with the adopted Calendar of Filing and
Meeting Dates (but no later than 60 days following the receipt of a complete
application per I.C. 36-7-4-608 and all required materials), review the
rezoning application and required supportive information.
      (1)   Notification. Notification for the scheduled Plan Commission public
hearing regarding the rezoning request shall be completed consistent with the
requirements of this chapter and the Rules and Procedures of the Plan
Commission.
      (2)   Representation. The applicant and/or any representative of the
applicant must be present at the public hearing to present the application and
address any questions the Commission might have.
      (3)   Testimony. The Commission shall consider a report from the
Administrative Officer and testimony from the applicant, remonstrators, the
public, and interested parties at the hearing.
      (4)   Procedures.  The presentation of reports and testimony and all
other aspects of the public hearing shall be consistent with the requirements
of the Rules and Procedures of the Commission.
      (5)   Possible action. The Plan Commission shall either forward the
application to the Town Council with a favorable recommendation, an unfavorable
recommendation, or no recommendation; or continue the request.
         (a)   Favorable recommendation. The application shall be forwarded
with a favorable recommendation if, by a majority vote of the Plan Commission,
it is found to be consistent with the decision criteria listed in this section.
The recommendation may include commitments requested by the Plan Commission.
         (b)   Unfavorable recommendation. The application shall be forwarded
with an unfavorable recommendation if, by a majority vote of the Plan
Commission, it is determined by the Plan Commission to be inconsistent with the
decision criteria listed in this section.
         (c)   No recommendation. The application may be forwarded with no
recommendation if, by a majority vote of the Plan Commission, it is determined
that the application includes aspects that the Plan Commission is not able to
evaluate.
         (d)   Continued. The application may be continued by the Plan
Commission based on a request by the Administrative Officer or applicant; an
indecisive vote wherein the item is essentially tabled, or a determination by
the Plan Commission that additional information is required prior to action
being taken on the request.
            1.   Additional legal notice shall not be required unless specified
by the Plan Commission.
            2.   The continuing of all applications shall be consistent with
the adopted Rules and Procedures of the Plan Commission.
      (6)   Certification. The Plan Commission shall certify its recommendation
by letter to the Town Council within ten business days of its determination
(per I.C. 36-7-4-608). The Plan Commission staff shall forward to the Town
Council appropriate copies of the Plan Commission resolution, the original
application and all supporting information, any staff reports regarding the
application, and an ordinance for the Town Council's consideration.
   (D)   Town Council action. The Town Council will review the rezoning
application and the materials forwarded from the Plan Commission. The Town
Council may then take action on the application.
      (1)   Notification. The Town Council shall provide notification of action
on the ordinance consistent with Indiana State Code.
      (2)   Possible action. The Town Council may either approve or deny the
ordinance, or return the petition to the Advisory Plan Commission. If the Town
Council fails to act within the 90 days of the ordinances' certification to the
Town Council, the ordinance shall become effective or be defeated with the
provisions of I.C. 36-7-4-608. The Town Council may also seek modifications or
additions to any written commitments in recordable form as described in this
section.
   (E)   Decision criteria. In reviewing the rezoning application, the Plan
Commission and Town Council shall consider the following:
      (1)   Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan and any other
applicable, adopted planning studies or reports.
      (2)   Current conditions. The current conditions and the character of
current structures and uses in each district.
      (3)   Desired use. The highest and best use for which the land in each
district is adapted.
      (4)   Property values. The conservation of property values throughout the
town's planning jurisdiction.
      (5)   Responsible growth.  Responsible growth and development.
   (F)   Written commitments. The applicant in any rezoning application may
make written commitments in recordable form regarding the characteristics of
the proposed future use of, or the resolution of outstanding issues in
existence on, the subject property consistent with I.C. 36-7-4-615.
      (1)   Origin of commitments.  Written commitments may be proposed by the
applicant as an element of the initial submittal of application materials, or
in response to any modifications requested by the Plan Commission or Town
Council.
      (2)   Consideration of commitments. All commitments shall be considered
by the Plan Commission and the Town Council in the review of the application.
         (a)   Commitments shall be included as an element of the rezoning
ordinance prepared by the Plan Commission following action taken at the public
hearing.
         (b)   Any deletion, addition, or alteration of the written commitments
proposed by the Town Council shall be referred back to the Plan Commission for
consideration and included in a revised or affirmed recommendation regarding
the application or may amend the written commitments and incorporate said
written commitments in recordable form within the rezoning ordinance.
         (c)   Any rezoning application shall include a commitment to properly
control weeds until the site is completely developed.
      (3)   Documenting commitments. Following final action being taken on the
rezoning application, the rezoning ordinance, with any written commitments
included, shall be recorded in the office of the Hancock County Recorder by the
applicant and shall not be considered effective until so recorded. A copy of
any recorded commitments shall be provided to the Administrative Officer at the
time of application for any improvement location permit. No improvement
location permit shall be issued for a permit application that does not comply
with the written commitments.
      (4)   Enforcement of commitments. The written commitments shall be
considered part of the rezoning ordinance binding on the subject property and
in recordable form.
         (a)   The written commitments shall be binding on the owner(s) of the
subject property, any subsequent owners of the subject property, and any person
or entity that acquires an interest in the subject property or portion thereof.
         (b)   The written commitments shall be enforceable by the Plan
Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or Town Council consistent with the
adopted provisions for the enforcement of any other aspect of this chapter, as
described in §§
154.225 through
154.228, Enforcement and Penalties.
         (c)   The written commitments may be modified only through the Zoning
Map Amendment process described by this chapter.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 36-7-4-921 was repealed by P.L.126-2011, Sec. 68.
§ 154.206 IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.
   No structures or site improvements shall be erected, moved, or added to on
platted or unplatted land, without an improvement location permit first being
issued by the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee. No improvement
location permit shall be issued unless the project is in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter,
Chapter 153, and other applicable regulations of the town.
   (A)   Permit required. The town requires that an improvement location permit
be obtained for any of the actions listed below. A single improvement location
permit may be issued for a combination of these actions, if they occur
together. The Administrative Officer shall determine if the application
requires review by the Technical Review Committee and/or Architectural Review
Committee.
      (1)   New development, after rezoning or plat approval;
      (2)   Placement or replacement of manufactured or mobile homes;
      (3)   Parking lot construction or alteration;
      (4)   Removal of required trees and plants within buffer yards and
landscaping areas required by this chapter;
      (5)   Mineral extraction;
      (6)   Telecommunication towers, buildings, and antenna; and
      (7)   Any work requiring erosion control by state and local codes not
already required to get a permit elsewhere;
      (8)   Any construction or site modifications that are not designed to be
occupied or attached to a structure that is designed to be occupied; and
      (9)   Any other work deemed to require by the Zoning Administrator or
Building Commissioner.
   (B)   Special exception uses and variances.
      (1)   Improvement location permit required. If the Board of Zoning
Appeals grants a special exception or a variance, it shall direct the applicant
to apply for an improvement location permit. If such application complies with
all requirements established by the Board and this chapter, an improvement
location permit for the execution of the approved special exception or variance
shall be issued.
      (2)   Failure to obtain an improvement location permit or complete
construction. A special exception or variance ceases to be authorized and is
said to expire if the obtaining of an improvement location permit, or the
execution of the approval, has not been completed within one year of the date
the special exception or variance is granted. The variance or special exception
shall also expire if the approved construction has not been completed and
approved by the Administrative Officer as being consistent with all written
commitments, conditions, the requirements of this chapter, and all applicable
permits within two years of the date the approval was granted.
   (C)   Sign permits.  The following procedure applies to improvement location
permits for permanent signs only.
      (1)   Application. Application for a sign permit shall be filed with the
Administrative Officer and shall be accompanied by any information the
Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, determines is necessary to
assure compliance with this chapter, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Clear and legible drawings with descriptions showing the
location of the sign which is the subject of the permit.
         (b)   An indication of all existing and anticipated signs on the same
property and for the same business use.
         (c)   A dimensioned drawing showing the size of the sign area and the
height of the sign.
         (d)   Description of sign materials and colors.
         (e)   Type of illumination.
         (f)   Mounting details.
      (2)   Effect of sign permit issuance.  A sign permit issued under the
provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute permission or
authorization to maintain an unlawful sign nor shall it be deemed as a defense
in an action to remove an unlawful sign.
      (3)   Expiration. A sign permit shall become null and void if work has
not been started within 30 days of the date the permit is issued or completed
within 180 days of the date the permit is issued.
   (D)   Exemptions. No improvement location permit shall be required for the
types of improvements listed below, provided any such improvement complies with
the applicable requirements of this chapter, the Subdivision Control Ordinance,
and any other adopted standards of the town.
      (1)   Routine maintenance, repair, or interior non-structural remodeling
of existing buildings not involving any change of use, additional lot coverage,
or increase in structure size.
      (2)   Essential services, as defined in this chapter.
      (3)   Lot and yard improvements such as drives, sidewalks, patios, decks,
retaining walls, play equipment, gazebos less than 200 square feet in area,
above ground pools less than 30 inches in depth and 15 feet in diameter, and
landscaping.
      (4)   Signs with a surface less than one square foot in area.
      (5)   Mini-barns and storage containers that are portable and less than
200 square feet or less in area.
   (E)   Copies. A copy of all submitted plans and application materials shall
be retained by the Administrative Officer for the permanent records of the Plan
Commission.
   (F)   Expiration of permits.  Unless otherwise permitted by this chapter, if
the rough-in inspection described in any improvement location permit has not
been completed within 12 months of the date of its issuance, the permit shall
automatically be deemed expired.
      (1)   The Administrative Officer may grant extensions for up to six
months to obtain the certificate of occupancy.
      (2)   No extension shall be granted unless any appropriate fees, as
defined by the adopted fee schedule, are paid to the town and the project
continues to be in compliance with all applicable requirements of the town.
   (G)   Construction according to permits and permit applications. Improvement
location permits issued on the basis of plans and applications only authorize
the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications. Current approved plans and the permit shall remain on the
construction site. Any other use, arrangement, or construction not authorized
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subject to the provisions of §§
154.225 through
154.228, Enforcement and Penalties.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111423E, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 154.207 TEMPORARY USE PERMIT.
   All allowable temporary uses of land and/or a temporary structure of 200
square feet or more must obtain a temporary use permit. A temporary use permit
expires after a period of 90 days. For all permitted temporary uses, the
following information shall be required to be submitted with any request for a
temporary use permit.
   (A)   Application.
      (1)   Property owner(s) name and address, including a letter from the
property owner(s) granting permission to operate the temporary use at the
proposed location if the property owner(s) is someone other than the applicant;
      (2)   Name and address of person, organization, or business requesting
the temporary use permit;
      (3)   Purpose of temporary use;
      (4)   Duration of the temporary use;
      (5)   If restroom facilities will accompany the use and if so what kind;
      (6)   If utilities are required, and if so what type;
      (7)   Hours of operation;
      (8)   If temporary use is intended to take place at night, a lighting
plan for the site; and
   (B)   Site plan.
      (1)   Context map;
      (2)   Location and footprint of the proposed temporary use on the lot;
      (3)   All required setbacks;
      (4)   Parking diagram, including number of spaces, points of ingress and
egress, and overall traffic circulation; and
      (5)   Any other pertinent information, as determined by the
Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, to allow for the efficient and
expeditious review of the application.
   (C)   Commitments. The Board may require the owner(s) of the property to
make written commitments concerning the use or development of the property as
specified under I.C. 36-7-4-921. Such commitments shall be recorded in the
Hancock County Recorder's Office. A copy of the recorded commitments shall be
provided to the Administrative Officer for inclusion in the petition file at
the time an application is submitted and prior to the issuance of any
improvement location permit. No improvement location permit shall be issued for
a permit application which does not comply with the recorded commitments.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111423E, passed 12-12-2023)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 36-7-4-921 was repealed by P.L.126-2011, Sec. 68.
§ 154.208 DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   The intent of this section is to provide for the adequate,
consistent review of new development and ensure compliance with this chapter;
accommodate traffic and utility systems; and address the unique characteristics
of certain areas of development. Development plan review is provided for by
I.C. 36-7-4-1400. The development plan review process is not intended to
provide an alternative to rezoning, variance, special exception, platting, or
other established procedures, but rather to allow for the administrative review
of site conditions and development plans for consistency with applicable
requirements prior to the issuance of permits.
      (2)   Generally, development plan review shall involve new non-
residential and residential development and shall occur after rezoning and
primary plat approvals. Development plan review may occur before or after any
necessary Board of Zoning Appeals applications based on the characteristics of
each application.
   (B)   Authority and process outline.
      (1)   Development plan required. Development plan approval may be
required upon the discretion of the Board of Zoning Appeals and the Plan
Commission.
      (2)   Exemptions. The following types of development shall be exempt from
the requirements of this section, but shall be required to obtain an
improvement location permit and/or any other permit or approval otherwise
required by this subchapter:
         (a)   Sign installation. The replacement or installation of any sign
(s) not occurring as part of an improvement to any other aspect of the
property.
         (b)   Parking lot expansion. The expansion of an existing parking lot
that does not result in (1) a greater than 25% or 2,000 square feet (whichever
is greater) increase in the surface area of the parking previously available on
the property (2) the demolition of any structure or (3) the need for
modifications to street accesses.
         (c)   Structural expansion. The expansion of an existing structure or
the construction of an accessory structure that does not result in a greater
than 25% increase in the floor area of the structures that were previously
existing on the property and does not require the provision of additional
landscaping, parking, or other improvements regulated by this subchapter.
         (d)   Residential use/structure. The placement of an individual
manufactured home or the construction or expansion of a single-family
residential use and structure (building permit required).
      (3)   Review and approval authority. The Administrative Officer, or his
or her designee, in their role as staff for the Plan Commission, shall have the
authority to review and approve development plans in conjunction with the
Technical Review Committee as required by this subchapter.
         (a)   Waiver of requirements. Neither the Administrative Officer nor
the Advisory Plan Commission shall have the authority to waive any requirement
of this subchapter in the review of a site development plan. All variances from
the terms of this subchapter shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
         (b)   Revision process. The procedure for the review of proposed
amendments or revisions to previously approved site development plans shall
follow the process for the initial approval of site development plans outlined
in this section.
   (C)   Application materials.
      (1)   General requirements. All applications may be obtained from the
town website and /or online permit application system. Fees, as established by
the Town Council, shall be paid to the Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee, prior to attending TAC or when invoiced by the town, whichever occurs
first.
         (a)   Application forms. All applications shall be made on forms
provided by the Administrative Officer.
         (b)   Review schedule. All applications shall be assigned reference
and/or docket numbers by the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee.
Applications shall be scheduled by the Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee, for the appropriate meetings and/or public hearings based on the
completeness of the application consistent with the requirements of this
section and the appropriate adopted calendar of filing and meeting dates for
the Plan Commission.
      (2)   Application. The applicant shall submit an application for
development plan review, an affidavit and consent of property owner(s) (if the
property owner is someone other than the applicant), a copy of the deed for the
property involved (if required by the Administrative Officer), and required
supporting information to the town permit system.
         (a)   Application material format. All documents and drawings shall be
provided in digital format in a manner specified by the Administrative Officer.
         (b)   Supporting information. Supporting information shall include,
but not be limited to, that described by this subchapter. The Administrative
Officer, County Surveyor, Town Engineer, Technical Review Committee, and/or
Plan Commission may request additional supporting information, which shall be
provided by the applicant.
      (3)   Required materials. The following materials shall be submitted with
all development plan applications:
         (a)   Summary statement. A summary statement of the characteristics
and operation of the development, including the population densities, presence
of any adult uses, and number of potential employees. The statement shall
include any written commitments being made regarding the development plan.
         (b)   Site description. A general description of the site and its
ownership including:
            1.   The name, street address, e-mail address, and telephone number
of the applicant;
            2.   The name, street address, e-mail address, and telephone number
of any land surveyors, engineers, or other professionals responsible for the
development plan design;
            3.   The name, street address, e-mail address, and telephone number
of the primary contact individual for the application (it shall be indicated if
the primary contact person is the applicant or a contracted design
professional).
         (c)   Cover sheet. All cover sheets shall contain the following
information:
            1.   A conceptual drawing describing the future development of all
contiguous holdings described above shall be provided by the applicant upon the
request of the Administrative Officer, County Surveyor, Town Engineer,
Technical Review Committee, and/or Plan Commission. At a minimum the conceptual
drawings shall include a description of the general street access points,
general land uses, and general drainage conditions and plans;
            2.   A vicinity map shall clearly identify the subject property,
property that is contiguous to the subject property that is owned and/or
otherwise controlled by the owner(s) or developer of the subject property, and
the current zoning and use of all property within 600 feet of the subject
property;
            3.   A site location map showing the subject property and adjacent
streets;
            4.   The legal description of the subject property and common
address of the site; and
            5.   The proposed name of the development (if applicable).
         (d)   Property survey. A property survey, drawn to an appropriate
scale with the scale clearly indicated and a graphic scale for reference,
bearing the seal of a land surveyor registered in the State of Indiana, and
showing the following existing features for the subject property and all land
within 100 feet of the property lines of the subject property, and illustrating
the following:
            1.   The boundary lines and dimensions of the subject property;
            2.   All structures (specifically indicating any structures
recognized as outstanding, notable, or contributing in the Indiana Historic
Sites and Structures Inventory - Hancock County Interim Report; and those
listed in the National Register of Historic Places; and/or the Indiana Register
of Historic Sites & Structures);
            3.   Topography interpolated from USGS sources and/or otherwise
meeting the requirements of the Town Engineer (topographic information shall
tie into horizontal and vertical control points);
            4.   Significant wooded areas and other isolated trees and
wetlands;
            5.   One hundred-year floodplain and 100-year floodway boundaries
(including elevations);
            6.   Public and private streets (including street names), sidewalks
and other pedestrian paths, rights-of-way, and easements;
            7.   Required building setbacks and any build-to lines and buffer
yards;
            8.   All known drainage areas, tiles, pipes and structures;
            9.   Utility services (including fire hydrants) and easements;
            10.   Street accesses; and
            11.   Any other paved or otherwise improved areas.
         (e)   Site plan. A site plan, drawn to an appropriate scale with the
scale clearly indicated and a graphic scale for reference, bearing the seal of
a professional engineer or land surveyor registered in the State of Indiana,
clearly showing all proposed aspects of the property and all features relevant
to the site including:
            1.   All setbacks and buffer yards;
            2.   Topography (including elevation contour lines at two-foot
intervals, or otherwise meeting the requirements of the County Surveyor/Town
Engineer);
            3.   Preserved wooded areas and isolated trees and wetlands;
            4.   Existing and proposed structures (including buildings, fences,
and walls);
            5.   All structure heights, dimensions, and floor areas;
            6.   Areas of outdoor storage;
            7.   Permanent dumpsters and trash areas;
            8.   Locations, dimensions, and design features (including all curb
radii, tapers, and parking space dimensions) of road accesses, interior drives,
parking lots, loading docks or areas, intersection sight visibility triangles,
and interior sidewalks;
            9.   Open spaces and specific landscaped areas;
            10.   Locations and capacities of public and private utilities;
            11.   The location, width, and purpose of all easements;
            12.   The use of each structure and the amount of parking required
and provided for the use;
            13.   Any public improvements including sidewalks, street trees,
and existing or planned public right-of-way dedications;
            14.   Locations for temporary uses, such as seasonal sales areas;
and
            15.   Locations of proposed signs (separate permit required).
         (f)   Landscaping plan. A landscaping plan, prepared by a landscape
architect registered with the State of Indiana, drawn to an appropriate scale
with the scale clearly indicated and a graphic scale for reference, showing the
following:
            1.   Proposed landscaping, buffer yards, and street trees;
            2.   Topography (including elevation contour lines at two-foot
intervals, or otherwise meeting the requirements of the Town Engineer);
            3.   One hundred-year floodplain and 100-year floodway boundaries
(including elevations);
            4.   Existing and proposed public and internal sidewalks, multi-use
paths, and other pedestrian ways;
            5.   The size and spacing of the plantings at the time of
installation, height at maturity, and the botanical and common name of the
species proposed to be used to meet the requirements of this subchapter; and
            6.   All existing trees and vegetation to be preserved, and the
drip lines for such trees (in which no construction activity shall occur).
         (g)   Stormwater drainage plan. A site drainage plan, bearing the seal
of a professional engineer or land surveyor registered in the State of Indiana,
including all calculations required by the County Surveyor/Town Engineer. The
drainage plan shall comply with Chapter 52, as amended from time to time, and
include the location of the following:
            1.   All natural streams, regulated drains, and watercourses,
            2.   One hundred-year floodways and 100-year floodplains (including
elevations),
            3.   All marshes, wetlands, and wooded areas, and
            4.   All drainage area features as described in the drainage
calculations.
         (h)   Lighting plan. A site lighting plan prepared by an electrical
engineer licensed by the State of Indiana drawn to an appropriate scale with
the scale clearly indicated and a graphic scale for reference, showing the type
and location of all exterior lighting fixtures (site and building lighting).
The lighting plan shall include a photometric drawing.
         (i)   Erosion control/sedimentation plan. A site erosion control
sedimentation plan, drawn to an appropriate scale with the scale clearly
indicated and a graphic scale for reference, showing proposed erosion and
sediment control measures.
         (j)   Construction plan. A site construction plan, drawn to an
appropriate scale with the scale clearly indicated and a graphic scale for
reference, showing:
            1.   The location of any proposed construction trailer and worker
parking;
            2.   The location, height, and dimensions of any temporary
construction related signs;
            3.   Any temporary site accesses to be used during construction;
            4.   All traffic control signs and devices (subject to the approval
of the Town Engineer and consistent with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices);
            5.   Any temporary utility connections; and
            6.   The location of any stockpiles of dirt, construction
materials, and construction waste dumpsters or storage areas, wash off areas.
         (k)   Street plan and profile.
         (l)   Sanitary sewer plan and profile.
         (m)   Utility plan, including water and electricity.
         (n)   Grading plan.
   (D)   Review process.
      (1)   Pre-application meeting required. A preliminary informal meeting
shall be held with town staff prior to application submittal. This meeting may
be waived by the Administrative Officer.
      (2)   Technical Advisory Committee. The Technical Advisory Committee
(TAC) shall review the development plan, including all supporting information
on the date established by the adopted calendar of meeting and filing dates.
         (a)   Representation. The applicant and/or a representative of the
applicant must be present at the meeting to present the development plan and
address any questions the Committee may have.
         (b)   Considerations. In reviewing the development plan, the Committee
shall consider whether or not the proposed development plan is consistent with
the requirements and intent of this subchapter, any other applicable adopted
requirements of the town, and the standards of the local utility providers.
         (c)   Possible action - development plans that are not wholly
proposing a single-family residential land uses and structures. The Committee
may forward a favorable recommendation, recommendation with modifications, or
an unfavorable recommendation to the Plan Commission.
            1.   Favorable recommendation. The Committee may forward a
favorable recommendation for the development plan if it complies with all
applicable requirements of this subchapter.
            2.   Recommendation with modifications. The Committee may forward a
recommendation contingent upon one or more modifications for the development
plan if it is generally consistent with the considerations for approval
outlined in this subchapter and require that minor modifications to be
completely in compliance with the requirements and intent of this subchapter.
The applicant shall revise the development plan proposal consistent with the
Committee comments and supply revisions for review by the Administrative
Officer, or his or her designee, prior to review and action by the Advisory
Plan Commission.
            3.   Deny. The Committee may forward an unfavorable recommendation
for the development plan if it is found to be inconsistent with the
considerations outlined in this subchapter. The development plan can be
resubmitted for review by the Technical Review Committee and action by the Plan
Commission if there have been significant changes as determined by the
Administrative Officer. If not, there shall be a one-year waiting period before
the same development plan can be resubmitted as a new application.
            4.   Continue. The Committee may request that action on a
development plan be continued if requested by the applicant, if a determination
has been made by the Administrative Officer that sufficient information has not
been provided, or if the applicant or an appropriate representative of the
applicant fails to appear at the Committee meeting. Development plan
applications that are continued shall be automatically docketed for the next
Committee meeting, unless otherwise requested by the applicant.
         (d)   Possible action - single-family residential development plans.
The Plan Commission delegates approval and/or denial power for all development
plans, which propose only single-family residential land uses and structures
(may include other accessory or temporary land uses and structures), to the
Technical Advisory Committee.
            1.   Approval. The Committee shall approve development plans which
comply with the requirements of this subchapter. The Committee may also approve
developments plans based on conditions of approval, if it is found that minor
modifications are needed to comply with the requirements of this subchapter.
            2.   Deny. The Committee shall deny development plans which are
found to be inconsistent with this subchapter. The development plan can be
resubmitted for review by the Committee if there have been significant changes
as determined by the Administrative Officer. If not, there shall be a one-year
waiting period before the same development plan can be resubmitted as a new
application.
            3.   Continue. Development plans that are found to need major
modifications to comply with the requirements of this subchapter may be
continued by the Committee for the petitioner to make the necessary revisions.
The Administrative Officer may also continue petitions if it is determined that
sufficient information has not been provided or if the applicant or an
appropriate representative fails to appear at the Committee meeting. The
petitioner may also request a continuance. Applications that are continued
shall be automatically docketed for the next Committee meeting.
      (3)   Plan Commission preparation. All development plans, except those
which propose only single-family residential land uses, shall be placed on the
agenda for the next meeting of the Plan Commission consistent with the adopted
calendar of meeting and filing dates. The applicant shall revise the
development plan proposal consistent with any Technical Review Committee
comments and submit the revised plans to staff a minimum of seven days prior to
review by the Plan Commission and shall provide such revision for review.
      (4)   Plan Commission review. The Plan Commission shall review the
development plan and any supporting information.
         (a)   Representation. The applicant and/or a representative of the
applicant must be present at the public hearing to present the development plan
and address questions from the Commission.
         (b)   Presentations. The Commission shall consider a report from the
Administrative Officer describing the findings of the Technical Review
Committee and any testimony from the applicant and any interested parties in
making its decision.
         (c)   Possible action. The Plan Commission may approve, approve with
modifications, deny, or continue the development plan application.
            1.   Approve. The Plan Commission may approve the development plan
if it is consistent with all applicable requirements of this subchapter.
            2.   Approve with modifications. The Plan Commission may approve
the development plan with modifications if it is generally consistent with all
applicable requirements of this subchapter. The Plan Commission may impose
conditions on the approval of a development plan if the conditions are
necessary to satisfy the requirements and intent of this subchapter. Accepted
conditions shall become written commitments which shall be recorded by the
applicant with the Hancock County Recorder before any construction activity
commences. A copy of the recorded commitments shall be provided to the
Administrative Officer prior to any construction activity taking place.
            3.   Deny. The Plan Commission shall deny the development plan if
it is not consistent with the applicable requirements of this subchapter.
Development plan applications that have been denied shall not be refiled for a
period of one year from the date of the denial, unless a different design, that
addresses the reasons for denial, is submitted.
            4.   Continue. The application may be continued based on a request
by the Administrative Officer or the applicant; an indecisive vote wherein the
item is essentially tabled; a determination by the Commission that additional
information is required prior to action being taken on the request; or if the
applicant or an appropriate representative of the applicant fails to appear at
the public hearing. Additional legal notice shall not be required unless
specified by the Plan Commission. The continuing of all applications shall be
consistent with the adopted rules and procedures of the Commission.
      (5)   Permits. Prior to any site work or construction activity, the
applicant shall be required to obtain the appropriate improvement location
permit and any other required permits specified by this subchapter.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 121322C,
passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.209 WRITTEN COMMITMENTS.
   An applicant of a map amendment (rezoning) petition may make written
commitments in recordable form regarding the characteristics of the proposed
future use of, or the resolution of outstanding issues in existence on the
subject property consistent with I.C. 36-7-4-613 which, if accepted by the
Advisory Plan Commission, must be recorded by the applicant prior to
application for an improvement location permit.
   (A)   Origin of commitments.  Written commitments may be proposed by the
applicant as an element of the initial submittal of application materials, as a
response to comments made by the Technical Review Committee, or in response to
any modifications requested by the Plan Commission.
   (B)   Consideration of commitments.  Any commitments shall be considered by
the Technical Review Committee and/or the Plan Commission at the time of their
review of the application.
   (C)   Filing of commitments. Following final action being taken on the
development plan application, the written commitments in recordable form shall
be documented by the Administrative Officer. A copy of the commitments shall be
maintained by the Administrative Officer for the records of the Plan
Commission.
   (D)   Enforcement of commitments. The written commitments shall be in
recordable form and considered part of this chapter binding on the subject
property.
      (1)   Successors in interest. The written commitments shall be binding on
the owner(s) of the subject property, any subsequent owners of the subject
property, and any property owner(s) or entity that acquires an interest in the
subject property or any portion of the subject property.
      (2)   Enforcement. The written commitments shall be enforceable by the
Plan Commission as if they are a part of this chapter, consistent with the
provisions of §§
154.225 through
154.228, Enforcement and Penalties.
      (3)   Modification .  Written commitments may be modified by the Plan
Commission. Interested parties shall file a petition clearly defining the
commitments to be modified in their existing language, their proposed language
and the reason(s) for the requested modification(s). The petition shall be
signed by the property owner(s), or petitioner with the written consent of the
property owner(s), to be filed with the Office of the Administrator. The matter
will be set for a hearing as would a petition for a rezoning with the notice
requirements associated therewith to be strictly adhered to and followed.
Modification of said written commitment(s) will be considered using the
standard that applied to the original action resulting in the subject
commitment(s).
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 36-7-4-613 was repealed by P.L.126-2011, Sec. 68.
§ 154.210 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   The following procedure applies to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy permit.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The intent of the certificate of occupancy permit
procedure is to coordinate building, planning, and engineering related issues
and approvals into a single process and to better ensure the public safety and
general welfare.
   (B)   Certificate requirements.  It shall be unlawful and in violation of
this chapter for any builder or property owner(s) to allow any improvement that
requires an improvement location permit to become occupied or utilized prior
to:
      (1)   Legally obtaining an improvement location permit;
      (2)   Successfully completing all required inspections, including the
final inspection; and
      (3)   Obtaining a certificate of occupancy from the Administrative
Officer.
   (C)   Inspection. Upon the completion of the work approved through an
improvement location permit, the permit holder shall contact the Plan
Commission Office and schedule a final inspection to verify the installation of
improvements consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Certificate issuance. The Administrative Officer or designee shall
issue the certificate of occupancy if the improvements comply with this
chapter, the Subdivision Control Ordinance, and other applicable requirements.
The Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, may also issue a limited or
temporary certificate of occupancy at his or her discretion.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.211 FOOD TRUCK PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. A food truck permit is required for all food trucks
wishing to operate within the town corporate limits. Food trucks permits are
valid for one year. Permit holder wishing to operate for more than one year
will need to re-apply each year. The permit year shall run from April 1 through
March 31.
   (B)   Permit review/approval. Food truck permits are reviewed by the
Administrative Officer or his or her designee. The Administrative Officer shall
approve/deny permits based upon the rules and regulations listed in §
154.060 through
154.076. The permit application shall be accompanied by, but not limited to the
following:
      (1)   A valid permit from the County Board/Department of Health.
      (2)   A valid permit from the Indiana Department of Revenue for a retail
merchant.
   (C)   Permit fee. A permit fee shall be charged for all food trucks as
outlined in the Town Fee Schedule.
   (D)   Penalties. It shall constitute a violation of this section for any
person or entity to operate a food truck in violation with the provisions of
this section or to fail to obtain the appropriate permit as outlined in this
section. Each day the violation exists constitute a new and separate violation.
In order to adequately regulate food trucks, the fine schedule and notice of
fine schedule in the town’s Zoning Ordinance and Fee Schedule, as they relate
to food trucks, shall be replaced by the following:
      (1)   Notice of violation may delivered via hand-delivery, certified
mail, or posting the notice of the food truck. The first notice of violation
shall result in a $50 fine.
      (2)   Subsequent violations shall result in a doubling of the fine
amount, i.e., second violation fine = $100, third violation fine = $300, and so
on.
      (3)   Violators have five days to pay a violation before a late fee of
$50 is charged.
      (4)   If the violator (permit holder) refuse to pay the fine, the
Administrative Officer may refer the violation to the Plan Commission attorney
in order to enforce the provisions of this section through court action
including but not limited to fine, court costs, and attorney fees.
(Ord. 040814A, passed 4-8-2014)
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
§ 154.225 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Authority. The Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, Building
Official, Town Engineer, and/or Administrative Officer (including their staff
and/or designees) are designated to enforce the provisions, regulations, and
intent of this chapter. All remedies and enforcement shall comply with the
powers set forth in I.C. 36-7-4-1000 et al. and all other applicable state
laws.
   (B)   Violations. Complaints made pertaining to compliance with provisions
of this chapter shall be investigated by the Administrative Officer, or his or
her designee. The Administrative Officer may include other officials, such as
the Town Engineer, Building Official, Police, or any of their designees in the
investigation. Action may or may not be taken depending on the findings of the
investigation. The degree of action will be within the sole discretion of the
Administrative Officer, and should reflect both what is warranted by the
violation as well as a consistent approach to the enforcement of this chapter.
   (C)   Inspections. Investigations of property may be done by the
Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, from a right-of-way, from
adjacent property (with permission of that property owner(s)), or from the
property suspected of a violation once he or she has described the purpose of
the inspection to the owner(s), tenant, or occupant at the time of the
inspection.
   (D)   Entry. In order to execute inspections, the Administrative Officer or
inspectors shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable
time for the purpose of carrying out his, her or their duties in the
enforcement of this chapter, unless the owner(s) or occupant of the premises
refuses to permit entry to the Administrative Officer or inspectors when entry
is sought pursuant to this section. In the event of such a refusal, the
Administrative Officer may petition any judge of a court of competent
jurisdiction for the issuance of an administrative search warrant. The petition
shall identify the premises upon which entry is sought and the purpose for
which entry is desired. The petition shall state the facts giving rise to the
belief that a condition which is in violation of this chapter on the premises,
or that a violation in fact exists and must be abated, and that the condition
or violation is not a lawful nonconforming use to the best of the affiant's
belief. Any warrant issued pursuant to the petition shall order the owner(s) or
occupant to permit entry to the Administrative Officer or inspectors for the
purposes stated therein.
   (E)   Responsibility. The property owner(s) shall be held responsible for
all violations on his or her or their property.
   (F)   Types of violations. The following items shall be deemed violations of
this chapter in response to which the Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee, shall take all actions necessary to eliminate the violations using
all authority granted to the Administrative Officer pursuant to this
subchapter.
      (1)   Illegal structures.  The placement, erection, and/or maintenance of
a primary structure, sign, accessory structure(s) or any other element
determined by the Administrative Officer not to be in conformity with the
provisions or explicit intent of this chapter.
      (2)   Illegal use.  Conducting a use or uses that do not comply with any
element of the provisions or explicit intent of this chapter.
      (3)   Failure to obtain a permit.  Failure to obtain an improvement
location permit or other permits and approvals required by this chapter.
      (4)   Violation of stop-work-order. Proceeding with work after issuance
of a stop-work-order or in violation of a memorandum of agreement.
      (5)   Failure to comply with development standards. Any failure to comply
with any element of the development standards and/or regulations of this
chapter.
      (6)   Failure to comply with commitments.  Any failure to comply with
commitments or conditions made in connection with a rezoning, special
exception, or variance; or other similar and documented commitment whether
recorded or not.
      (7)   Failure to comply with permit requirements. Any failure to comply
with the plans submitted and approved in order to obtain a permit.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.226 CONSTRUCTION PROCESS VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Stop-work orders. The Administrative Officer, or his or her designee,
may place a stop-work-order on any land/property improvement process.
      (1)   Procedure. Stop-work orders shall be issued by written letter that
shall state the nature of the violation and that the work and/or any other
illegal activity must stop immediately until the matter is resolved. If the
property is occupied by someone other than the property owner(s), a copy of the
stop work order shall be provided to the occupant(s). This letter shall be
posted in a conspicuous place and be delivered/mailed to the property owner(s).
      (2)   Reasons. Reasons for a stop-work order include, but are not limited
to:
         (a)   Not complying with any element of the development standards and/
or any regulation of this chapter or the McCordsville Subdivision Control
Ordinance.
         (b)   Not obtaining an improvement location permit or any other
required permit or approval prior to the construction or installation of any
improvement for which an approval or permit is required by this chapter.
         (c)   Not completing structures or other improvements consistent with
any approved improvement location permit, variance, special exception, or other
approval.
         (d)   Not meeting the conditions or commitments of a special
exception, variance, rezoning, or other approval whether recorded or not.
         (e)   Not meeting the conditions of a site development plan, planned
unit development final detailed plan, or written any commitment associated
therewith.
         (f)   Illegal use or expansion of use of structures, or structures and
land in combination.
   (B)   Memorandum of agreement. The Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee, must meet with the property owner(s) served the stop-work order
notice within seven days of any such meeting being requested. A memorandum of
agreement shall be drafted stating the conditions by which construction or
action may be resumed. This memorandum of agreement must be signed by the
Administrative Officer and the property owner(s) that is responsible for the
violation.
   (C)   Appeals. Any stop-work order issued as a result of the enforcement of
this chapter, may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals. This appeal shall
follow the provisions established for administrative appeals.
   (D)   Resumption of construction activity. The stop-work order shall be
lifted and construction activity may resume upon either:
      (1)   The resolution of the violation(s) to the satisfaction of the
Administrative Officer; or
      (2)   The execution of all tasks required by the memorandum of agreement.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.227 IMMEDIATE PUBLIC RISK VIOLATIONS.
   Any violation of this chapter that presents an immediate risk to the health,
safety, or welfare of the public or to property within the town may be
corrected by the Administrative Officer, or a property owner(s), firm, or
organization selected by the Administrative Officer without prior notice to the
property owner(s) or other property owner(s) responsible for the violation.
   (A)   Immediate public risk violation defined. Immediate public risk
violations shall include but shall not be limited to:
      (1)   Obstructions.  Signs, structures, landscaping or other materials
placed in an easement, sight visibility triangle, or other public and/or
private rights-of-way in violation of this chapter.
      (2)   Distractions. Any sign, structure, landscaping, or other material
located on private property that serves to distract or inhibit operators of
motor vehicles on adjacent public streets, pedestrians, or other members of the
general public.
      (3)   Other threats. Any other immediate threat to public welfare as
determined by any representative of the town or by the Board of Zoning Appeals
based upon the advice and recommendation of the Administrative Officer.
   (B)   Seizure materials. Any sign, structure, landscaping or other material
that constitutes an immediate public risk violation may be seized by the
Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, in a manner that results in the
least amount of damage to the material or the property on which it is located
under the circumstances.
   (C)   Notice of violations. The Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee, shall provide notice to the owner(s) of the property as listed in the
records of the Auditor's Office. Office upon which the violation was located or
any discernible appropriate owner(s) of materials placed within the right-of-
way in violation of this chapter, by placing a notice in a conspicuous place on
the property and by mailing a letter to that property owner(s).
      (1)   Notice time requirements.  All notice letters shall be sent to the
property owner(s) via certified mail within 24 hours of the seizure. Any notice
that is to be posted on the property shall be posted at the time the material
is seized.
      (2)   Notice contents. The letter and posted notice shall include the
following:
         (a)   A description of the materials seized;
         (b)   A citation of the section(s) of the chapter that were violated
and the characteristic(s) of the violation that posed an immediate threat to
public welfare;
         (c)   The address and phone number of the Administrative Officer and
the name of the person to be contacted by the property owner(s) to discuss the
violation and request the return of the seized item(s); and
         (d)   Instructions describing how, where, and when the seized items
may be claimed.
   (D)   Storage and retrieval of seized materials. The Administrative Officer,
or his or her designee, shall store any sign, structure, landscape materials or
other items seized in a secure location for a period of no less than 30 days
from the date notice was mailed to the property owner(s). The property owner(s)
may claim the seized property at any time following its seizure upon the
payment of the fine specified on the Fee Schedule and the establishment of a
memorandum of agreement between the property owner(s) and Administrative
Officer regarding the future use of the item in a manner consistent with this
chapter.
   (E)   Liability. Neither the Administrative Officer, the town, nor any other
official or entity involved in the seizure shall be liable for any damage to
the seized materials or the property from which they were taken.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 154.228 VIOLATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   General procedures. Unless otherwise provided for by this chapter,
there shall be a minimum of a three-step procedure for the prosecution of
violations of this chapter. Intermediate steps, including additional notices of
violation and extensions of time limits for compliance may be used by the
Administrative Officer at his or her sole and unlimited discretion. However,
the general procedure for all violations shall follow the minimum steps set
forth below. The minimum steps are as follows:
      (1)   Notice of violation. The Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee, shall issue a notice of violation to the property owner(s)
committing, in whole or in part, a violation. The notice of violation is a
warning to the violator(s) that a violation has been observed and that it must
be corrected within 15 days from the date of the notice of violation. The
notice of violation shall be mailed via certified mail, return receipt
requested by the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, or may be
hand-delivered by town staff, who will execute an affidavit certifying
delivery. If the violation is abated within the specified time frame, the
matter will be closed and the landowner will not incur any fines or penalties.
      (2)   Notice of penalty for violation. If a violation is not abated
within the specified time frame in the notice of violation, the Administrative
Officer, or his or her designee, shall issue a notice of penalty for violation
to the property owner(s) committing, in whole or in part, a violation. The
notice of penalty for violation is a citation that states the penalty for the
violation. The notice of penalty for violation shall be mailed via certified
mail, return receipt requested by the Administrative Officer, or his or her
designee, or may be hand-delivered by town staff, who will execute an affidavit
certifying delivery. The property owner(s) in violation will have a 15 days
from the date of the notice of penalty to pay all applicable penalty and
correct the violation. If the Administrative Officer, or his or her designee,
determines that the violation has not been corrected within the specified time
frame, the Administrative Officer may apply additional penalty and/or any other
enforcement action authorized by this chapter.
      (3)   Legal action. If the property owner(s) in violation refuses to pay
the penalty, attorney’s fees, court costs, and/or correct the violation within
the time frame specified by the notice of penalty for violation, the
Administrative Officer may refer the violation to the Board of Zoning Appeals
(BZA) attorney in order to pursue court action through a court of competent
jurisdiction. Additional penalty, attorneys fees, and liens against the
property may also be pursued until the matter is resolved.
   (B)   Monetary fines. Monetary fines may be imposed at the discretion of the
Administrative Officer by issuance of the notice of fines for violations as set
forth above.
      (1)   Multiple violations. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
      (2)   Fine amount. Each separate offense shall be subject to a maximum
fine specified by the adopted Fee Schedule assessed on a per day basis from the
date of compliance requested by the Administrative Officer in the notice of
violation.
         (a)   In addition to any fine imposed, any property owner(s) who
initiates any activity that requires an improvement location permit without
first obtaining such permit may be required to pay two times the normal amount
of the permit fee as an additional fine, consistent with the adopted Fee
Schedule.
         (b)   The amount of any fine shall be as determined by the
Administrative Officer.
      (3)   Payment. The payment of any violation shall be by cash, cashier’s
check, or credit card and shall be delivered to the Administrative Officer, his
or her designee, or paid through the online permit system, who shall forward
the funds to the Clerk-Treasurer for deposit in the appropriate fund.
         (a)   The Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, shall issue
a receipt to the person making the payment.
         (b)   The Administrative Officer may, at his or her discretion, waive
the assessed fine for the timely correction of the violation.
   (C)   Appeals. Any property owner(s) receiving a notice of violation and/or
fine(s) for violation may appeal the violation and/or fine to the Board of
Zoning Appeals. A written statement from the property owner(s) in violation,
either filing an Administrative Appeal consistent with this chapter, shall be
submitted to the Administrative Officer via certified mail at least three days
prior to the date any fine and/or compliance is due.
      (1)   Fines. No additional fines shall accrue from the date of the appeal
until the Board of Zoning Appeals has made a ruling as to the violation and/or
fine.
      (2)   Additional notices. No additional notices will be issued by the
Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, if the property owner(s) in
violation has (have) submitted an appeal.
   (D)   Legal remedies. The Administrative Officer via the Board of Zoning
Appeals (BZA) attorney may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction
to invoke any legal, equitable, or special remedy, for the enforcement of any
ordinance or regulation created under I.C. 36-7-4, as amended from time to
time.
      (1)   Enforcement. Implementation of the legal remedies set forth above
may be used to prosecute violations of the following:
         (a)   The zoning ordinance, subdivision control ordinance, and any
other requirements adopted separately by the Town Council or adopted by their
reference in the zoning or subdivision control ordinance;
         (b)   All agreements with the Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) or its
designees that have been established as written commitments in recordable form;
         (c)   All commitments made in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4 et seq.; and
         (d)   All conditions imposed in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4 et seq.
      (2)   Injunction. The Administrative Officer may bring an action in a
court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a property owner(s) from violating
I.C. 36-7-4 et seq. or any ordinance adopted under I.C. 36-7-4 et seq.
      (3)   Removal of structures. The Administrative Officer may also bring an
action in a court of competent jurisdiction for a mandatory injunction,
directing the property owner(s) to remove a structure erected in violation of
this chapter.
      (4)   Responsibility for prosecution expenses. A defendant/respondent
shall reimburse the Office of the Plan Commission all expenses associated with
the prosecution of a violation of any provision of this chapter, including but
not limited to any fines, attorney’s fees, photocopying charges, mileage,
hours, or portions thereof, devoted to said prosecution by the Administrative
Officer or any employee of the town and any other cost incurred directly or
indirectly by any employee or elected official of the town related to the
prosecution. However, only those costs of enforcement that are documented by
the Administrative Officer, and that have a relationship to the enforcement
action shall be paid by the defendant/respondent.
      (5)   Other parties eligible to seek enforcement. An action to enforce a
written commitment made in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4 et seq. may be brought
in a court of competent jurisdiction by:
         (a)   Rules and procedures provisions. Any property owner(s) who is
entitled to enforce a commitment made in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4 et seq.
under the rules and procedures of the Plan Commission or the Board of Zoning
Appeals in force at the time the commitment was made.
         (b)   Specified parties. Any other specially affected property owner
(s) who was designated in the written commitment.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111423E, passed 12-12-2023)
APPENDIX A: OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF USES
Land Use Matrix
Primary Use Zoning District
            R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 MF 1 MF 2 CN/TC CO CR I1 I2 P OT
Land Use Matrix
Primary Use                     Zoning District
                                R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 MF 1 MF 2 CN/TC CO CR I1 I2 P OT
Agriculture                     S
Agricultural Industry, CFO or
CAFO
Agricultural, Crop Production   S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S     S  S  P  P
(including tree farms)
Agricultural, Farm Implement                                      P  P  P
Sales or Service
Agricultural, Grain Processing
or Milling
Agricultural, Grazing or        S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S     S  S  S  S
Pasture Land
Airport                                                                    S
Amphitheater                                                      S        S S
Animal Shelter                                                    S  S  S
Animal, Clinic or Hospital
(small animals) with outdoor                                         S  S
Kennels
Animal, Clinic or Hospital
(small animals) without outdoor                          S        P  P  P
Kennels
Animal, Grooming                S  S                     P        P  P  P    S
Animal, Kennel, Indoor                                            S  S  S
(including doggy daycare)
Animal, Kennel, Outdoor                                                 S
(including doggy daycare)
Animal, Pet Store                                        S        P          S
Animal, Riding Stables          S                                    S  S
Animal, Veterinary, Large-                                        S  P  P
animal
Antique Shop                                   S    S    S        P          S
Apparel and Accessories                        S    S    P        P          S
Apparel, Alterations/Tailoring                 S    S    P        P  P       S
Appliance Repair                                         S        P  P  S    S
Appliance Store                                          S        P          S
Arcade                                                   S        S  S       S
Assisted Living Facility              S  S  S  S    S    S     S  S
Auditorium                                                        S          S
Automotive Parts Store (without                                   P  P  P
on-site repair services)
Automotive, Car Wash                                     S        P  P
Automotive, Major Service (e.g.                                   S  P  P
Body Shop)
Automotive, Minor Service (e.g.
Oil Changes and Tires &                                           P  P  P
Detailing)
Automotive, Recreational                                          S  S  P
Vehicle Sales or Service
Automotive, Rental (automobiles                                   S  P  P
only)
Automotive, Sales or Lease                                        S  P  P    S
Automotive, Storage (does not                                        S  S
include Rental Establishments)
Automotive, Truck or Bus                                             S  S
Rental, Sales or Service
Bakery, Commercial                                                P  P  P
Bakery, Retail                              S  S    S    P     P  P          S
Banquet Hall                                             S        P          S
Bar or Tavern                                            S     S  S  S       S
Barber or Beauty Shop                       S  S    S    P     S  P          S
Bed & Breakfast Establishment   S  S  S  S  S  S    S    P                   S
Bicycle Sales, Rental or                    S  S    S    P     S  P  S  S    S
Service
Billiard Hall                                            S        S  S       S
Boat or Boat Trailer Sales or                                     S  P  S
Service
Boat Storage, Outdoor                                                S  P
Book Store (including                       S  S    S    P     P  P        S S
stationery)
Bottled Gas Storage or                                                  S
Distribution
Bottling, Beverages (alcoholic                                       S  P
or non-alcoholic)
Bowling Alley                                            S        P  S
Brewery, Industrial Brewery or                                          S
Distillery
Brewery, Micro-Brewery                                   S     S  P  S       S
Camp, Public or Private                                                    S
(excluding RV campgrounds)
Catering Facility                                        S     S  S  P       S
Child Care Center                           S  S    S    P     S  P  S     S S
Club or Lodge, Private or                                S     S  S  S     S S
Public
Coffee Shop                              S  S  S    S    P     P  P  P       S
Collection Center, Recycling                                            S
Collection Point, Donations
(excluding retail                                   S    S     S  P  P  P  S S
establishments with drop-off
centers)
Collection Point, Recycling                         S    S     S  P  P  P  S S
Community Center                S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S     S  P        P S
Confectionery, Commercial (e.g.                          S        S  S  P    S
candy factory)
Confectionery, Retail (e.g.                 S  S    S    P     S  P          S
candy shop)
Conference Center                                        S     P  P  P  S  P S
Construction, Flooring Store                                      P  P  P    S
Construction, Paint or Wall                                       P  P  P    S
Covering Store
Continuum of Care Facility                  S  S    S    S     S
Contractor, Commercial                                            S  S  P
Convenience Store, with                                  S     S  P  S  P
Gasoline Service or Sales
Convenience Store, without                  S  S    S    S     P  P  S       S
Gasoline Service or Sales
Co-working Space                                         P     P  S          S
Data Processing Center                                         P  P  P  P
Daycare                         S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S     S  P        P S
Department or Discount Store,                            P     S  P  S  S    S
Small Scale
Department or Discount Store,                  S    S    P     S  P  S       S
Medium Scale
Department or Discount Store,                                  S  P  S
Large Scale
Distribution Center, Enclosed                                        S  P
(excluding Bottled Gas)
Distribution Center, Unenclosed                                         S
(excluding Bottled Gas)
Driving Range (with or without                                    S  P     S
miniature golf course)
Dry Cleaning &/or Laundry,                                        S  S  P
Commercial or Industrial
Dry Cleaning &/or Laundry,                  S  S    S    P     P  P  P  P    S
Retail
Dwelling, Fraternity or                        S    S                P     P
Sorority
Dwelling, Multi-family                   S  S  P    P                        S
Dwelling, Second Floor/Upper                S  P    P    P     P  P          S
Level(s)
Dwelling, Secondary Suite       S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S                   S
Dwelling, Single-family         P  P  P  P  P  S    S                        P
Dwelling, Student Housing                   S  S    S                P     P S
Dwelling, Two-family                  S  S  S  P    P    S                   S
Electronics Store (excluding                   S    S    P     P  P  P       S
Department or Discount Stores)
Emergency Services Facility or  S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S     P  P  P  P  P S
Station
Farmer's Market, Permanent                     S    S    P     P  P        S S
(enclosed only)
Financial Institution, Bank or                 S    S    P     P  P  P  P  S S
Credit Union
Financial Institution, Payday                            S     S  S  S  S
Loan
Fire Arm/Gun Sales                                                      S
Fire Arm Range                                                          S
Fireworks Sales, Permanent
Fitness Center                              S  S    S    S     P  P  P  P    S
Florist, Retail                             S  S    S    P     P  P          S
Florist, Wholesaler                                               S  P  P
Gallery, Art or Photo
(excluding tattoo or piercing               S  S    S    P     P  P          S
parlors)
Gas Station                                              S     S  P  S  P
Golf Course (with or without
driving range, may include      S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S                 P
country club)
Government Facility (excluding
Penal and Correctional          S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S     P  P  P  S  P S
Institutions)
Greenhouse, Commercial                                            S  P  P
Grocery Store or Supermarket                   S    S    S     S  P  P       S
(stand-alone)
Group Home                      S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S                 P
Gymnastics Center                                        S        P  P  P  S
Health or Day Spa (excluding                   S    S    S     P  P  P       S
sexually oriented businesses)
Home Improvement, Retail (e.g.                           S        P  P  P
Hardware Store or Garden Shop)
Hotel (excluding Extended Stay                           S     S  P  S       S
Hotels)
Hotel, Extended Stay                                           S  S  S
Ice Cream Shop, Retail                      S  S    S    P     P  P  S     P S
Jewelry Store                                  S    S    P     P  P          S
Junkyard/salvage yard
Library                         S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S     P  P        P S
Liquor Store                                             S     S  P          S
Lumber Yard                                                          S  P
Mail Order Store                                         S     S  P  P
Mall, Shopping                                                    P
Manufacturing, Light                                                 P  P
Manufacturing, Medium                                                S  P
Medical Hospital, Center or
Complex 10,000 sq ft or greater                                S  P  S     P
(gross floor area)
Medical or Dental Clinic less
than 10,000 sq ft (gross floor                 S    S    P     P  P  S     P S
area)
Miniature Golf Course (stand-                                     P        S
alone)
Mining or excavation
Mobile Home Park (including                         S
Mobile Home Sales Offices)
Monument Sales (excluding                                               S
Manufacturing)
Mortuary or Funeral Home (with                                    S  S     S
or without cemetery)
Motel                                                             S  S  S
Museum                                                   S        P  P     P S
Music Store                                    S    S    S        P  P       S
Nature Center                   S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S     S  S        P
Nature Reserve or Preserve
(including Wildlife                                                        P
Sanctuaries)
Newspaper or Magazine Stand                 S  S    S    P     P  P  S       S
Night Club (excluding sexually                                    S  S
oriented businesses)
Novelty, Gift, Souvenir Store
(excluding sexually oriented                   S    S    P     P  P          S
businesses)
Nursing Home                                   S    S             S  P     P
Park                            P  P  P  P  P  P    P    P     P  P  P     P S
Parking Facility as a Primary               S  S    S    S     S  S  S  S  S S
Use (public or private)
Penal or Correctional                                                   S  S
Institution
Pharmacy, Stand-alone                          S    S    S     S  P  P       S
Philanthropic Institution or                             S     S  S  S     S
Facility
Post Office with on-site                                       S  S  P  P  S
storage of delivery vehicles
Post Office without on-site                    S    S    S     P  P  P  P  P S
storage of delivery vehicles
Print Shop or Copy Center,                                        S  P  P
Commercial or Industrial
Print Shop or Copy Center,                  S  S    S    P     P  P  P  P    S
Retail
Printing/Publishing Facility                                      S  P  P
Professional Office                            S    S    S     P  P  S       S
Radio or TV Station                                      S     S  S  P  S  S S
Recreation Facility, Indoor                              S        P  P     P
Recreation Facility, Outdoor                                      S  S  S  S
Recreational Vehicle Sales or                                        S  S
Service
Recreational Vehicle Storage,                                        S  P
Outdoor
Religious Place of Worship      S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S     P  P  P  S  P S
Research & Development Facility                                S     S  S
(including Laboratories)
Residential/institutional
Facility for the                                    S                      S
Developmentally Disabled or
Mentally Ill
Restaurant, Drive-In                                     S     S  P  S
Restaurant, Eat-in                          S  S    S    S     S  P  P     S S
Restaurant, Fast Casual                                  S        P
Retail, Bargain                                          S        S
Retail, Small Scale                                      P     S  P  S  S    S
Retail, Medium Scale                                     P     S  P  S       S
Retail, Large Scale                                            S  P  S
Retirement Facility                         S  S    S    S     S  S        S
School, Commercial, Trade or                                   S  S  P  P  P S
Business
School, K-12 and including pre- S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S        S        P
school
School, Nursery                 S  S  S  S  S  S    S    P     S  P        S S
School, University or College               S  S    S    S     S  S  P     P
Self-Storage or Mini-warehouse                                    S  S  P
Sexually Oriented Business                                              S
Shipping Service, Retail                       S    S    S     P  P  P  P    S
Studio, Art/Artist (excluding
Tattoo Parlors and Sexually     S  S  S  S  S  S    S    P        P          S
Oriented Businesses)
Studio, Performing Arts (e.g.               S  S    S    P     P  P  P     P S
Dance, Aerobics, and Pilates)
Tanning Salon                                            S        P  P
Tattoo and/or Piercing Parlor                                           S
Telecommunications Facility/                                      S  S  S
Tower
Theater, Indoor                                          S        P  P     S S
Theater, Outdoor (i.e. drive-                                        S     S
in)
Tobacco Store                                                     S  S  S
Transit Station                          S  S  S    S    S     S  S  S  S  S S
Utility Facility                S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S     S  S  S  P  P S
Vineyard or Orchard             S  S  S  S  S  S    S    S     S  S  P  P
Warehousing, Enclosed                                                S  P
Warehousing, Petroleum Products                                         S
or other hazardous materials
Warehousing, Unenclosed                                                 S
Winery                          S  S                     S        P  S  S    S
 
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 081319C,
passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 111423E, passed 12-12-2023)
APPENDIX B: BULK USE STANDARDS MATRIX
Bulk Use Standards Matrix
Standard Zoning District
         R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 MF1 MF2 CN CO CR I1 I2 P TC
Bulk Use Standards Matrix
Standard    Zoning District
            R1     R2     R3     R4     R5    MF1   MF2   CN      CO     CR    I1    I2    P      TC
Density                                                                               
Max. Gross
Residential <1.0   1.99   2.49   2.99   3.0   N/A   N/A   N/A     N/A    N/A   N/A   N/A   N/A    N/A
Density
(du/acre)
Area
Min. Lot                                                                 2.5   2     3
Area (sq    43,560 23,000 14,000 11,000 7,500 4,000 6,000 23,000  43,560 acres acres acres 43,560 N/A
ft)
Max. Lot
Area (sq    N/A    N/A    N/A    N/A    N/A   N/A   N/A   100,000 N/A    N/A   N/A   N/A   N/A    100,000
ft)
Min. Living                                   1,000 1,000
Area (sq    1,200  1,200  1,200  1,200  1,100 ave.  ave.  720     950    950   N/A   N/A   N/A    720
ft)
Min. Ground
Floor
Living Area 2,500  2,400  1,800  1,500  950   N/A   N/A   N/A     N/A    N/A   N/A   N/A   N/A    N/A
1- story
bldg (sq
ft)
Min. Ground
Floor
Living Area 2,000  1,800  1,400  1,200  720   N/A   N/A   N/A     N/A    N/A   N/A   N/A   N/A    N/A
2- story
bldg (sq
ft)
Lot Width
Min. Lot
Width at    125    100    90     80     70    100   100   100     125    150   125   150   100    65
Bldg. Line
(ft)
Setbacks
Min. Front
yard
Setback1    30     30     30     30     35    30    40    25      40     40    40    45    35     0
Local Rd
(ft)
Min. Front
yard
Setback1    40     40     40     40     35    35    45    35      40     40    40    50    40     5
Collector
St (ft)
Min. Front
yard
Setback1    50     50     50     50     45    40    50    50      50     50    50    50    50     10
Arterial St
(ft)
Min. Front                                                                                        10
yard        20     15     15     10     10    25    30    10      15     15    25    50    15     (aggre-
Setback2                                                                                          gate)
(ft)
Min. Front                                                                                        10
yard        20     25     25     25     25    50    50    20      20     30    40    50    25     (aggre-
Setback2                                                                                          gate)
(ft)
Lot
Coverage
Max. Lot
Coverage (%
of all      25%    35%    35%    35%    40%   60%   75%   65%     65%    75%   75%   75%   50%    N/A
impervious
surfaces)
Height
Max.
Principle
Structure   50     45     45     45     45    60    60    45      45     55    50    55    55     60
Height3
(ft)
Max.
Accessory
Structure   35     26     26     26     26    35    35    35      35     35    35    35    35     26
Height3
(ft)
Misc.
Max. No. of
Primary     1      1      1      1      1     N/A   N/A   N/A     N/A    N/A   N/A   N/A   N/A    N/A
Structures
per lot
 
1 Where no other building exists within 300 feet. Otherwise, the minimum front
yard setback shall be equal to the average setback distance for existing
buildings within 300 ft.
2 Additional buffer yard requirements may apply.
3 In all instances, the height of a structure shall be measured from grade
level at the lowest point of the base of the structure to the highest point of
the structure, excluding necessary appurtenances.
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
APPENDIX C: LIGHTING DRAWINGS
   All lighting shall be consistent with the concept drawings enclosed herein
and shall conform to the town’s standards and specifications.
   Exhibit A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1259.png]
 
   Exhibit B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bf20372466c44cc430ffdc02e141f77a52849a8c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1261.png]
 
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 1110 20C, passed 12-8-2020; Ord. 111423E,
passe d 12-12-2023)
APPENDIX D: OFFICIAL PARKING SCHEDULE
For every ... ... the following number of parking spaces is required ...
                                                           ... the following
For every ...                                              number of parking
                                                           spaces is required
                                                           ...
Employees per shift: for each employee working on the
largest shift (for multi-shift operations ample parking    1
spaces to accommodate shift changes shall be provided
Business Vehicles: for each vehicle stored on-site         1
Dwelling units: for each dwelling unit on-site             2
... in addition to ...
Commercial Use
Auto-oriented facility: for every 200 square feet in any   1
car wash, repair, or modification facility
Dealerships: for each vehicle or mobile home on display at
an auto/boat/RV/farm implement/manufactured home           1
dealership (of an appropriate size, and to be used for the
storage of each vehicle)
Hotel/Motel: for each sleeping unit in any hotel, motel or 1
bed and breakfast
Retail, small: for every 300 square feet in a personal     1
service business, beauty or barber shop, or dry-cleaners
Retail, medium: for every 300 square feet of gross floor
area retail space in all convenience stores, gas stations, 1
greenhouses, grocery stores, department stores, and other
retail facilities
Retail, large: for every 400 square feet of gross floor
area in all hardware, home improvement, furniture, and     1
large appliance stores
Sales facility show rooms: for every 500 square feet in
all auto/boat/RV/or farm implement sales facility show     1
rooms
Self-storage facility: for every 5,000 square feet at a    1
self-storage facility
Office Use
Arts/public space: for every 300 square feet in any        1
library, museum or gallery
Medical/dental office: for every 250 square feet of gross  1
floor area in any medical or dental office or clinic
Professional office: for every 300 square feet in any      1
administrative or professional business office or bank
Public/Institutional Use
Airport: for every 5 hangar or tie-down spaces at an       1
airport or heliport
College/university: for every 2 on-campus residents of a   1
resident-student based college or university
Day care: for every 6 children, permitted by capacity, in  1
any day care facility
Educational facility, after high school: for every 4
students for which a community college, business,          1
vocational trade, or other commuter-based school is
designed
Hospital/nursing home: for every 4 patient beds at a       1
hospital or nursing home
Penal/correctional institution: for every 10 inmates for   1
which a penal or correctional institution is designed
Elementary/middle school: for every classroom for which an
elementary or middle school is designed. See also the      2
Gathering Space requirement for additional requirements
High School: for every 20 students for which a high school
is designed. See also the Gathering Space requirement for  1
additional requirements
Recreation/Assembly Use
Bowling alley: for every lane at a bowling alley           5
Camping facility: for every camp site or cabin at a camp   1
ground
Gathering space, non-business: for every 3 seats in a
restaurant, auditorium, gymnasium, stadium, grand stand,   1
funeral home, church (or other place of worship), or movie
theater
Golf course: for every 9 holes at any golf course          20
Nature area for every ½ acre of area included in a nature 1
area
Recreational facility, sports for every field or court at  20
a sports or recreation facility
Recreational facility, water based: for every 100 square
feet of recreational area at a swimming pool greater than  1
24-inches, skating rink, or public lake
Recreational facility, other: for every 200 square feet of
gross floor area in any fitness center, dance academy,     1
health-spa, private lodge or club, or entertainment center
 
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011)
APPENDIX E: SIGN STANDARDS MATRIX
Sign Standards Matrix
Standard Zoning District
         R1, R2, RE, R4, R5 MF1, MF2 CN CO CR I1, I2 P TC, OT
Sign Standards Matrix
            Zoning District
Standard    R1, R2,
            RE, R4, MF1, MF2 CN     CO     CR     I1, I2    P         TC, OT
            R5
Permitted                                                       
Sign Type
Wall Sign                    P      P      P      P         P         P
Awning Sign                  P      P      P      P         P         P
Projecting                   P      P      P      P         P         P
Sign
Window Sign                  P      P      P      P         P         P
Ground Sign P       P        P      P      P      P         P         P
Unified                      P      P      P      P         P         P
Center Sign
Changeable                          P      P      P         P         P
Copy Sign
Electronic
Message                                    P
Board
Fuel
Station LED                  P      P      P      P
Price
Time &
Temperature                         P      P      P         P         P
Sign
Component
General Sign Standards
Wall Sign   1.5 SF per lineal foot of building or tenant frontage
Area
Max. Wall                    100 SF 200 SF 200 SF 200 SF    200 SF    200 SF
Sign Area
Aggregate           32 SF    200 SF 300 SF 300 SF 300 SF    300 SF    300 SF
Sign Area
Projecting                   24 SF  24 SF  24 SF  24 SF     24 SF     24 SF
Sign Area
Ground Sign 32 SF   32 SF    36 SF  36 SF  36 SF  36 SF     36 SF     36 SF
Areas
Ground Sign 6'      6'       6'     6'     6'     6'        6'        6'
Height
Unified     For sites greater than 5 acres but less than 20 acres - 100 SF
Center Sign For sites 20 acres or greater - 150 SF
Area
Unified     For sites greater than 5 acres but less than 20 acres - 10'
Center Sign For sites 20 acres or greater - 16'
Height
EMB Size                                   24 SF            24 SF
Max. Window                  10% of 10% of 10% of 10% of    10% of    10% of
Sign Area                    window window window window    window    window
Fuel
Station LED                  Counts against permitted sign area
Price
Changeable                   50% of 50% of 50% of 50% of    50% of    50% of
Copy Area                    sign   sign   sign   sign area sign area sign area
                             area   area   area
 
(Ord. 121410, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 111114, passed 11-11-2014)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS
      
III.   STREET NAMES
      
IV.   VACATIONS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
120799A  3-8-2000    Annexes 83.27 acres, more or less
091101B  1-8-2001    Extends corporate boundary of town by incorporating 31.03
                     acres and 75.6 acres, more or less
100700   2-6-2001    Annexes four areas of land, totaling 222 acres, more or
                     less
021301   6-12-2001   Makes real estate of 62.57 acres, more or less, a part of
                     the town
052902A  7-9-2002    Annexation of land commencing at a Harrison monument
101204   10-21-2004  Annexation of a part of the east half of the northwest
                     quarter and the southwest quarter of Section 13
061207   5-13-2008   Annexation of 146.51 acres, more or less
031213   4-9-2013    Changing, extending the corporate boundary of the town
061014   6-10-2014   Changing, extending the corporate boundary of the town
031114   10-14-2014  Annexation of 1,082 acres east and west of County Road 600
                     West
041117   5-9-2017    Changing, extending the corporate boundary of the town
050917A  6-13-2017   Changing, extending the corporate boundary of the town
091217   10-10-2017  Changing, extending the corporate boundary of the town
031318B  4-10-2018   Changing, extending the corporate boundary of the town
031318C  4-10-2018   Changing, extending the corporate boundary of the town
061218   9-11-2018   Changing, extending the corporate boundary of the town
100918   11-13-2018  Changing, extending the corporate boundary of the town
081319   12-10-2019  Annexation of 75 acres west of County Road 600 West
030921   4-13-2021   Annexation of 78 acres east of County Road 600 West
030921A  4-13-2021   Annexation of 59 acres east of County Road 600 West
041321   5-11-2021   Annexation of 146 acres east of County Road 600 West
060821   8-10-2021   Annexation of 62 acres east of County Road 600 West
030822   7-12-2022   Annexation of 82.90 acres west of County Road 600 West
041222B  6-14-2022   Annexation of 156.166 acres west of County Road 400 West
080922B  9-13-2022   Annexation of 68.33 acres west of County Road 600 West
080922C  10-11-2022  Annexation of 80 acres east of County Road 550 West
091322D  12-13-2022  Annexation of 48.225 acres east of County Road 600 West
121223B  2-13-2024   Annexation of 1.15 and 0.33 acres east of County Road 600
                     West and south of State Road 67
040924A  5-14-2024   Annexation of two tracts commonly known as 5457 West 900
                     North
100824B  11-12-2024  Annexation of 80 acres in Buck Creek Township
                    
 
TABLE II: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Investment of public funds; agreement with Participants,
050906   5-9-2006    Bank One, Indianapolis, N.A. as Custodian and MBIA
                     Municipal Investors Service Corporation
                     Authorizing the provision of fire protection and emergency
031015A  3-10-2015   response services by Buck Creek Township without the
                     necessity of a contract
061720   6-17-2020   Adopting the Vernon Township Fire Protection Territory
                     interlocal agreement
                    
 
TABLE III: STREET NAMES
 
Ord.    Date   Description
No.     Passed
111203  11-12- Pendleton Pike (U.S. Highway 36) renamed “Broadway” within the town
        2003
111307B 11-13- Woody Creek Crossing renamed “Wind River Run” for its entire length within the
        2007   town
 
TABLE IV: VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
121695   - -1995     Vacates a portion of the first alley south of the
                     intersection of State Road 67 and County Road 600 West
012696   - -1996     Vacates the previously dedicated but non-built public
                     street beginning at the northwest corner of Lot Number 6
110996   11-9-1996   Vacates three public ways
110904A  12-14-2004  Vacates two portions of real estate
111406A  12-12-2006  Vacates sewer easements
                     Vacates three alleys, beginning at the southwest corner of
111307   12-11-2007  Lot Number 1; beginning at the southeast corner of Lot
                     Number 3; and beginning at the southeast corner of Lot
                     Number 5
070808B  7-8-2008    Vacates right-of-way commencing at the northwest corner of
                     the southeast quarter of Section 26
080823   9-12-2023   Vacates a public way
080823A  9-12-2023   Vacates sanitary sewer easement
101023D  11-14-2023  Vacating a public way
101023E  11-14-2023  Vacating sanitary sewer easement
111423C  1-9-2024    Vacating a public way
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Cites Code Section
I.C. Cites                       Code Section
1-1-1-5                          10.04
1-1-1-7                          10.12
1-1-1-8                          10.06
1-1-4-5                          10.05
1-1-5-1                          10.11
1-1-6-1                          10.08
4-21.5-3                         53.40
4-21.5-3-7                       151.33
4-22-2                           154.005
5-1-14-14                        34.26
                                 33.03,
5-3-1                            153.017,
                                 154.201
5-11-10 et seq.                  34.05
5-11-10                          33.03
5-11-10-1.6                      34.01
5-13-5 et seq.                   34.05
5-13-5-5                         34.05
5-14-3                           34.03
5-14-3 et seq.                   95.04,
                                 154.074
5-14-3-2                         34.25
5-14-3 et seq.                   33.07
5-14-3-2(k)                      34.09
5-14-3-8                         34.09
5-22                             33.03
5-22-3-4                         33.03
5-22-7-5                         33.03
5-22-7-8                         33.03
5-22-8-2                         33.03
5-22-18                          33.03
5-22-18-1                        33.03
5-22-18-5                        33.03
6-1.1-17                         34.22
6-1.1-18.5-9.8                   34.26
6-3.5-1.1-25 (Repealed)          34.27
6-3.5-6-7 (Repealed)             34.26
6-3.5-7-13(b)(2)(D) (Repealed)   34.26
6-3.5-7-13.1(b)(2)(E) (Repealed) 34.26
6-3.5-7-13.5 (Repealed)          34.26
6-3.5-7-13.6 (Repealed)          34.26
6-3.5-7-14 (Repealed)            34.26
6-3.5-7-21 (Repealed)            34.26
6-3.6-9-17                       34.34
7.1-3-9-3                        111.02
7.1-3-9-4                        111.03
7.1-5-12-3                       33.01
7.1-5-12-5                       33.01
7.1-5-12-13                      33.01
8-1.5-5                          52.01
8-21-10                          154.005
8-21-10-3                        154.005,
                                 154.092
8-22-3-1                         34.34
8-23-5                           34.34
9-13-2-41                        73.01
9-13-2-69.7                      73.01
9-13-2-196                       71.01
9-17-2-12                        34.25
9-21-9-2                         73.11
9-21-9-5 (Repealed)              73.11
9-24-4-2 (Expired)               34.25
9-25-2-3                         73.01
9-26-9-3                         34.09
10-13-3-27                       34.25
12-7-2-28.4                      154.005
12-7-2-28.6                      154.005,
                                 154.063
12-7-2-29                        154.005
12-7-2-33.7                      154.005
12-7-2-33.8                      154.005
12-7-2-98.5 (Repealed)           154.005
12-17.2-5-6.3(b)                 154.005
12-28-4-7                        154.005,
                                 154.071
13-11-2-40                       154.005
13-18-10                         154.005
13-18-27                         52.25
13-18-27-18                      52.26
13-21-3-12(a)(4)                 52.26
14-22-40-3                       131.03
14-28-1                          152.39
14-28-1-26                       152.39
14-32                            52.27
14-34                            52.23,
                                 52.24
22-9-1-4 et seq.                 91.02
22-9-5-6                         91.02
22-9.5-1 et seq.                 91.01
22-9.5-2-2                       91.02
22-9.5-2-3                       91.02
22-9.5-2-4                       91.02
22-9.5-2-8                       91.02
22-9.5-2-9                       91.02
22-9.5-2-11                      91.02
22-9.5-2-13                      91.02
22-9.5-3                         91.03
22-9.5-3 et seq.                 91.09
22-9.5-4-8                       91.10
22-9.5-5                         91.02
22-9.5-5-1                       91.03
22-9.5-6                         91.02,
                                 91.10
22-11-14-6                       93.04
22-12                            151.33
22-12-1-4                        151.27
22-12-1-5                        151.27
22-12-1-7                        151.27
22-12-1-14                       151.27
22-12-1-16                       151.27
22-12-1-17                       151.27
22-12-1-18                       151.27
22-12-1-22(b)(12)                151.34
22-12-1-24                       151.27
22-12-1-26                       151.27
22-12-7                          151.29
22-13                            151.33
22-13-2-3(b)                     151.34
22-13-2-6                        151.28
22-13-2-7                        151.33
22-13-2-7(b)                     151.34
22-13-2-9                        151.28
22-13-2-11                       151.29
22-14                            151.33
22-15                            151.33
22-15-3                          151.31
22-15-4                          151.28
26-1-3.1-502.5                   53.19
31-6-4-15.7 (Repealed)           130.02
31-27                            154.005
31-34.1                          154.005
31-37-2.2                        154.005
31-37-2.3                        154.005
31-37-2.5                        154.005
31-37-3-3.5                      130.02
31-37-19-27                      130.02
32-25                            154.005
32-25-2-9                        151.27
32-30-6-6                        94.01,
                                 94.21
33-24                            34.08
33-36-2-1 et seq.                32.01
33-36-2-3                        32.01
34-6-2-86(1)(B) (Repealed)       52.26
34-24-1-1                        34.23
34-24-1-5                        34.23
34-24-1-9                        34.23
34-28-5-1(b)                     52.26
35-47-2-3(b)                     34.25
36-1-3-8                         150.99
36-1-3-8(a)(10)                  10.99
36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B)               94.18,
                                 94.22
36-1-4-16                        35.05
36-1-5-4                         31.02,
                                 151.34
36-1-6-4                         94.21,
                                 151.33
36-1-6-9                         151.33
36-1-6-9(e)                      52.26
36-1-6-9(f)                      52.26
36-1-8-5                         34.22
36-1-8-5.1                       34.22
36-1-8-11                        34.05
36-1-10                          34.28,
                                 34.33
36-1-10.5                        34.08
36-1-20.2                        31.02
36-1-21                          31.02
36-2-7-10                        94.22
36-4-6-11                        31.02
36-4-8                           33.03
36-5-2-2                         10.15
36-5-2-9.4                       31.02
36-5-2-9.8                       Adopting Ordinance
36-5-4                           33.03
36-5-4 et seq.                   34.05
36-7                             34.08
36-7-2-7                         34.21
36-7-4 et seq.                   153.002,
                                 154.002
36-7-4 et seq.                   154.005,
                                 154.228
                                 35.04,
36-7-4                           152.01,
                                 153.002,
                                 154.228
36-7-4-202                       35.04
36-7-4-207                       35.04
36-7-4-207(b)                    154.022
36-7-4-212                       154.022
36-7-4-213                       154.022
36-7-4-216                       35.04,
                                 154.022
36-7-4-217                       154.022
36-7-4-218                       154.022
36-7-4-223                       154.022
36-7-4-401                       154.022
36-7-4-405                       154.022
36-7-4-405(b) and (c)            150.04
36-7-4-405(h)                    150.04
36-7-4-602                       154.004
36-7-4-602(b)                    154.004
36-7-4-602(c)                    154.004
36-7-4-603                       154.004,
                                 154.162
36-7-4-606(f)                    154.162
36-7-4-608                       154.162,
                                 154.205
36-7-4-613 (Repealed)            154.209
36-7-4-615 (Repealed)            154.164,
                                 154.205
                                 153.004,
36-7-4-700                       154.005,
                                 154.022
36-7-4-706                       153.017
36-7-4-707(c)                    153.030
36-7-4-900                       154.005,
                                 154.023
36-7-4-902                       35.04,
                                 154.023
36-7-4-905                       154.023
36-7-4-906                       35.04
36-7-4-916                       154.023
36-7-4-918.4                     154.202
36-7-4-918.5                     154.202
                                 154.202,
36-7-4-921 (Repealed)            154.203,
                                 154.204,
                                 154.207
36-7-4-1000 et al.               154.225
36-7-4-1000                      154.204
                                 154.005,
36-7-4-1400                      154.022,
                                 154.208
36-7-4-1402(c)                   154.022
36-7-4-1511(i)                   154.166
36-7-4-1512                      154.162
36-7-4-1513                      154.162
36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28       151.01
36-7-9-2                         94.22,
                                 151.01
36-7-9-4                         151.02
36-7-9-14                        151.08
36-7-12-4                        35.01
36-7-12-5(d)                     35.01
36-7-12-18                       35.01
36-7-14-25.1(a)                  34.28,
                                 34.33
36-7-14-25.2                     34.28,
                                 34.33
36-7-14-27                       34.28,
                                 34.33
36-7.5-4-2                       34.26
36-8-3-4                         35.07
36-8-3-4.1                       35.07
36-8-3-20                        35.05
36-8-3-20(f)                     35.05
36-8-6-2                         35.06
36-8-8                           35.06
36-8-9                           35.07
36-8-9-3.1(a)                    35.07
36-8-9-4                         35.07
36-8-14.4                        34.39
36-8-16 (Repealed)               150.04
36-8-17                          151.32
36-8-19-8.5                      34.39
36-9                             34.08
36-9-7                           35.09
36-9-23                          34.35,
                                 51.03
36-9-23-31                       51.01
36-9-25                          51.01
36-9-25-11                       51.01
36-10                            34.08
36-10-3-4                        35.02
                                 
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Ord. No.    Date Passed Description
030299A     3-2-1999    95.04
2012-061212 6-12-2012   31.02
010819      1-8-2019    32.04
021120      2-11-2020   32.04
011221      1-12-2021   32.04
                       
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2991C    3-9-1991    95.01 -
                     95.03
2991D    3-9-1991    35.05
101291   10-12-1991  35.05
61392    7-11-1992   34.20
91292    9-9-1992    34.01
121292A  12-12-1992  30.02
120995   - -1995     95.15 
                     95.17
121695   - -1995     TSO Table IV
012696   - -1996     TSO Table IV
110996   11-9-1996   TSO Table IV
110996A  11-9-1996   Ch. 72 Schd. I
051097   5-10-1997   34.21
121397A  12-13-1997  35.05
071198   7-11-1998   33.03
071198A  7-11-1998   33.03
102898   11-14-1998  93.01 -
                     93.03
110999   - -1999     53.38
120799B  - -1999     35.02
030299A  3-2-1999    33.03
040699SU 4-6-1999    53.35 -
                     53.40
040699A  4-6-1999    91.01 -
                     91.10
050499   6-1-1999    33.01
060199   6-1-1999    35.01
080100   - -2000     53.01
120799A  3-8-2000    TSO Table I
091900A  9-19-2000   34.01
120500   12-5-2000   34.02
091101B  1-8-2001    TSO Table I
100700   2-6-2001    TSO Table I
050801B  5-8-2001    34.03
021301   6-12-2001   TSO Table I
061201   6-12-2001   150.01
071901   7-19-2001   95.04
071001B  9-11-2001   51.01
010802   1-8-2002    150.01
031202B  3-12-2002   Ch. 72 Schd. II
052902   5-29-2002   33.02
052902A  7-9-2002    TSO Table I
111202A  12-10-2002  53.37,
                     53.38
111202B  12-10-2002  150.02,
                     150.99
071603   8-12-2003   51.02
111203   11-12-2003  TSO Table III
031104   3-11-2004   35.03
051104   5-11-2004   Ch. 72 Schd. II
081004A  8-10-2004   34.22
101204   10-21-2004  TSO Table I
                     92.01 -
101204B  12-14-2004  92.04,
                     92.99
                     131.01 -
101204A  12-14-2004  131.05,
                     131.99
110904A  12-14-2004  TSO Table IV
020905   2-9-2005    33.15 -
                     33.25
071205A  7-12-2005   50.01
071205B  7-12-2005   95.04
091305C  9-13-2005   95.15,
                     95.99
091305D  9-13-2005   34.21
050906   5-9-2006    TSO Table II
071106B  7-11-2006   34.23
111406A  12-12-2006  TSO Table IV
                     10.99,
                     70.99,
                     71.99,
                     Ch. 72 Schd. II,
121206C  12-12-2006  90.99,
                     92.99,
                     94.99,
                     130.99,
                     150.99
031307   3-13-2007   34.04
041007A  4-10-2007   111.01 -
                     111.03
081407B  8-14-2007   Ch. 72 Schd. II
111307A  11-13-2007  150.03,
                     150.99
111307B  11-13-2007  TSO Table III
111307F  11-13-2007  34.24
111307   12-11-2007  TSO Table IV
061207   5-13-2008   TSO Table I
061008   6-10-2008   Ch. 72 Schd. II
070808B  7-8-2008    TSO Table IV
081208   8-12-2008   34.05
090908A  10-14-2008  53.15 -
                     53.23
031009B  3-10-2009   33.03
041409   4-14-2009   33.40 -
                     33.53
071409   7-14-2009   34.25
081109   8-11-2009   34.05
101309   11-10-2009  53.16
111009   11-10-2009  94.99
041310A  - -2010     34.26
                     90.01 -
101210   - -2010     90.13,
                     90.99
011210   1-12-2010   Ch. 72 Schd. II
071310   7-13-2010   34.06
110910   11-9-2010   35.04
                     154.001 -
                     154.005,
                     154.020 -
                     154.025,
                     154.040,
                     154.041,
                     154.060 -
                     154.076,
                     154.090 -
                     154.092,
                     154.110 -
121410   1-11-2011   154.121,
                     154.140 -
                     154.148,
                     154.160 -
                     154.167,
                     154.180 -
                     154.186,
                     154.200 -
                     154.210,
                     154.225 -
                     154.228, Ch. 154 Apps.
                     A 
                     E
                     153.001 -
                     153.004,
                     153.015 
                     153.017,
                     153.030 -
                     153.038,
121410A  1-11-2011   153.050 -
                     153.059,
                     153.070 -
                     153.079,
                     153.090,
                     153.100 -
                     153.104,
                     153.999
020811A  2-8-2011    34.27
                     151.25 -
091311B  9-13-2011   151.34,
                     151.99
                     130.01,
091311C  9-13-2011   130.03,
                     130.99
101111   10-11-2011  94.40,
                     94.41
011012   2-14-2012   150.04,
                     150.99
071012   7-10-2012   93.99
                     71.01 -
081412A  8-14-2012   71.07,
                     71.99
081412B  8-14-2012   70.01,
                     70.99
081412C  8-14-2012   32.01 -
                     32.04
081412D  8-14-2012   34.07
081412E  8-14-2012   34.31
081412F  8-14-2012   34.30
081412G  8-14-2012   34.29
111312   11-13-2012  150.05
121112   12-11-2012  Ch. 72 Schd. I
121112A  12-11-2012  30.01
021213A  2-12-2013   53.19
031213B  3-12-2013   53.22
031213   4-9-2013    TSO Table I
040913A  4-9-2013    52.01 
                     52.05
051413   5-14-2013   32.05
051413A  5-14-2013   53.01
051413B  5-14-2013   34.28
070913   7-9-2013    151.01 -
                     151.10
070913A  8-13-2013   150.03
070913B  7-9-2013    Adopting Ordinance
070913C  7-9-2013    53.16 -
                     53.18
081313   8-13-2013   53.19
081313A  8-13-2013   52.02
011414   1-14-2014   32.04
011414A  1-14-2014   71.08,
                     71.99
                     152.01 -
                     152.09,
                     152.20 -
                     152.22,
021114A  2-14-2014   152.35 -
                     152.42,
                     152.55 -
                     152.61,
                     152.99
031114   10-14-2014  TSO Table I
040814   4-8-2014    71.09
040814A  4-8-2014    154.005,
                     154.211
061014   6-10-2014   TSO Table I
                     153.033,
                     153.035,
                     153.036,
                     154.005,
                     154.060,
                     154.061,
                     154.074,
                     154.076,
                     154.091,
111114   11-11-2014  154.113,
                     154.119 
                     154.121,
                     154.142,
                     154.145,
                     154.146,
                     154.148,
                     154.202,
                     154.208, Ch. 154, Apps.
                     A,
                     E
120914A  12-9-2014   34.33
011315   1-13-2015   Ch. 72 Schd. I
021015   2-10-2015   34.32
031015A  3-10-2015   TSO Table II
041415A  4-15-2015   Ch. 72 Schd. II
051215   5-12-2015   32.04
051215A  5-12-2015   34.32
                     73.01 -
081115   8-11-2015   73.14,
                     73.99
090815   9-8-2015    153.033
041216   4-12-2016   33.05
                     153.032,
                     153.036,
                     153.053,
                     154.005,
                     154.072,
041216-A 4-12-2016   154.074,
                     154.113,
                     154.114,
                     154.121,
                     154.140 -
                     154.145,
                     154.148
041216-B 4-12-2016   Ch. 72 Schd. II
051016   5-10-2016   34.34
061416   6-14-2016   33.04
071216   7-12-2016   154.060
091316   9-13-2016   Ch. 72 Schd. II
091316A  9-13-2016   95.04
                     154.005,
101116-A 10-11-2016  154.041,
                     154.074
110916   11-9-2016   95.04
                     51.01,
                     53.17,
121316C  1-10-2017   53.19,
                     53.23,
                     53.38
                     Ch. 72 Schds.
021417   2-14-2017   I,
                     II
031417-A 3-14-2017   33.06
031417B  3-14-2017   Adopting Ordinance
041117   5-9-2017    TSO Table I
042817   4-28-2017   95.04,
                     95.05
050917A  6-13-2017   TSO Table I
050917B  5-9-2017    51.01
091217   10-10-2017  TSO Table I
021318-A 2-13-2018   35.07,
                     35.08
031318B  4-10-2018   TSO Table I
031318C  4-10-2018   TSO Table I
050818   5-8-2018    35.06
081418-B 8-14-2018   Ch. 72 Schd. II
061218   9-11-2018   TSO Table I
091118   9-11-2018   35.06
100918   11-13-2018  TSO Table I
111318A  11-13-2018  51.03
111318B  11-13-2018  34.35,
                     51.03
                     93.02,
111318   12-19-2018  93.03,
                     93.99 
121918   12-19-2018  51.03
051419   5-14-2019   32.04
061119A  6-11-2019   71.10
                     154.060,
                     154.073,
                     154.076,
                     154.091,
010819   2-12-2019   154.113,
                     154.114,
                     154.119,
                     154.145,
                     154.181
081319   12-10-2019  TSO Table I
081319C  8-13-2019   Ch. 154, App. A
111219   12-10-2019  51.03
                     52.02,
111219A  12-10-2019  52.03,
                     53.16
111219C  11-12-2019  34.36
121019B  12-10-2019  Ch. 72 Schd. I
121019C  12-10-2019  34.37
011420A  1-14-2020   Ch. 72 Schd. I
021120A  2-11-2020   Ch. 72 Schd. I
031020   4-14-2020   53.16
031720   3-17-2020   34.08
041420   4-14-2020   34.38
041420B  4-14-2020   Adopting Ordinance
061720   6-17-2020   TSO Table II
062320   6-23-2020   34.39
071420C  7-14-2020   Ch. 72 Schd. I
                     93.02,
090820   9-8-2020    93.03,
                     93.99
                     154.005,
                     154.077 -
                     154.080,
                     154.090,
                     154.093,
111020C  12-8-2020   154.113,
                     154.118 -
                     154.121,
                     154.142,
                     154.145,
                     154.148,
                     Ch. 154, App. C
030921   4-13-2021   TSO Table I
030921A  4-13-2021   TSO Table I
041321   5-11-2021   TSO Table I
051121   5-11-2021   34.40
060821   8-10-2021   TSO Table I
030822A  3-8-2022    Adopting Ordinance
030822   7-12-2022   TSO Table I
041222C  4-12-2022   34.39
041222B  6-14-2022   TSO Table I
051022B  6-14-2022   53.22
061422C  6-14-2022   93.04
071222A  8-9-2022    154.094
080922B  9-13-2022   TSO Table I
080922C  10-11-2022  TSO Table I
091322D  12-13-2022  TSO Table I
101122C  11-9-2022   151.11,
                     151.99
102522   10-25-2022  30.01
110922A  - -2022     51.03
110922B  12-13-2022  51.03
                     154.160 -
121322C  12-13-2022  154.167,
                     154.208
071123   7-11-2023   154.076
080823   9-12-2023   TSO Table IV
080823A  9-12-2023   TSO Table IV
101023D  11-14-2023  TSO Table IV
101023E  11-14-2023  TSO Table IV
111423A  11-14-2023  31.01
                     34.09,
                     154.005,
                     154.060,
                     154.061,
                     154.066,
                     154.076,
111423E  12-12-2023  154.111,
                     154.113,
                     154.121,
                     154.200,
                     154.206,
                     154.228, Ch. 154, App.
                     A,
                     C
111423C  1-9-2024    TSO Table IV
121223   12-12-2023  Ch. 72, Sch. II
121323B  2-13-2024   TSO Table I
010924   2-13-2024   35.02
021324   2-13-2024   34.01
031224A  4-9-2024    33.07
                     112.01 -
031224C  6-11-2024   112.09,
                     112.99
040924A  5-14-2024   TSO Table I
                     52.20 -
040924B  5-14-2024   52.27,
                     52.99
                     110.01 -
051424   5-14-2024   110.11,
                     110.99
051424A  5-14-2024   151.01 -
                     151.08
                     71.01 -
051424B  8-13-2024   71.12,
                     71.99
061124   - -2024     35.09
061124A  7-9-2024    Ch. 72, Sch. II
                     94.01 -
                     94.04,
070924   7-9-2024    94.15 -
                     94.22,
                     94.99
100824A  10-8-2024   35.07
100824B  11-12-2025  TSO Table I
111224   11-12-2024  51.03
121024A  12-10-2024  31.01
                     93.01 -
121024D  1-21-2025   93.04.
                     94.99
121024B  2-11-2025   34.09
                    
 
