MILLERSBURG, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord., passed 9-10-2025
State legislation current through 2025 Legislative Service, Pamphlet #3
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588  www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component codes,
titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Millersburg Town Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances”, or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto, and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or subsection.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters, or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning,
application, or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary, and
usual sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Millersburg.
      COUNCIL. The Town Council.
      COUNTY. Elkhart County, Indiana.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads, and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver, and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      TOWN. The Town of Millersburg, Indiana.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing, or other modes
of representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or the person’s
mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(I.C. 1-1-4-5)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable.
If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
   (D)   The repeal of a section or amendment stating that the provisions of a
chapter, subchapter, or section are severable as provided in division (B) above
does not affect the operation of division (B) with respect to that chapter,
subchapter, or section.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority, or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; on the effective date of that ordinance or following the
effective date, the rights, powers, duties, or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority, or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers, and rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday, or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall
not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under
the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture, or
liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings, and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(I.C. 36-5-2-2)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-
way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent violations,
except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and parking.
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   TOWN ORGANIZATION
      
31.   TOWN POLICIES
      
32.   FINANCES
      
33.   PURCHASING POLICY
CHAPTER 30: TOWN ORGANIZATION
Section
   
30.01   Department of Economic Development
   
30.02   Department of Redevelopment
§ 30.01 DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   This is hereby created for the town a Department of Economic
Development with full power and authority to act and to do such acts and things
as are provided by law.
   (B)   The Department of Economic Development shall be under the control of a
commission to be known as the town’s Economic Development Commission. The
town’s Economic Development Commission shall consist of three members to be
appointed by the Town Council in the following manner: one member shall be
selected by the President of the Town Council; one member shall be nominated by
the County Council; and one member shall be nominated by the Town Council.
   (C)   The Commissioners shall take office upon their appointment, and their
terms shall run the following number of years from February 1 following the
original appointment: the Commissioner selected by the President of the Town
Council, three years; the Commissioner nominated by the County Council, two
years; and the Commissioner nominated by the Town Council, one year.
   (D)   At the expiration of the respective terms of each of the Commissioners
originally appointed, their respective successors shall be selected and
nominated before the expiration of the term in the same manner as the original
appointee, and each succeeding member shall serve a term of three years. In the
event that the appropriate body fails to make a nomination within the time
specified by law, the President of the Town Council may select and appoint a
person without nomination. Each such selectee or nominee appointed shall be
notified in writing and appointed by the President of the Town Council within
ten days after receiving such nomination. In the event that any person
appointed as Commissioner fails to qualify by taking and subscribing an oath of
office within such ten-day period, or if any Commissioner, after qualifying,
dies, resigns, vacates, or is removed from office, a new Commissioner shall be
selected or nominated and appointed to fill such vacancy in the same manner as
the Commissioner so appointed and shall serve for the remainder of the vacated
term, Commissioners shall receive no salary but be entitled to reimbursement
for any expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties.
   (E)   The town’s Economic Development Commission shall have all of the
powers and duties as are provided by law.
(Ord. 1991-10, passed 8-26-1991)
§ 30.02 DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The Town Council now deems it to be in the best interest of the town
and its citizens to afford a maximum opportunity for rehabilitation,
redevelopment, or economic development of areas by private enterprise in the
town by establishing a Department of Redevelopment.
   (B)   The Town Council hereby establishes the Department of Redevelopment of
the town. The Department will be controlled by a board of five members known as
the Town Redevelopment Commission.
   (C)   Pursuant to the Act, all of the territory within the corporate
boundaries of the town will be a special taxing district to be known as the
town’s Redevelopment District for the purpose of levying and collecting special
benefit taxes for redevelopment and economic development purposes as provided
in the Act. The Town Council finds and determines that all of the taxable
property within this special taxing district will be considered to be
benefitted by the redevelopment projects and economic development projects
carried out under the Act to the extent of the special taxes levied under the
Act.
   (D)   The President of the Town Council shall appoint three of the five
members of the Town Redevelopment Commission. The term of office of the members
of the Town Redevelopment Commission shall commence from the date of their
appointment and expire on January 1, 2015.
(Ord. 2012-9, passed 10-24-2012)
CHAPTER 31: TOWN POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Internal control standards
   
31.02   Premium Conversion Plan adopted
   
31.03   Copy machine fees
   
31.04   Dump truck rental
   
31.05   Comprehensive Plan
   
31.06   Fees for certain law enforcement records
ADA Provisions
   
31.20   ADA Transition Plan
   
31.21   Adoption of ADA standards
   
31.22   ADA Coordinator and grievance procedure
Drug Free Workplace
   
31.35   Overview
   
31.36   Policy
   
31.37   Prohibited drugs
   
31.38   Alcohol
   
31.39   Reporting violations
   
31.40   Employee rehabilitation
   
31.41   Testing
Elections
   
31.55   New election wards
   
31.56   Additional standards
   
31.57   Election of Town Council members
   
31.58   Seats elected by ward
Town Facility Rental Fees
   
31.65   Millersburg Town Community/Meeting Room
   
31.66   Ball diamonds and pavilion
Cross-reference:
   Fair housing, see
Ch. 93
   Town organization, see
Ch. 30
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS.
   The town adopts as policy the internal control standards as set forth by the
state’s Board of Accounts Uniform Internal Control Standards for Indiana
Political Subdivisions Manual as expressly written and published by the state’s
Board of Accounts in September, 2015, and as amended from time to time. In
order to implement these standards, the Clerk-Treasurer shall certify in
writing that personnel as defined in statute have received the required
training. All officers, elected officials, and employees are required to comply
with the policy. Employees who fail to comply with this policy are subject to
discipline, including, but not limited to, termination of his or her
employment.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 6-22-2016)
§ 31.02 PREMIUM CONVERSION PLAN ADOPTED.
   The Section 125 Premium Conversion Plan, copies of which are on file in the
office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer, is adopted and incorporated as part of this
code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. passed 2-27-2013)
§ 31.03 COPY MACHINE FEES.
   (A)   Copies will be as follows:
      (1)   Fifteen cents per page;
      (2)   One dollar for legal documents (i.e., ordinances);
      (3)   One dollar for faxes, more than one page actual charge;
      (4)   One dollar for e-mail copies; and
      (5)   Five dollars for Marshal reports.
   (B)   All copies must be made on the town’s copy paper.
(Res. 2006-2, passed 2-8-2006)
§ 31.04 DUMP TRUCK RENTAL.
   (A)   The rental of the dump truck will be available to the town residents
on a rental agreement basis and when the Street Department is not in need of
the truck. The rental fee will be $150 per use.
   (B)   The Town Council determined to put the money received from the rental
of the town dump truck into the Local Road and Street Fund.
(Res. 2003-6, passed 6-23-2003)
§ 31.05 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   (A)    Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-509, the Town Council of the Town of
Millersburg, Indiana does hereby approve and adopt the Town of Millersburg,
Indiana 2021 Comprehensive Plan as an amendment to the 2006 Elkhart County
Comprehensive Plan, to be applicable in and the governing comprehensive plan
for the Town of Millersburg, Indiana.
   (B)   The Town of Millersburg, Indiana 2021 Comprehensive Plan shall be on
file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Millersburg
Clerk-Treasurer and at the Elkhart County Department of Planning and Zoning. In
addition, the Town of Millersburg, Indiana 2021 Comprehensive Plan shall be
placed on file in the Office of the Elkhart County Recorder.
(Ord. 1982-4, passed 8-30-1982; Res. 2021-12, passed 9-22-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Planning and zoning, see
Ch. 151
§ 31.06 FEES FOR CERTAIN LAW ENFORCEMENT RECORDS.
   (A)   Fee schedule for law enforcement officer reports. There is hereby
established the following fee schedule for the Town of Millersburg Police
Department for providing law enforcement officer reports:
      (1)   Accident report. The fee for providing an accident report shall be
$5.
      (2)   Incident report. The fee for providing an incident report shall be
$5.
   (B)   Deposit of fees. The fees collected under this section for providing
accident and incident reports shall be deposited in the Local Law Enforcement
Continuing Education Fund.
   (C)   Use of Local Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund. The monies in
the Local Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund shall be expended at the
discretion of the Millersburg Town Marshal for the continuing education and
training of law enforcement officers employed by the Millersburg Police
Department and for equipment and supplies for law enforcement purposes.
(Ord. 2021-13, passed 9-8-2021)
ADA PROVISIONS
§ 31.20 ADA TRANSITION PLAN.
   The town hereby approves the ADA Transition Plan: Pedestrian Network.
(Res. 2013-04, passed 2-27-2013)
§ 31.21 ADOPTION OF ADA STANDARDS.
   The Town Council adopts the 2010 Americans with Disabilities (ADA) Standards
for Accessible Design and 2011 Guidelines for Pedestrian Facilities in the
Public Right-of-Way.
(Res. 2013-02, passed 2-27-2013)
§ 31.22 ADA COORDINATOR AND GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Town Council is designated as the ADA Coordinator for the town.
   (B)   The notice under the Americans with Disabilities Act is adopted as the
town notice under the Americans with Disabilities Act.
   (C)   The town grievance procedure under the Americans with Disabilities Act
is adopted as the grievance procedure for addressing complaints alleging
discrimination on the basis of disability in the provision of services,
activities, programs, or benefits by the town.
   (D)   In compliance with federal and state laws as set forth above, the Town
Council resolves to post the required information regarding the ADA
Coordinator, notice under the Americans with Disabilities Act, and town
grievance procedure under the Americans with Disabilities Act on its website
and at such other locations as may be determined from time to time.
(Res. 2013-03, passed 2-27-2013)
DRUG FREE WORKPLACE
§ 31.35 OVERVIEW.
   The town makes a commitment to provide employees a safe working environment,
to ensure that employees, equipment, and operating practices comply with health
and safety standards, and to maintain public confidence in the town and its
employees. Since the town values each employee, the town offers employees
assistance in dealing with alcohol and drug abuse problems.
(Ord. 2014-2, passed 1-22-2014)
§ 31.36 POLICY.
   (A)   The town requires all employees to report for work in a condition that
allows them to perform their duties in a safe and efficient manner. Employees
will not be permitted to work under the influence of alcohol or with prohibited
drugs in their systems thereby affecting job performance.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of this subchapter will be considered just
cause for disciplinary action, up to and including discharge, even for a first
offense. In addition, refusal to adhere to any part of the policy may be
considered an act of insubordination and also may lead to disciplinary action
up to and including discharge.
   (C)   This subchapter and related procedures may be modified by the town at
any time in order to comply with any applicable federal, state, or local laws
or to better serve the needs of the town.
(Ord. 2014-2, passed 1-22-2014)
§ 31.37 PROHIBITED DRUGS.
   (A)   Prohibited drugs are defined as illegal substances, including
controlled substances as defined in the Controlled Substance Act (21 U.S.C. §
8120 and 21 C.F.R. §§ 1308.11 to 1308.15) and prescription controlled substance
which have not been prescribed by a licensed physician or dentist for specific
treatment purposes for the employee. Abuse of prescription or over-the-counter
drugs will also be treated as a substance abuse problem under this subchapter.
   (B)   This subchapter prohibits the illegal use, sale, transfer,
distribution, possession, or unlawful manufacture of narcotics, drugs, or other
controlled substances while on the job or on town premises (including vehicles
used for town business). These include, but are not limited to, marijuana,
cocaine, crack, PCP, heroin, LSD, amphetamines, hallucinogens, and
barbiturates. Any illegal substances found on such premises will be turned over
to the state police and may lead to criminal prosecution.
(Ord. 2014-2, passed 1-22-2014)
§ 31.38 ALCOHOL.
   (A)   The use of alcohol on the job or on town premises is prohibited,
unless such use is non-abusive and is part of an authorized official event held
off town premises. The use of alcohol in vehicles used for town business is
strictly prohibited.
   (B)   Alcohol possession applies to all open or unsealed alcoholic beverage
containers. Such containers are not allowed on the job or on town premises,
unless their possession is part of an authorized official event. Possession of
such containers in vehicles used for town business is never authorized.
(Ord. 2014-2, passed 1-22-2014)
§ 31.39 REPORTING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Employees must, as a condition of employment, abide by the terms of
this subchapter and report any conviction to the town under a criminal drug
statute for violations occurring on or off town premises when conducting town
business. Report of a conviction must be made to the town within five business
days after the conviction. The town will then notify the appropriate
contracting officer within ten days after receiving notice from either the
employee or from another source. (These requirements are mandated by the Drug-
Free Workplace Act of 1988.)
   (B)   An employee who is involved with off the job illegal drug activity may
be considered in violation of this subchapter. In determining whether
disciplinary action will be imposed for this activity, the town will consider
the circumstance of each incident, including, but not limited to, any adverse
effect the employee’s actions may have on its customers, other employees, the
public, or the town’s reputation and image.
   (C)   Any questions regarding the reporting of violations should be directed
to the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 2014-2, passed 1-22-2014)
§ 31.40 EMPLOYEE REHABILITATION.
   (A)   Health maintenance is primarily a personal responsibility and it is
the individual’s responsibility to correct unsatisfactory job performance or
behavioral problems caused by alcohol or drug abuse. In an effort to assist
employees, the town will provide various means for employees and their family
members to remain aware of the dangers of substance abuse in the workplace and
to overcome drug and alcohol related problems.
   (B)   Employees with a personal alcohol or drug related problem are
encouraged to volunteer to participate in a approved rehabilitation program
upon referral from the Employee and Family Assistance Program before work
performance becomes affected.
   (C)   Participation in a rehabilitation program will not be considered a
barrier to employment nor a cause for disciplinary action. Employees will not
be disciplined merely because of participation in a rehabilitation program or
excused from the disciplinary consequences of conduct which is in violation of
this subchapter or any other town policies or job requirements.
   (D)   Any employee identified through a town investigation as having a
substance abuse problem also may not avoid disciplinary action by requesting to
participate in an approved rehabilitation program.
   (E)   Circumstances in each case will be evaluated to determine the course
of action to be taken (i.e., whether the employee will be offered the
opportunity to participate in a rehabilitation program and/or will be subject
to discipline).
(Ord. 2014-2, passed 1-22-2014)
§ 31.41 TESTING.
   (A)   The town will not ask employees to submit to random alcohol or drug
tests.
   (B)   Alcohol or drug tests may be required for employees in the following
circumstances:
      (1)   When unsatisfactory job performance or other employee behavior is
reasonably indicative of substance abuse;
      (2)   During and after participation in a drug or alcohol rehabilitation
program for a reasonable period of time as determined by the town; and
      (3)   When required by law.
   (C)   If a supervisor identifies an employee with a behavior pattern and/or
job performance reasonably indicative of substance abuse, the supervisor (with
the concurrence of the next level of supervision) may recommend that the
employee have a fitness for duty examination by a physician designated by the
town. The physician will determine whether a fitness for duty examination is
necessary and whether alcohol or drug tests will be required.
   (D)   Pre-employment drug testing is part of the pre-employment physical.
The method of testing will be determined by the town. Applicants who test
positive for prohibited drugs in their systems will not be offered employment.
Any questions regarding reapplication opportunities should be directed to the
Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 2014-2, passed 1-22-2014)
ELECTIONS
§ 31.55 NEW ELECTION WARDS.
   (A)   The Town Council hereby divides (and/or re-divides) the town into
three election wards for the purpose of conducting elections of town officers.
   (B)   The boundaries of such wards, to be numbered one through three, are as
follows.
      (1)   Ward One shall have the following boundaries/dimensions: All that
portion of the town which lies to the centerline of Jefferson Street north
commencing on the north town limits line at a point where the centerline of
Jefferson Street extended north intersect said line; thence from Main Street to
a point of one-half a block east on Main Street then south through an alley
one-half block then east through an alley one-half block and lies to the
centerline of Sherman Street to said line south of town limits.
      (2)   Ward Two shall have the following boundaries/dimensions: All that
portion of the town which lies east of the first ward and west of a line
described as follows: Commencing on the south town limits line at a point where
the centerline of Jackson Street extended south would intersect said line;
thence north along the centerline of Jackson Street and the centerline extended
to the centerline of Elm Street; thence east along the centerline of Elm Street
to the centerline of Larimer Drive; thence north along the centerline of
Larimer Drive then west on the centerline of Blessing Street then north of the
centerline of Cripe Drive extended to the north town limits line.
      (3)   Ward Three shall have the following boundaries/dimensions: All that
portion of the town which lies east of the second ward.
(Ord. 2002-15, passed 10-28-2002)
§ 31.56 ADDITIONAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Any part of the town which has not been described as included in one
of the wards established by this subchapter shall be included within the ward
that is contiguous to that part and which contains the least population of all
such contiguous wards (if there be more than one ward contiguous to such area),
such population determination shall be per that most recent federal decennial
census.
   (B)   Any part of the town which has been described in this subchapter as
being in more than one ward shall be included in that ward which is one of the
wards in which that part is included in this subchapter, is contiguous to that
part, and contains the least population according to the most recent federal
decennial census.
(Ord. 2002-15, passed 10-28-2002)
§ 31.57 ELECTION OF TOWN COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   The members of the Town Council shall be elected by wards. From and after
the effective date of this subchapter, there shall be three members of the Town
Council elected by ward with one from each respective ward. The terms of office
for the existing seats on the Town Council shall remain unchanged.
(Ord. 2002-15, passed 10-28-2002)
§ 31.58 SEATS ELECTED BY WARD.
   The seats on the Town Council which are to be elected by ward shall be
elected by the voters of the entire town but the candidate elected or selected
must be a resident from the represented ward.
(Ord. 2002-15, passed 10-28-2002)
TOWN FACILITY RENTAL FEES
§ 31.65 MILLERSBURG COMMUNITY/MEETING ROOM.
   (A)   The Millersburg Town Community/Meeting Room shall be leased through
the Town Clerk-Treasurer’s office for the sum of $200 per day. This will
include the restrooms, tables, chairs, cleaning supplies, kitchen serving
utensils, refrigerator, freezer and microwave.
   (B)   All checks concerning the leasing of the Millersburg Town Community/
Meeting Room shall be made payable to the Town of Millersburg and deposited
with the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
   (C)   Anyone desiring to rent the Millersburg Town Community/Meeting Room
shall execute releases as may from time to time be prepared for the purpose of
assuring that said utilization will create no liability on the part of the Town
of Millersburg, Indiana. Contracts must be filled out upon rental request.
(Ord. 2021-11, passed 8-11-2021)
§ 31.66 BALL DIAMONDS AND PAVILION.
   (A)   The Millersburg ball diamonds may be leased through the Park Board/
Town Clerk-Treasurer for the sum of $50 per day; $20 per field (two-hour
limit); $10 per one hour practice; $35 per hour for lights; $30 per day for
concessions; and pavilion with playground (dual sided), restrooms, and picnic
tables will be $75 per day. The entire park rental for less than 500 people
will be $500 for the day; for more than 500 people, it will be $1,000.
   (B)   All checks concerning the leasing of the town parks shall be made
payable to the Town of Millersburg and deposited with the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
   (C)   Anyone desiring to rent the Millersburg ball diamonds or pavilion
shall execute releases as may from time to time be prepared for the purpose of
assuring that said utilization will create no liability on the part of the Town
of Millersburg, Indiana.
(Ord. 2021-10, passed 8-11-2021)
CHAPTER 32: FINANCES
Section
Funds
   
32.01   Local Major Moves Construction Fund
   
32.02   Local Road and Bridge Matching Grant Fund
   
32.03   Employee Retirement Fund
   
32.04   LOIT Special Distribution Fund
   
32.05   Cash Reserve Fund
   
32.06   Rainy Day Fund
   
32.07   Riverboat Wagering Tax Revenue Sharing Fund
   
32.08   Capital Development Fund
   
32.09   Levy Excess Fund
   
32.10   [Reserved]
   
32.11   Park and Recreation Fund
   
32.12   Operating Fund for the Park and Recreation Board
   
32.13   Petty Cash Fund
   
32.14   ARPA Local Fiscal Recovery Fund
   
32.15   Cumulative Fire Protection Territory Equipment Replacement Fund
   
32.16   Donation Fund
Fixed Asset Inventory and Capitalization Policy
   
32.25   Definitions
   
32.26   Land capitalization provisions
   
32.27   Infrastructure capitalization provisions
   
32.28   Building capitalization provisions
   
32.29   Improvements other than building capitalization provisions
   
32.30   Machinery and equipment capitalization provisions
   
32.31   Construction in progress capitalization provisions
   
32.32   Depreciation methods
   
32.33   Procedures for reporting acquisition and disposal of capitalized assets
   
32.34   Responsibility for verifying and accounting for fixed assets
Reimbursement Policy
   
32.45   Travel expenses
   
32.46   Lodging
   
32.47   Meals
   
32.48   Registration fees
   
32.49   Town vehicles
   
32.50   Cellular phones
   
32.51   Uniforms
   
32.52   Audits
   
32.53   Town officials generally
FUNDS
§ 32.01 LOCAL MAJOR MOVES CONSTRUCTION FUND.
   (A)   Establishment of Local Major Moves Construction Fund. There is hereby
established the “Town of Millersburg Local Major Moves Construction Fund”, as
contemplated by House Enrolled Act No. 1008, and I.C. 8-14-16-4(a) forming a
part thereof (hereinafter the “Fund”).
   (B)   Expenditures from the Fund. Moneys in the Fund may be expended only
for the purposes set forth in I.C. 8-14-16-5, as such was incorporated in House
Enrolled Act No. 1008, and as such shall from time to time hereinafter be
amended or expanded, and in a fashion consistent with the provisions of this
section. Moneys in the Fund shall consist of the original allocation to the
town government from the state’s Major Moves Construction Fund, moneys received
hereafter from other state, federal, or local sources, and investment earnings
in the Fund.
   (C)   Regulation on the use of moneys in the Fund. In accordance with I.C.
8-14-16-4(d), the Town Council may appropriate money in the Fund for purposes
described in I.C. 8-14-16-5, provided, however, that such appropriations must
be included as part of the annual budget for the calendar year in accordance
with I.C. 6-1.1-17. Money remaining in the Fund at the end of a particular
calendar year shall remain in the Fund and shall not revert to any other fund.
(Ord. 2006-10, passed 9-13-2006)
§ 32.02 LOCAL ROAD AND BRIDGE MATCHING GRANT FUND.
   A new non-reverting fund to be known as the Local Road and Bridge Matching
Grant Fund (“Fund”), and which is to be given number 258, is now established.
The Fund shall receive moneys from the Local Road and Bridge Matching Grant
Fund through INDOT as well as local match funds transferred from the state’s
LOIT Special Distribution Fund earmarked for local road improvements.
(Ord. 2016-07, passed 12-14-2016)
§ 32.03 EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT FUND.
   (A)   The town elects to enlarge its participation in the Public Employees’
Retirement Fund by including additional classes of employees as stated below in
the coverage under Chapter 340 of the Acts of 1945, all Acts amendatory and
supplemental thereto. This agreement supplements the original dated 7-1-1986.
   (B)   The town agrees to make the required contributions under the Public
Employees’ Retirement Fund Act, which is the Act of 1945, Chapter 340, and all
Acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto, including specifically the
Acts of 1955, Chapter 329, commonly designated as “The Indiana Public
Employees’ Social Security Integration and Supplemental Retirement Benefit
Act”.
   (C)   The following positions are declared to be covered by the Fund:
      (1)   Clerk Assistant/Marshal Assistant;
      (2)   Maintenance Director;
      (3)   Clerk-Treasurer;
      (4)   Town Marshal;
      (5)   Deputy Marshal; and
      (6)   Maintenance Assistant.
   (D)   It is hereby declared that none of the classifications or positions
specified in division (C) above are compensated on a fee basis or of an
emergency nature, or in a part-time category.
(Res. passed 4-7-1997; Res. 2001-3, passed 2-12-2001; Res. 2015-2, passed 1-14-
2015; Ord. passed 4-8-2015; Res. 2018-1, passed 1-10-2018; Res. 2018-3, passed
2-14-2018; Res. 2018-8, passed 9-12-2018)
§ 32.04 LOIT SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION FUND.
   (A)   The LOIT Special Distribution Fund 257 is created to account for the
receipts and expenditures of the one-time special distribution under I.C. 6-
3.6-9-17.
   (B)   The LOIT Special Distribution Fund 257 will be used in accordance with
I.C. 6-3.6-9-17(h)(1)(A).
   (C)   The entire distribution made under I.C. 6-3.6-9-17 will be placed in
the LOIT Special Distribution Fund 257.
   (D)   The moneys deposited into the LOIT Special Distribution Fund 257 may
not revert at any time to any other fund of the town, unless the money will be
used exclusively for the purposes set forth in I.C. 6-3.6-9-17(h)(1)(A).
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 8-24-2016)
§ 32.05 CASH RESERVE FUND.
   (A)   Cash Reserve Fund established. Pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-3-11, a Cash
Reserve Fund is hereby established for the town water utility to receive
transfers to the Cash Reserve Fund of surplus earnings of the town water
utility.
   (B)   Transfer of funds. The Town Council, as the municipal legislative body
and the Works Board for the town water utility, may transfer surplus earnings
of the town water utility from the Cash Reserve Fund to the town’s General Fund
pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-3-11(a). Money may not, however, be transferred from the
Cash Reserve Fund to the town’s General Fund unless the terms and conditions of
any bond ordinance, resolution, indenture, contract under I.C. 8-1-2.2, or
similar instrument binding upon the town water utility is satisfied.
   (C)   Amounts transferred. Upon any transfer of funds from the Cash Reserve
Fund of the town’s water utility to the town’s General Fund, the Town Council
must specify the amount transferred and the account in the town’s General Fund
for the receipt of such funds and the purpose of such transfer. Such
authorization may be reflected in an ordinance, resolution, or the minutes of
the meeting of the Town Council at which such authorization is given.
(Ord. 2018-13, passed - -)
§ 32.06 RAINY DAY FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Rainy Day Fund and all revenue mentioned
in Ord. 2004-1 shall be receipted into this Fund.
   (B)   The revenue receipted into the Rainy Day Fund shall be used for any
governmental purpose. The Rainy Day Fund shall be subject to the same
appropriation process as other funds that receive tax money. The fiscal body
shall make a finding that the proposed use of the Rainy Day Fund is consistent
with the intent of the Fund.
(Ord. 2004-1, passed 2-10-2004)
§ 32.07 RIVERBOAT WAGERING TAX REVENUE SHARING FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Riverboat Wagering Tax Revenue Sharing
Fund for the town and all moneys received shall be deposited into said Fund.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 4-33-13-5(1) Riverboat Wagering Tax Revenue Sharing,
the town shall use the Fund for the following purposes:
      (1)   To fund sewer and water projects, including storm water management
projects;
      (2)   To carry out any governmental purpose for which the fiscal body of
the town appropriates the riverboat wagering tax revenue sharing. The riverboat
wagering tax revenue sharing used for this purpose does not reduce the property
tax levy of the town or reduce the maximum levy of the town;
      (3)   To reduce property levy of the town. (This reduction of property
tax levy does not reduce the maximum levy of the town); and
      (4)   To fund additional property tax replacement credits in property tax
increment allocation areas.
   (C)    Pursuant to I.C. 4-33-13-5, the first year’s distribution must be
appropriated by an additional appropriation. All years thereafter must be
budgeted; if not budgeted and money is left to accumulate, an addition
appropriation must be done when funds are to be used.
(Res. 2003-12, passed 8-25-2003)
§ 32.08 CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby re-established the town’s Cumulative Capital
Development Fund.
   (B)   An ad valorem property tax levy will be imposed and the revenues from
the levy will be retained in the town’s Cumulative Capital Development Fund.
   (C)   The maximum rate of the levy under division (B) above will not exceed
$0.05 per $100 assessed valuation.
   (D)   The town’s Cumulative Capital Development Fund is re-established until
such time as the Fund is rescinded.
   (E)    The funds accumulated in the town’s Cumulative Capital Development
Fund, in accordance with I.C. 36-9-15.5-2, may be used for any purpose for
which property taxes may be imposed within the municipality under the authority
of any of the following statutes which may apply to the town from time to time:
I.C. 8-16-3; I.C. 8-22-3-25; I.C. 14-27-6-48; I.C. 14-33-14; I.C. 16-23-1-40;
I.C. 36-8-14; I.C. 36-9-4-48; I.C. 36-9-15.5; I.C. 36-9-16-2; I.C. 36-9-16-3;
I.C. 36-9-16.5; I.C. 36-9-17; I.C. 36-9-26; I.C. 36-9-27-100; I.C. 36-10-3-21;
or I.C. 36-10-4-36.
   (F)   Notwithstanding division (E) above, the funds accumulated in the
town’s Cumulative Capital Development Fund may be spent for purposes other than
the purposes stated in division (E) above if the purpose is to protect the
public health, welfare, or safety in an emergency situation which demands
immediate action. Money may be spent under the authority of this section only
after the Town Council President issues a declaration that the public health,
welfare, or safety is in immediate danger that requires the expenditure of
money in the Fund.
(Ord. 1992-10, passed 8-31-1992; Ord. 2004-2, passed - -; Ord. passed 4-22-
2020)
§ 32.09 LEVY EXCESS FUND.
   (A)   Levy Excess Fund. Pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-18.5-17, there is hereby
established the Levy Excess Fund.
   (B)   Transfer of levy excess. Following the passage of this section, the
Town Clerk-Treasurer shall hereafter transfer and deposit that part of the
town’s ad valorem property tax levy actually collected in any calendar year
that exceeds 102% of the town’s ad valorem property tax levy for that calendar
year (the “levy excess”) to the Levy Excess Fund. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, in the event that the levy excess for any calendar year is less than
$100, no money shall be deposited in the Levy Excess Fund for that calendar
year.
   (C)   Investment of Fund. The town may invest money in the Levy Excess Fund
in the same manner in which money in the town’s General Fund may be invested.
However, any income derived from investment of the Levy Excess Fund shall be
deposited in and become a part of the Levy Excess Fund.
   (D)   Appropriations. The Levy Excess Fund may not be appropriated until the
expenditure of the money has been included in a budget that has been approved
by the state’s Board of Tax Commissioners under I.C. 6-1.1-17, except that the
town may transfer money from its Levy Excess Fund to other funds to reimburse
those funds for amounts withheld as a result of refunds paid under I.C. 6-1.1-
26. Subject to the limitations set forth in this division (D) and I.C. 6-1.1-
18.5-17, as such may be amended from time to time, the town may use money in
the Levy Excess Fund for any lawful purpose for which money in any of its other
funds may be used.
(Ord. 2002-8, passed 5-13-2002)
§ 32.10 [RESERVED].
§ 32.11 PARK AND RECREATION FUND.
   (A)   There is created a Park and Recreation Fund.
   (B)   All funds coming from taxes levied by the town and appropriated by the
Town Council, other than funds designated for the non-reverting Capital
Improvement Fund, shall be placed in the Fund and paid out on claims allowed by
the Town Council pursuant to appropriations.
   (C)   Any moneys remaining in said Fund at the end of the year and not
committed shall revert to the General Fund of the town and be subject to
appropriation for this Fund or for any other fund as determined by the Town
Council.
(Ord. 1995-8, passed 8-7-1996)
§ 32.12 OPERATING FUND FOR THE PARK AND RECREATION BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby established a non-reverting Operating Fund for the
town’s Park and Recreation Board.
   (B)   All moneys received from fees, rents, concessions, or any other source
other than taxes shall be deposited in said non-reverting Fund.
   (C)   No moneys shall be paid from this Fund unless appropriated from time
to time by the Town Council, but when appropriated, may be paid on claims
presented to the Park and Recreation Board, allowed by the Board and signed by
the President and Secretary of the Board.
(Ord. 1995-11, passed 9-18-1995)
§ 32.13 PETTY CASH FUND.
   It is hereby approved by the Town Council that $25 be taken from the General
Fund, $25 from the Water Fund, and $25 from the Sewer Fund to establish the
following funds:
   (A)   Fifty dollars will be put into a Cash Change Fund which will be used
strictly for making change for customers; and
   (B)   Twenty-five dollars will be put into a Petty Cash Fund for making
disbursements such as postage and the like to be reimbursed periodically by the
Clerk-Treasurer with the appropriate fund.
(Ord. 1994-13, passed 9-19-1994)
§ 32.14 ARPA LOCAL FISCAL RECOVERY FUND.
   (A)   Fund No. 151 is hereby created, which shall be a special, non-
reverting fund designated to receive allocations to the Town of Millersburg,
Indiana from the ARPA.
   (B)   Any monies deposited into said Fund may only be utilized for costs
incurred by the town for the following purposes by December 31, 2024:
      (1)   To respond to the public health emergency with respect to the
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) or its negative economic impacts, including
assistance to households, small businesses, and nonprofits, or aid impacted
industries such as tourism, travel, and hospitality;
      (2)   To respond to workers performing essential work during the COVID-19
public health emergency by providing premium pay to eligible workers of the
town that are performing such essential work, or by providing grant to eligible
employers that have eligible workers or who perform essential work;
      (3)   For the provision of government services to the extent of the
reduction in revenue of the town, due to COVID-19 public health emergency
relative to revenues collected in the most recent full fiscal year of the town,
prior to the health emergency;
      (4)   To make necessary investments in water, sewer, or broadband
infrastructure; and/or
   (C)   The Common Council shall adopt a plan which provides details for the
use of fund.
(Ord. 2021-06, passed 6-9-2021)
§ 32.15 CUMULATIVE FIRE PROTECTION TERRITORY EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT FUND.
   (A)   A Cumulative Fire Protection Territory Equipment Replacement Fund is
re-established for the following purposes: for all uses as set out in I.C. 36-
8-19-8.5 and 6-1.1-41.
   (B)   This Council will adhere to the provisions of I.C. 36-8-19-8.5 and 6-
1.1-41 . The proposed fund will not exceed $0.0333 on each $100 of assessed
valuation. Said tax rate will be levied beginning with taxes for 2022, payable
2023.
   (C)   Clinton Township is the provider unit of the Clinton Township/Town of
Millersburg fire protection territory and the Town of Millersburg is the
participating unit(s) of said fire protection territory. Clinton Township, as
provider unit, is authorized to re-establish this fund. This section contains
or incorporates by reference the contents of the agreement to establish/re-
establish the Fund.
(Ord. passed 3-23-2022)
§ 32.16 DONATION FUND.
   (A)   The town establishes a Donation Fund.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-14-2, a fund may use income received under this
chapter from a community foundation only for purposes of the unit.
   (C)   Funds are donated from residents, public, and/or businesses.
   (D)   Donations towards the town will be receipted into the 2300 fund line
item.
   (E)   Funds will be properly labeled and used towards equipment, town
events/festivities, and the betterment of the town.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-24-2023)
FIXED ASSET INVENTORY AND CAPITALIZATION POLICY
§ 32.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAPITAL ASSETS. Tangible assets of durable nature employed in the operating
activities of the town and are relatively permanent and needed for the
provision or sale of goods or services. This broad group is usually separated
into asset types according to the physical characteristics of the items. The
category types for the CAPITAL ASSETS are: land; infrastructure; buildings;
improvements other than buildings; machinery and equipment; and construction in
progress.
   CAPITAL OUTLAYS. Expenditures which benefit both the current and future
fiscal periods. These cost are for the acquisition of or addition to the city’s
capital assets for those assets with costs of $5,000 or greater and life
expectancies longer than one year.
   ENTERPRISE FUNDS. Those funds used to account for operations that are
financed and operated in a manner similar to private business enterprise, where
the intent of the town is that the expenses, including depreciation of
providing goods and services to the general public on a continuing basis be
financed or recovered primarily through user charges; or, where the town has
decided that periodic determination of revenues earned, expenses incurred, and/
or net income is appropriate for capital maintenance, public policy, management
control, accountability, and other purposes. The ENTERPRISE FUNDS of the town
include the municipally-owned water, wastewater, and electric utilities and any
other utility that may be established by the Common Council. Operation of these
utilities shall require ENTERPRISE FUND accounting and reporting.
   HISTORICAL COST. The cash equivalent price exchanged for goods or services
at the date of acquisition.
   TANGIBLE ASSETS. An organization’s resources that have physical properties
that can be observed by one or more of the physical senses. For the town, these
resources are those items that are used in the provision of services.
(Ord. 2018-4, passed 2-14-2018)
§ 32.26 LAND CAPITALIZATION PROVISIONS.
   (A)   All costs of acquiring land including costs such as appraisals, owner
relocation costs, site surveys, environmental explorations and remediations,
title services, real estate services, and back taxes. Land listings shall
include the location, date of acquisition of the land, and the vending source
where identifiable. Land purchases shall be included without regard to the
initial cost of the acquisition. Legal services, court costs, and other
services directly related to the acquisition of land shall be included in the
land cost. Land purchases that include buildings or other site improvements
shall have an allocation of estimated or known value of the land and a separate
known or estimated value for the buildings or site improvements at the time of
acquisition. The value for the buildings or improvements shall be listed under
the appropriate categories of buildings, infrastructure, or improvements other
than buildings. Costs for preparing the land for its intended purpose
(including contractor payments and/or town workers’ salaries and benefits) such
as demolishing buildings, excavating, cleanup, and/or inspection. Costs of land
rights-of-way for infrastructure (such as roadway, alleys, or sidewalks) shall
be capitalized as infrastructure with estimated or known cost at the time of
acquisition. Expenditures for temporary or permanent easements will be expensed
rather than capitalized.
   (B)   Donated land will be noted as such and will have a listed cost of the
known or estimated fair market value of the land at the time of donation.
Expenditures incurred for professional service related to the transfer of the
land and preparation of the land for its intended use as listed in division (A)
above shall be added to the fair market value.
   (C)   Land purchases made through the use of federal or state funding will
follow the above provisions as listed in division (A) above.
(Ord. 2018-4, passed 2-14-2018)
§ 32.27 INFRASTRUCTURE CAPITALIZATION PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The town will capitalize infrastructure with original cost or
estimated or known value of $5,000 or more at the time of acquisition.
Infrastructure for general town assets includes such items as roads and
streets, street lighting systems, bridges, overpasses, sidewalks, curbs, and
storm water collection systems. For business like departments of electric,
sewer, and water infrastructure, includes the distribution or collection
systems. Electric systems include assets such as electric lines, substations,
and transformers. Sewer systems include assets such as sewer lines, manholes,
and lift stations. Water systems include assets such as water lines, valves,
and fire hydrants. For new infrastructure, the costs of engineering and
construction shall be included. Location and estimated or known date of
construction or acquisition shall be included.
   (B)   Extensions of or replacements of infrastructure assets will only be
included if the cost of installation, extension of, or replacement is $5,000 or
greater.
   (C)   Infrastructure acquired from developers or annexation shall be
included at fair market value at the time of acquisition.
   (D)   Infrastructure acquired with state or federal dollars will be included
on the same basis as indicated in divisions (A) and (B) above regarding
infrastructure.
   (E)   Electric, sewer, and water infrastructures will be depreciated using
life expectancy of the infrastructure and straight line depreciation.
   (F)   Maintenance or repairs necessary to maintain the existing
infrastructures will be expensed. For example, milling and paving, patching,
resurfacing, snow removal, and the like, are considered maintenance activities
and will be expensed. Department operating activities such as feasibility
studies will be expensed and not capitalized as an element of the
infrastructure asset.
   (G)   Department operating activities such as feasibility studies will be
expensed and not capitalized as an element of the infrastructure asset.
(Ord. 2018-4, passed 2-14-2018)
§ 32.28 BUILDING CAPITALIZATION PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The town will capitalize new buildings, building renovations, and
additions to buildings at full cost if the total cost is $5,000 or greater. The
listing will include location, known or estimated date of acquisition, and
vendor if identifiable.
   (B)   Capitalization of building costs will include the preparation of land
for the building, architectural, engineering, and other professional fees,
contractor, subcontractor, and other costs directly attributable to the
construction of a building.
   (C)   Donated buildings will be recorded at fair market value on the date of
transfer with any associated costs.
   (D)   Building purchases using federal or state funding will be included on
the same basis follow the above provisions as listed in divisions (A) and (B)
above.
   (E)   Sewer and water owned buildings will be depreciated using life
expectancy of the infrastructure and straight line depreciation.
(Ord. 2018-4, passed 2-14-2018)
§ 32.29 IMPROVEMENTS OTHER THAN BUILDING CAPITALIZATION PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Improvements other than buildings include assets such as site
lighting, parking lots, and walk paths, pools, and fencing. The town will
capitalize improvements other than buildings if the improvements have a total
cost of $5,000 or greater. The listings of these improvements will include
known or estimated date of acquisition, location, and vendor if identifiable.
   (B)   Capitalization of improvements other than buildings expenditures will
include architectural and engineering fees, shipping costs if any, site work
for the installation of the improvement, contractor, subcontractor, and other
costs directly attributable to the improvement other than building.
   (C)   Donated improvements other than buildings will be recorded at fair
market value on the date of acquisition including any associated costs as
listed in divisions (A) and (B) above.
   (D)   Maintenance or repairs necessary to maintain the existing improvement
other than buildings will be expensed. For example, patching, resurfacing, snow
removal, and the like, are considered maintenance activities and will be
expensed. Department operating activities such as feasibility studies will be
expensed and not capitalized as an element of the infrastructure asset.
   (E)   Improvements other than building expenditures using federal or state
funding will be included on the same basis as listed in divisions (A) and (B)
above.
   (F)   Donated infrastructure will be recorded at fair market value on the
date of transfer with any associated costs.
(Ord. 2018-4, passed 2-14-2018)
§ 32.30 MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT CAPITALIZATION PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The town will capitalize machinery and equipment with original costs
of $5,000 or more original cost. Examples include trucks, cars, mowers,
tractors, pumps and motors, furniture, and security camera systems. Model
numbers and serial numbers will be included when available and applicable.
Departmental location and known or estimated date of acquisition will be
included with the asset listing.
   (B)   Capitalization of machinery and equipment costs will include shipping
or delivery charges. Cost for attachments to equipment that are necessary for
the intended use of the equipment will be included with the machinery and
equipment. Examples of such attachments are: radar and camera units; snow
blades; snow throwers; salt boxes; tractor cabs; and excavation buckets.
   (C)   Leased equipment will only be included if the lease is a lease to
purchase agreement. The principle sum for the lease purchase will be included
in the fixed asset listings.
   (D)   Donated machinery and equipment will be listed at fair market value on
the date of transfer with any associated costs. The procedures for listing
donated items as fixed assets will be the same as those listed in divisions (A)
and (B) above concerning machinery and equipment.
   (E)   Machinery and equipment purchases using state or federal funding will
also follow the above provisions in divisions (A) and (B) above.
(Ord. 2018-4, passed 2-14-2018)
§ 32.31 CONSTRUCTION IN PROGRESS CAPITALIZATION PROVISIONS.
   Construction work shall be recorded as “construction work in progress”.
Projects that have not been completed by the end of a given reporting year will
be included under this item type provided that the project cost is $5,000 or
greater. At the completion of the project, it will be entered under the
appropriate item type of either buildings or improvements other than buildings.
The date of completion of the project will be listed as the date of
acquisition.
(Ord. 2018-4, passed 2-14-2018)
§ 32.32 DEPRECIATION METHODS.
   The town will only depreciate capital assets that are property of the sewer
or water departments. The straight-line method of depreciation shall be used
along with a life expectancy listed for the business like assets. Land is never
depreciated. No salvage value shall be used for the fixed assets. Depreciation
for other capital assets will be calculated beginning with the second year
following the purchase of the asset. The remaining values for assets will be
calculated annually.
(Ord. 2018-4, passed 2-14-2018)
§ 32.33 PROCEDURES FOR REPORTING ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF CAPITALIZED
ASSETS.
   The Town Clerk-Treasurer has asset acquisition and disposal forms that
department heads are required to fill out at the time a fixed asset is acquired
or disposed of. It is imperative that each form be filled out completely so
that the fixed asset report is kept current and is as thorough and accurate as
possible. Disposals will be listed on a separate sheet with the date of
disposal and the type of disposal such as scrapped, sold at auction, or donated
to another non-profit organization. The listings shall be removed from the
fixed asset report and entered in the disposal list during the year following
the disposal of the asset.
(Ord. 2018-4, passed 2-14-2018)
§ 32.34 RESPONSIBILITY FOR VERIFYING AND ACCOUNTING FOR FIXED ASSETS.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall provide each department head with an electronic
listing of the fixed assets for his or her department along with any additions
or deletions that the department head has provided. Each department head fixed
asset listing shall be reviewed by the head of that department at least
annually. Each department head will send to the Clerk-Treasurer a signed sheet
attesting to the accuracy of the department fixed asset list or noting changes
necessary for the accuracy. This sheet with any related information shall be
provided to the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 2018-4, passed 2-14-2018)
REIMBURSEMENT POLICY
§ 32.45 TRAVEL EXPENSES.
    The following policies shall be used in providing or reimbursing for Town
Council Members, Clerk/Treasurer, and town employees for travel accommodations
when such travel has been authorized and budgeted.
   (A)   Travel by commercial airlines, rail services, bus, or similar common
carrier mode will be provided for at the prevailing "coach" or "tourist" rate
when authorized and supported by original receipts.
   (B)   Taxi fare and/or the cost of other local (public) conveyance will be
provided for or reimbursed when supported by original receipts.
   (C)   Parking fees and tolls will be reimbursed when supported by original
receipts.
   (D)   When a personal automobile is used in lieu of common carrier
transportation, the first 700 miles (of a round trip) will be reimbursed at the
rate allowed by the current salary ordinance, miles in excess of 700 miles will
be reimbursed at one-half the maximum IRS rate.
(Ord. 2005-5, passed 12-28-2005; Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-13-2024)
§ 32.46 LODGING.
    Lodging shall be provided for or reimbursed when supported by an original
receipts in the following manner:
   (A)   Single occupancy will be provided at the actual cost.
   (B)   Double occupancy will be provided at the actual cost when both parties
are eligible for reimbursement.
   (C)   Double occupancy will be provided at the single occupancy rate when
only one party is eligible for reimbursement unless room is a one-rate charge.
   (D)   Reimbursement for lodging costs shall include room cost and associated
local taxes. Any other charges made to the room are the responsibility of the
employee.
(Ord. 2005-5, passed 12-28-2005; Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-13-2024)
§ 32.47 MEALS.
   (A)   Meals will be reimbursed at a daily limit of $40 when supported by
original receipts. The town will not reimburse alcohol purchases.
   (B)   When separate checks are not available, an employee may claim
reimbursement for other employees up to the maximum amount provided for in the
preceding section multiplied by the number of employees provided that each
employee is identified by name and that an original receipt is provided.
Payment for meals for any individual will not be made to more than one
individual.
   (C)   No reimbursement will be made for meals when already provided for in
the registration fee.
(Ord. 2005-5, passed 12-28-2005; Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-13-2024)
§ 32.48 REGISTRATION FEES.
   The cost of registration or similar fees for conferences, seminars and other
similar meetings or functions related to town affairs will be provided for or
reimbursed when supported by original receipts. Whenever possible, arrangements
for these affairs should be made by a designated person and directly billed to
the individual. The Town Council may approve a greater amount on a case-by-case
basis. Except in emergencies, approval to incur expenses shall be received in
advance. Receipts for expenses must be turned in to the Clerk/Treasurer.
(Ord. 2005-5, passed 12-28-2005; Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-13-2024)
§ 32.49 TOWN VEHICLES.
   Town vehicles provided for use by town employees are to be used for town
business only, unless approved by the Council or in the case of emergencies.
Police vehicles are exempt as they are on 24 hour call and can be taken home.
No other vehicles are to be taken home unless approved by the Council.
(Ord. 2005-5, passed 12-28-2005; Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-13-2024)
§ 32.50 CELLULAR PHONES.
   Certain employees may be provided cell phones to assist them in the
performance of their required duties for the town. Employees shall be
responsible for reimbursing the town for any calls made or received on the cell
phone over plan minutes per month. The Town Council must approve any
exceptions.
(Ord. 2005-5, passed 12-28-2005; Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-13-2024)
§ 32.51 UNIFORMS.
   The town will furnish uniforms for the Maintenance Department, Street
Department, Police Department, and Utilities Department. The employees will not
be charged as the town requires the use of uniforms and has a contract to rent
and clean the uniforms. The Town Council agrees to add a line item in the
budget 2007 to include weatherproof leather boots.
(Ord. 2005-5, passed 12-28-2005; Ord. 2024-01, passed 3-13-2024)
§ 32.52 AUDITS.
   The town agrees to pay any and all fines that may be charged by any and all
audits.
(Ord. 2005-5, passed 12-28-2005)
§ 32.53 TOWN OFFICIALS GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Town Council is authorized to budget and appropriate funds from
the General Fund of the town to pay the expenses of, or to reimburse town
officials for expenses incurred in, promoting the best interests of the town.
   (B)   Such expenses which may be reimbursed, if approved by the Town
Council, include, but are not necessarily limited to, the rental of meeting
places, meals, decorations, memorabilia, awards, expenses incurred in
interviewing job applicants, expenses incurred in promoting industrial,
commercial, and residential development, expenses incurred in developing
relations with other units of government, and any other expenses of a civic or
governmental nature deemed by the Town Council to be in the best interests of
the town.
(Ord. 1996-2, passed 4-1-1996)
CHAPTER 33: PURCHASING POLICY
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Purchasing agency
   
33.02   Powers and duties
   
33.03   Purchasing agents
   
33.04   Purchase of supplies less than $25,000
   
33.05   Purchases of services
   
33.06   Purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States
   
33.07   Purchase from the Department of Correction and Rehabilitation Center
   
33.08   Purchases between $25,000 and $75,000
   
33.09   Clerk-Treasurer authorized to make payments
   
33.10   Use of credit cards for town purchasing
Purchasing Rules
   
33.20   Protection of officers
   
33.21   Discussions with officers responding to a request for proposals
   
33.22   Delay of openings of offers
   
33.23   Evidence of financial responsibility
   
33.24   Modification and termination of contracts
   
33.25   Purchasing policies of the town; notices
   
33.26   Receiving offers
   
33.27   Electronic receipt of offers
   
33.28   Correction and withdrawal of bids
   
33.29   Cancellation of solicitation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 PURCHASING AGENCY.
   The Town Council is designated as the purchasing agency for the town.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.02 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The purchasing agency shall have all the powers and duties authorized under
I.C. 5-22, as may be amended from time to time by law, or supplemented from
time to time by ordinances adopted by the Town Council, and policies adopted by
the purchasing agency.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.03 PURCHASING AGENTS.
   (A)   The purchasing agency shall act as purchasing agency for every agency,
board, and office. The agency may also designate in writing additional
purchasing agents as it determines to be necessary and appropriate from time to
time. The Town Council hereby designates the following representatives of the
town to serve as purchasing agents for the town subject to the specified dollar
limit authority assigned for each as designated below.
 
Town Representative    Dollar Limit
Maintenance Director   $500
Marshal                $500
Superintendent         $500
Town Clerk-Treasurer   $2,500
Town Council President $2,500
 
   (B)   Purchases in excess of $2,500 shall only be made by the Town Council
President or the Town Clerk-Treasurer with the prior approval of the purchasing
agency.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.04 PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES LESS THAN $25,000.
   Subject to the purchasing limitations contained in §
33.03, the purchasing agents may purchase supplies with an estimated cost of
less the $25,000 on the open market with at least two quotes, preferably three
quotes, but without receiving bids.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.05 PURCHASES OF SERVICES.
   Subject to the purchasing limitations contained in §§
33.03 and
33.04, the purchasing agents may purchase services for the . . . MISSING
CONTENT
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.06 PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES.
   Supplies manufactured in the United States shall be specified for all town
purchases and shall be purchased unless the town determines that:
   (A)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in reasonably
available quantities;
   (B)   The prices of the supplies manufactured in the United States exceeds
by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable supplies
manufactured elsewhere;
   (C)   The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United States is
substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available supplies
manufactured elsewhere; or
   (D)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is not in
the public interest.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.07 PURCHASE FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTION AND REHABILITATION CENTER.
   The purchasing agents from the town shall make purchase from the state’s
Department of Correction and the Rehabilitation Center in accordance with and
when required by I.C. 5-22-12.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.08 PURCHASES BETWEEN $25,000 AND $75,000.
   Subject to the purchasing limitations contained in §§
33.03 and
33.04, the purchasing agents of the town may make purchases between $25,000 and
$75,000 in accordance with the procedures established under the I.C. 5-22-8.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.09 CLERK-TREASURER AUTHORIZED TO MAKE PAYMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The Clerk-Treasurer may make claim payments in advance of
Council allowance for the following kind of expenses, provided that the
procedures contained in this section are followed:
         (a)   License of permit fees;
         (b)   Insurance premiums;
         (c)   Utility payments or utility connection charges;
         (d)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute;
         (e)   Maintenance or service agreements;
         (f)   Lease or rental agreements;
         (g)   Bond or coupon payments;
         (h)   Payroll;
         (i)   State, federal, or county taxes; and
         (j)   Expenses that must be paid because of emergency circumstances.
      (2)   Each payment out of this section must be supported by a fully
itemized invoice or bill and certified by the Clerk-Treasurer.
      (3)   The Board having jurisdiction over the allowance of the claim,
shall review and allow the claim at its next regular or special meeting
following the preapproved payment of the expense.
   (B)   (1)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to pay any claim itemized and
certified as required by I.C. 5-11-10-1, provided that an appropriation has
been made for the expenditure and sufficient unexpended funds remain to pay
such claims without transferring from another line item.
      (2)   All claims paid be reviewed and allowed at the next regular or
special meeting of the Council following the preapproved payment.
(Ord. 1994-12, passed 9-19-1994; Ord. 1995-13, passed 11-6-1995; Ord. 2022-07,
passed 6-22-2022)
§ 33.10 USE OF CREDIT CARDS FOR TOWN PURCHASING.
   (A)   This section is adopted in compliance with the State Board of Accounts
Accounting and Uniform Compliance Guidelines Manual for Cities and Towns,
authorizing a town to use credit cards for appropriate town purchases.
   (B)   Town of Millersburg employees and officials may use town credit cards
for purchases related to the performance of town duties when such use is in the
best interest of the town.
   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to obtain credit cards titled for
town departments at the request of the department head.
   (D)   The department head shall be responsible for safekeeping of the credit
cards issues to his/her department. Credit cards shall be kept in a secured
location.
   (E)   Town credit cards shall be used for purchases relating to the
performance of town business only. No personal use of a town credit card is
allowed, even if an employee offers to reimburse the town for the employee's
personal use of a town credit card. If an accidental purchase is made on the
town credit card, that employee is to pay the town back via written check.
   (F)   Payment of credit card bills shall be subject to the audit
requirements of account payable vouchers in conformity with I.C. 5-11-10 and
I.C. 36-4-8 and the regulations of the State Board of Accounts. Itemized
receipts are required for all credit card purchases, including restaurant
charges. Payment will not be made on the basis of a credit card statement.
Signed charge slips showing a total charge only, with no itemization of items
purchased, are not acceptable. It is the responsibility of the employee
authorizing the charge to obtain proper itemized receipts.
   (G)   Credit card charges that do not meet audit requirements are the
responsibility of the employee authorizing the charge. Any interest or penalty
incurred due to the late filing with the Clerk-Treasurer of accounts payable
vouchers for payment of a credit card, or incurred due to delay in furnishing
of documentation required for audit by an officer or employee, shall be the
responsibility of that officer or employee.
   (H)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall be notified immediately if a credit card is
lost or stolen.
   (I)   The Millersburg Town Council may revoke any credit cards that have
been used in violation of town policy.
(Ord. 2022-08, passed 6-22-2022)
PURCHASING RULES
§ 33.20 PROTECTION OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   Protection of offers prior to opening. The Clerk-Treasurer, as
purchasing agent under the Act, shall retain all offers received in a secure
location prior to the date and time at which offers will be opened in order to
prevent disclosure of the contents prior to the opening of the offers.
   (B)   Unobstructed evaluation of offers. After offers have been opened, the
purchasing agent shall be responsible for maintaining the offers in such a
manner as to permit evaluation of the offers by the persons responsible for
evaluating the offers.
   (C)   Public records status of bids. Bids submitted in response to an
invitation for bids must be made available for public inspection and copying
after the time of the bid opening, unless the bid opening is delayed, as
authorized in this subchapter or any other statute or ordinance.
   (D)   Register of proposals. The purchasing agent shall prepare a register
of proposals for each request for proposals issued which shall contain
information concerning the proposals available for public inspection and
copying. Proposals may not be disclosed prior to being registered.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.21 DISCUSSIONS WITH OFFICERS RESPONDING TO A REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS.
   The purchasing agent may conduct discussions with, and best and final offers
may be obtained from, responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to
be reasonably susceptible of being selected for a contract award.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.22 DELAY OF OPENINGS OF OFFERS.
   When the Town Council makes a written determination that it is in the town’s
best interest, offers may be opened after the time stated in the solicitation.
The date, time, and place of the rescheduled opening must be announced at the
time and place of the originally scheduled opening.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.23 EVIDENCE OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Purchases less than $25,000. The purchasing agent may not require
evidence of financial responsibility when the estimated cost of a purchase is
less than $25,000.
   (B)   Purchases between $25,000 and $100,000. The solicitation may include a
requirement that an offeror provide evidence of financial responsibility. If
evidence of financial responsibility is required, the solicitation must
indicate the kind of evidence that will be acceptable. If a bond or certified
check is required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated cost of the purchase.
   (C)   Purchases over $100,000. The solicitation shall include a requirement
that an offeror provide evidence of financial responsibility and must indicate
the kind of evidence that will be acceptable. If a bond or certified check is
required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated cost of the purchase.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.24 MODIFICATION AND TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS.
   (A)   Price adjustments. The Town Clerk-Treasurer, with the direction of the
Town Council, as purchasing agent, may include provisions to permit price
adjustments in a purchase contract. The following provisions for price
adjustments may be included.
      (1)   Price adjustments must be computed by agreement on a fixed price
adjustment before the beginning of the pertinent performance or as soon after
the beginning of performance as possible.
      (2)   Price adjustments must be computed by unit price specified in the
contract or subsequently agreed upon.
      (3)   Price adjustments must be computed by costs attributable to the
events or situations under such clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all
as specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon.
      (4)   Price adjustments must be computed in such other manner as the
contracting parties may mutually agree upon.
      (5)   In the absence of agreement by the parties, price adjustments must
be computed by a unilateral determination by the town of the cost attributable
to the events or situations under such clauses with adjustment of profit or
fee, all as computed by the town in accordance with applicable ordinances
adopted by the town.
   (B)   Adjustments in time of performance. The purchasing agent may include
provisions in a purchase contract concerning adjustments for time of
performance under the contract.
   (C)   Unilateral rights of the town. The purchasing agent, with Town Council
approval, may include in a purchase contract provisions dealing with the
unilateral right of the town, the purchasing agent, to order changes in the
work within the scope of the contract or to order temporary work stoppage or
delays in time of performance.
   (D)   Quantity variations. The purchasing agent may include in a purchase
contract provisions dealing with variations between the estimated quantities of
work in a contract and the actual quantity delivered.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.25 PURCHASING POLICIES OF THE TOWN; NOTICES.
   (A)   Invitation for bids.
      (1)   All notices of invitation for bids shall be published in accordance
with I.C. 5-3-1 in The Goshen Newspaper and posted at the Town Hall, the local
post office, and at the Farm Bureau Credit Union Bank.
      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer, as purchasing agent, shall schedule the
publication of notice to provide a reasonable amount of time for preparation
and submission of bids. The notice will be published two times, at least one
week apart. The second publication must occur at least ten days prior to the
date the bids will be opened.
   (B)   Request for proposals.
      (1)   All notices of request for proposals shall be published in
accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in The Goshen Newspaper and posted at the Town Hall,
the post office, and at the Farm Bureau Credit Union Bank.
      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer, as purchasing agent, shall schedule the
publication of notice to provide a reasonable amount of time for preparation
and submission of proposals. The notice will be published two times, at least
one week apart. The second publication must occur at least ten days prior to
the date the bids will be opened.
   (C)   Request for specifications.
      (1)   All notices of request for specifications shall be published in
accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in The Goshen Newspaper and posted at the Town Hall,
the post office, and at the Farm Bureau Credit Union Bank.
      (2)   (a)   The Clerk-Treasurer, as purchasing agent, shall schedule the
publication of notice to provide a reasonable amount of time for preparation
and submission of proposals.
         (b)   The notice will be published two times, at least one week apart.
         (c)   The second publication must occur at least ten days prior to the
date the bids will be opened.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.26 RECEIVING OFFERS.
   (A)   Bids received in response to an invitation for bids must be opened
publicly in the presence of at least one or more witnesses at the time and
place designated in the invitation for bids.
   (B)   Proposals received in response to a request for proposals must be
opened so as to avoid disclosure of the contents to competing offerors during
the process of negotiation.
   (C)   Proposals received in response to a request for specifications may be
opened as specified in the request for specifications.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.27 ELECTRONIC RECEIPT OF OFFERS.
   (A)   The purchasing agency may receive electronic offers in response to an
invitation to bid, request for proposals, and a request for specifications.
   (B)   An electronic offeror may only receive an electronic offer if:
      (1)   The solicitation includes the procedure for the electronic
transmission of the offer; and
      (2)   The purchasing agency receives the offer on a fax machine or other
system with a security feature that protects the contents of an electronic
offer with the same degree of protection as provided to an offer not
transmitted electronically.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.28 CORRECTION AND WITHDRAWAL OF BIDS.
   (A)   An offeror may correct inadvertent errors in a bid up to the time at
which bids will be opened by supplementing the erroneous bid and submitting a
revised bid. A bidder may not supplement an inadvertently erroneous bid after
the time at which the bids were opened.
   (B)   A bidder may withdraw a bid containing inadvertent errors up to the
time at which bids will be opened and for a period of not more then 24 hours
after the time at which the bids were opened.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
§ 33.29 CANCELLATION OF SOLICITATION.
   When the purchasing agent makes a written determination that it is in the
country’s best interests, the purchasing agent may cancel a solicitation or
reject all offers, provided that the solicitation included information
concerning the procedure for cancellation.
(Ord. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES; DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
      
51.   WATER PROVISIONS
      
52.   SEWER USE; SEWER RATES
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES; DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Town standards
   
50.02   Acceptance of dedicated projects and constructed streets
   
50.03   Cross-connection control and backflow prevention
   
50.04   Water turn-on and shutoff procedures
   
50.05   Water meters
   
50.06   Fire protection and water connections
   
50.07   Authority of Superintendent
   
50.08   Priority of governing standards
   
50.09   Deviations from the Guide
Garbage
   
50.15   Garbage pick up rates
   
50.16   Collection and charges
   
50.17   Brush and limb pick up
   
50.18   Trash totes
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 TOWN STANDARDS.
   (A)   The Town Standard Specification and Development Guide is hereby
incorporated by reference and adopted and established for the town.
   (B)   The Town Standard Specification and Development Guide shall govern all
public work and utility projects of the town, as well as all private projects
to be dedicated to the town and those connecting with or affecting water
utility facilities, sewer utility facilities, park facilities, roads and
streets, buildings and other facilities of the town.
   (C)   For purposes of this chapter, the Town Standard Specification and
Development Guide shall be hereinafter referred to as the “Guide”. The Town
Council may revise the provisions contained in the Guide at any time upon the
adoption of a duly enacted ordinance at a public meeting.
§ 50.02 ACCEPTANCE OF DEDICATED PROJECTS AND CONSTRUCTED STREETS.
   (A)   No dedicated water or wastewater project shall be accepted by the town
until the developer/ builder thereof has complied with the terms and conditions
of the Guide and any and all other legal standards arising from the county’s
Zoning Ordinance, the county’s Subdivision Ordinance or other applicable law.
   (B)   At a minimum, to secure acceptance by the town, the developer/builder
must have performed or completed the following.
      (1)   If a subdivision is involved, the developer/builder must have
secured both primary and secondary approval of the plat for the subdivision.
      (2)   The final plat, as approved by the Plan Commission, must be
properly filed and recorded in the County Recorder’s and Auditor’s offices.
      (3)   All inspections contemplated by the Guide must have been undertaken
and completed, and final approval by the town’s Superintendent of Public Works
must be at hand.
      (4)   All drainage arrangements or systems contemplated by the Guide, the
county’s street standards, the plat of the subdivision and applicable state law
shall be completed by the developer/ builder.
      (5)   The maintenance bond contemplated by the Guide must be in
appropriate form and on file with the Town Council. The amount of the
maintenance bond shall be equal to 10% of the contract price for the items to
be dedicated to the town and shall be effective for a period of three years
from the date of acceptance.
      (6)   A written request for the acceptance must be filed with the Town
Council; as part of such written request, the builder/developer must certify,
under oath, that each of the requirements herein stated have been completed.
      (7)   A written certification executed by a professional engineer
licensed pursuant to I.C. 25-31 et seq. must be filed with the Town Council
certifying that construction review and inspection services have been performed
and that the project in question, including any utilities, have been designed,
constructed and tested in accordance with the requirements of the Guide.
§ 50.03 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION.
   (A)   The regulations located at 327 I.A.C. 8-10 et seq. entitled “Cross-
Connections; Control; Operation”, as amended or replaced from time to time as
promulgated by the state’s Department of Environmental Management, and 675
I.A.C. 16-1.4 et seq. entitled “Indiana Plumbing Code, 1999 Edition”, as
amended or replaced from time to time as promulgated by the state’s Fire
Prevention and
Building Safety Commission, are hereby incorporated and adopted by reference as
part of this chapter. One copy of these regulations shall be on file with the
town’s water utility.
   (B)   The town’s water utility may cause inspections to be made of all
properties served by the public water system. The frequency of inspections and
reinspections shall be based on potential health hazards involved and shall be
as established by the town’s water utility.
   (C)   Upon presentation of credentials, a representative of the town’s water
utility shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time into or
upon any property served by a connection to the public water system of the town
in order to inspect connections. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of
any property shall furnish to the inspector any pertinent information regarding
the connections, piping systems, water systems and hazards on such property. It
shall be assumed that a cross-connection and hazard is present if access or
requested information are refused.
   (D)   The town’s water utility is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation
of this chapter exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system.
Water service shall be discontinued only after ten days’ written notice is
served on the owner, lessee or occupants of the property or premises where a
violation is found or suspected to exist. Water service to such property shall
not be restored until the violations have been eliminated in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   If it is deemed by the town’s Superintendent of Public Works that an
emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate
action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the Clerk of the
town and delivered to the user’s premises, water service may be immediately
discontinued. The user shall have an opportunity for hearing before the Town
Council, or its designated hearing officer, of such emergency discontinuance.
   (F)   If a charger issue exists, an approved reduced-pressure-principle
backflow preventer may be installed and maintained by the user in the principal
water line servicing each connection to the town water system. In the
discretion of the town’s Superintendent of Public Works, a double-check valve
backflow preventer may be used in lieu of a reduced-pressure-principle backflow
preventer. In the event the town’s Superintendent of Public Works determines
that an increased risk or hazard exists to the town water system at a
connection where a double-check valve backflow preventer was originally allowed
to be utilized pursuant to this section, the town’s Superintendent of Public
Works may require the replacement of the double-check valve backflow preventer
with a reduced-pressure-principle backflow preventer.
   (G)   The backflow preventer used must be an approved assembly as found on
the “List of Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies”, published by the
University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and
Hydraulic Research, which list is available for inspection at the town’s water
utility. The backflow preventer must be installed in an easily accessible
location not subject to flooding or freezing.
   (H)   As a condition of continued service, all users shall arrange for the
inspection of all cross- connection and backflow preventer control assemblies
by an inspector registered by the state’s Department of Environmental
Management. These inspections shall occur at time intervals specified in 327
I.A.C. 8-10-8(b), as amended, or as otherwise required by any applicable
statute, regulation or ordinance. Completed test reports shall be submitted to
the town’s water utility by the user within 30 days after the user’s receipt of
the test reports. Tests and inspections may be required on a more frequent
basis at the discretion of the town’s Superintendent of Public Works.
   (I)   This chapter does not supersede the state’s Plumbing Code as amended
or replaced from time to time or any plumbing ordinances, sewer use ordinances
or other ordinances currently in force and effect in the town, but rather is
supplementary to such. In the event of any conflict with this chapter, the
requirements which are stricter and more protective of the public health and
safety shall control.
§ 50.04 WATER TURN-ON AND SHUTOFF PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Other than by persons authorized by the town, no one shall turn on or
shall turn off town mains, hydrants, gate valves, curb stop valves or other
valves of the town’s water utility. No person shall maliciously, willfully or
negligently break, damage, uncover or deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is part of the town waterworks. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest.
   (B)   Each month, the town’s water utility shall generate a customer balance
sheet showing the amount owed per customer, not including the amount owed from
the most recent billing.
   (C)   When any account or statement for services provided by the town’s
water utility is 60 days past due, the water utility may send a letter
demanding payment within ten working days and stating that the water service
may be terminated if all delinquent payments are not made within the ten days.
   (D)   (1)   If payment is not received within the ten working days described
in division (C) above, the town water utility may terminate water service to
the customer.
      (2)   Water service shall not be restored until the customer pays the
past due amounts and the customer makes satisfactory arrangements with the
town’s water utility to avoid future delinquencies.
      (3)   In order to re-commence water service after termination, the
customer shall pay to the town’s water utility a re-instatement fee of $30.
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 WATER METERS.
   (A)   (1)   Water meters shall be initially purchased by the user from the
water utility at the user’s expense.
      (2)   All water meters used shall meet the requirements of and be subject
to the approval by the town’s Superintendent of Public Works.
   (B)   To confirm and ratify historic policy of the town’s water utility, the
repair and/or replacement of water meters for water lines of one inch or less
in size shall be provided by the town at its expense; the repair and/or
replacement of water meters for water lines greater than one inch in size shall
be provided by the user at the user’s expense.
§ 50.06 FIRE PROTECTION AND WATER CONNECTIONS.
   Any fire protection system utilizing water from the town’s water utility
shall have its own tap and be connected to a town water line separate and apart
from any other water tap or connection to the town water system.
§ 50.07 AUTHORITY OF SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   In the event of unforeseen circumstances or developments or emergency
situations, the Superintendent of the town’s water utility is hereby vested
with such authority and discretion as is needed in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare in connection with the operation of the town’s water
utility.
   (B)   A person shall not institute, permit or maintain any conditions that
may jeopardize or threaten the public health and safety with respect to the
town water system. The Superintendent, upon hearing of the existence of such
conditions, shall order the abatement of those conditions. The order must be in
writing, specify the conditions that may jeopardize or threaten the public
health and safety and name the shortest reasonable time for abatement. If a
person refuses or neglects to obey an order issued under this provision by the
Superintendent, the Town Attorney may, upon receiving the information from the
Superintendent, institute proceedings in the courts for enforcement. An order
may be enforced by injunction. If the action involves a criminal offense, a law
enforcement authority with jurisdiction over the location where the offense
occurred shall be so notified for further enforcement.
§ 50.08 PRIORITY OF GOVERNING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Within the Guide, the following standards are established for the
town: state laws and regulations; the “Ten States Standards”; and the American
Waterworks Association Standards.
   (B)   In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between these various
standards, the controlling standard or requirement shall be established and
determined by reference to and priority shall be given in the following order:
      (1)   State laws and regulations;
      (2)   Town standards contained within the Guide;
      (3)   “Ten States Standards”; and
      (4)   American Waterworks Association Standards.
   (C)   With reference to these standards, the latest edition of the published
standard or specification shall be the governing edition.
§ 50.09 DEVIATIONS FROM THE GUIDE.
   Any deviations or variations from the standards, specifications and
requirements of the Guide shall be permitted only with the prior written
approval of the respective Superintendent of the town with jurisdiction of the
project or area in question.
GARBAGE
§ 50.15 GARBAGE PICK UP RATES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a building and
forming a single habitable residence with facilities which are used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
      GARBAGE. All household solid and semi-solid waste originating from a
dwelling unit located with the Town, and generated by the occupant.
      OCCUPANT. The person in actual possession of a dwelling unit, whether or
not the owner.
      OWNER. The legal or equitable owner of record who has a right to
participate in controlling a dwelling unit, whether or not the occupant.
   (B)   Every owner of a dwelling unit located within the corporate limits of
the town shall pay for the services of garbage pick-up provided by the Town
Council.
   (C)   Every owner of a dwelling until located within the corporate limits of
the town shall pay monthly rates for garbage pick-up for each dwelling unit as
follows:
Year Monthly Rates
Year Monthly Rates
2019 $10.00
2020 $11.00
2021 $12.25
2022 $12.62
2023 $13.00
2024 $13.39
2025 $13.79
2026 $14.21
2027 $14.63
2028 $15.07
 
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 8-14-2019)
§ 50.16 COLLECTION AND CHARGES.
   (A)   All rates shall be prepared, billed, and collected by the Town Council
in the manner provided by law and this subchapter.
      (1)   The rates for all owners shall be prepared and billed monthly.
      (2)   The rates may be billed to the occupant of each dwelling unit
served, unless otherwise requested in writing by the owner, but the billing
shall in no way relieve the owner from the liability in the event payment is
not made as required.
         The owners of properties served, which are occupied by a tenant or
tenants, shall have the right to examine the collection records of the town for
the purpose of determining whether the bills have been paid by the occupant,
provided that the examination shall be made at the office at which the records
are kept and during the hours that the office is open for business.   
      (3)   All rates not paid when due are declared to be delinquent and a
penalty of ten percent of the amount of the rates and charges not timely paid
shall be due and owing. The time at which the rates and charges shall be paid
is 15 days after the mailing of the bill by the town to the person responsible.
Additionally, the town reserves all charging and collection rights and remedies
permitted by I.C. 36-9-6-19.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 8-14-2019)
§ 50.17 BRUSH AND LIMB PICK UP.
   The Town of Millersburg hereby establishes the following guidelines for
Millersburg residents to have their brush and limbs picked up curbside:
   (A)   The Town of Millersburg Street Department will complete area checks.
Brush and limb piles will only be picked up on Mondays and Thursdays, weather
permitting.
   (B)   It has been determined by the Town of Millersburg Town Council and the
Millersburg Street Department that nothing larger than a three-inch diameter
and length of less than eight feet will be picked up curbside by the
Millersburg Street Department.
   (C)   No logs, sticks, twigs, rocks, or trash shall be set out. Limbs or
branches that are one inch in diameter and less than two feet long can be
placed in the resident’s trash tote.
   (D)   Shall a homeowner and or resident have a tree taken down, the
homeowner and or resident is responsible for all debris and tree removal clean
up.
   (E)   Millersburg residents can coordinate with the Millersburg Street
Department to have limbs and brush picked up that may exceed the three-inch
diameter size and eight feet length for a cost of $50 per trip by the
Millersburg Street Department.
   (F)   A proper invoice will be given to the resident from the Millersburg
Street Department. Payment will be receipted into the MVH Fund miscellaneous
revenue line item.
   (G)   There is no longer any permitted dumping in the Town of Millersburg
for brush and limb piles.
   (H)   Storm damage debris and material must be assessed by the Town of
Millersburg Street Department to determine pick up.
(Ord. 2022-09, passed 8-10-2022)
§ 50.18 TRASH TOTES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      TRASH PICK-UP DAY. The day of the week which the residents of the town
are scheduled, by the trash disposal service, for removal of trash from the
trash totes.
      TRASH TOTE. The container supplied by the trash disposal service for
residents to utilize for trash pick-up or any other container in which trash is
placed within with the intent that the trash pick-up service will remove and
properly dispose of the trash.
   (B)   No person, firm, organization or corporation shall permit a trash
tote, trash, garbage or other discarded items to be left within ten feet of a
public street, sidewalk, public way, or other areas designated by the town for
trash pick-up, except for the time period from 4:00 p.m. on the day prior to
trash pick-up day until 6:00 p.m. on the day following the trash pick-up day.
For purposes of this section, the fact that a trash tote or other discarded
material is found within 20 feet of a public street, except within the
designated time period, is prima facie evidence that the owner of such real
estate is in violation of this section.
   (C)   Any person, firm, or organization found to be in violation of this
section shall be fined in an amount up to $50.
   (D)   Each day a person, firm or organization continues to remain in
violation of this section is a separate offense.
   (E)   It is a defense to this section if the trash tote in question (a) is
stored within three feet of the residence or (b) if the trash tote is stored as
far as practical from the street.
   (F)   This section applies to all owners of real property within the town.
Specifically, it is a defense to the section if the trash tote is being
utilized by the town or any other tax-exempt organization for a special event
which is approved by the Town Council.
   (G)   The town may act to bring compliance with the provisions of this
section pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 36-1-6. Continuous enforcement
orders (as defined in I.C. 36-7-9-2) can be enforced, and liens may be
assessed, without the need for additional notice, so long as the original
notice to the property owner, and others with a substantial property interest,
was served by certified mail, first-class mail, personal service, or similar
service.
(Ord. 2025-06, passed 7-9-2025)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a violation and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding $2,500 for each such violation. Each day in which any violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense under this section. For any
continuing violation, the town shall also be entitled to an injunction against
the violator for the actions involved. If the violation involves the town water
system, the injunction may also include a shut-off order allowing the town to
shut-off the violator’s supply of municipal water from the town’s water utility
until all violations cease and are corrected.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage suffered by the town by
reason of such violation, including, but not limited to, the costs and expenses
of locating the source of the violation, repairing any damage caused by the
violation, attorney fees, court costs, engineering fees, administrative time
and expense, labor and all other costs associated with enforcement and
compliance with this chapter.
CHAPTER 51: WATER PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Connection to town’s water utility
Water Rate Provisions
   
51.15   Rates and charges
   
51.16   Temporary users
   
51.17   Collection and deferred payment charges
   
51.18   Connection and tap fees
 
   
51.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 CONNECTION TO TOWN’S WATER UTILITY.
   (A)   From and after the effective date of this section, real estate which
is being connected to a sanitary sewer main operated by the town’s sewer
utility shall also be connected for potable water supply purposes to a water
main operated by the town’s water utility unless a water main operated by the
town’s water utility is not available for connection.
   (B)   From and after the effective date of this section, real estate which
is being connected to a water main operated by the town’s water utility for
fire protection service shall also be connected for potable water supply
purposes to a water main operated by the town’s water utility.
   (C)   From and after the effective date of this section, the installation
and use of a new privately- owned potable water supply well within the town is
prohibited unless a water main operated by the town’s water utility is not
available for connection.
   (D)   (1)   From and after the effective date of this section, existing
privately-owned potable water supply wells within the town shall be
discontinued from use as a potable water supply source when the existing well
fails to produce potable water adequate in quality and volume to provide the
premises served with its potable water supply needs if a water main operated by
the town’s water utility is available for connection at the time the repair or
replacement of the existing potable water supply well is needed.
      (2)   Connection shall, at that time, then be made to a water main
operated by the town’s water utility.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AVAILABLE. For purposes of a water main, a water main operated by the
town’s water utility:
         (a)   Is located within 25 feet of the property line of the real
estate for which connection is intended;
         (b)   The water main can be reached through public rights-of-way and/
or public utility easements; and
         (c)   Water pressure is adequate to supply municipal water service to
the real estate for which connection is intended at a pressure of no less than
40 psi (pounds per square inch) without the aid of a booster pump or other
water pressure enhancing equipment at the maximum elevation for which fixtures
will be installed at the real estate.
      PERSON. An individual, partnership, limited partnership, limited
liability partnership, joint venture, firm, company, limited liability company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate or any other legal
entity.
      POTABLE WATER. Any water used for human or domestic consumption
including, but not limited to, water use for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes and/or preparing foods.
      WELL. A hole drilled or driven to obtain ground water.
   (F)   All connections required by this section shall be in accordance and in
compliance with the requirements of the utility standards for the town.
Penalty, see § 51.99
WATER RATE PROVISIONS
§ 51.15 RATES AND CHARGES.
   There shall be and there are hereby established for the use of and the
service rendered by the waterworks system of the town, the following rates and
charges, based on the use of water supplied by said waterworks system.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed - -)
§ 51.16 TEMPORARY USERS.
   Water furnished to temporary users such as contractors, circuses and the
like shall be charged on the basis of the metered gallon rates hereinbefore set
forth as metered or as estimated and established by the Superintendent of
Public Works.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed - -)
§ 51.17 COLLECTION AND DEFERRED PAYMENT CHARGES.
   All rates and charges not paid when due are hereby declared to be delinquent
and a penalty of 10% of the amount of the rates or charges not timely paid
shall thereupon attach thereto and be due and owing. The time at which such
rates or charges shall be paid is now fixed at 15 days after the date of
mailing of the bill by the town to the person responsible therefor.
Additionally, the town hereby reserves any and all collection rights and
remedies permitted by applicable state statutes.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed - -)
§ 51.18 CONNECTION AND TAP FEES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CONNECTION FEE. The payment required for the benefit or privilege of
making a connection, directly or indirectly, to the town’s waterworks system,
which is to be paid in accordance with this subchapter.
      DEVELOPER. An owner of, or person acting on behalf of an owner to develop
or improve property to be served by the town’s water utility.
      EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT. A conversion of flows from non-residential use
or multi-family units to flows equivalent to single-family dwelling(s).
Generally, one EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT is equal to a 310-gallon per day usage
rate.
      TAP FEES. The fees to reimburse the town for the direct costs associated
with making a connection to the water main. The fee includes direct costs such
as materials, labor, equipment, pavement replacement, inspection,
administration and review, as well as any other costs incurred in processing
the application and making the connection. The fee does not include required
backflow prevention devices and necessary metering equipment to meter the use
of water by a user.
   (B)   (1)   Prior to connecting to the town’s waterworks system, a developer
shall be required to pay a connection fee in the amount of $1,765 per
equivalent dwelling unit. Multi-family dwelling units and non-residential users
shall be converted to an equivalent dwelling unit as determined by the type of
user. The equivalent dwelling units assessed shall be in accordance with the
equivalent dwelling unit table contained in division (I) below.
         (a)   These fees will be used by the utility in the best interests of
the utility and in accordance with the utility’s policy, but shall be primarily
available to offset the costs of future extensions, modifications and
improvements to the town’s waterworks system. Connection fees for fire
sprinkler connections and for users not listed in the table or of unique
character will be established by the Town Council with any necessary assistance
or input from the Superintendent of the town’s water utility subject to appeal
in accordance with division (H) below. Replacements, improvements, additions
and/or expansions of an existing facility or building which requires a building
permit shall subject the user to the fees outlined in this subchapter for the
replacement, improvement, addition and/or expansion project. In addition, the
submission of false, fraudulent, inaccurate or erroneous information by a user
when applying for approval to make a connection to the town’s waterworks system
shall subject the user to being reassessed at any time the appropriate amount
under this subchapter for the connection fee. For a period of two years after
occupancy, a developer shall be liable for and subject to being reassessed for
any additional connection fees based upon the actual usage of the property if
such actual usage would result in a larger connection fee being due and payable
to the town.
         (b)   These fees are representative of the historical costs that have
been invested in the waterworks system by the existing rate payers, as
determined by an independent study performed for the town. Connection fees are
in addition to tap fees and user fees. These fees may be revised from time to
time, as required by the town.
      (2)   At the time a transfer of or change in a utility account is
requested by a new user or new owner of a property served by the town’s water
utility and/or the town’s sewer utility, the new user or owner shall complete
an application for utility service. The utility account, however, shall not be
changed or transferred until the new user or new owner and the existing account
holder contact the town. If the application is not completed and filed by the
new user or new owner with the town within two weeks after the transfer or
change is made, any municipal water or sewer service serving the property shall
be subject to termination.
   (C)   The tap fee for connecting a user to the town’s water distribution
system shall be $1,492 for three-quarter inch connections and $1,672 for one-
inch connections. Tap fees for fire sprinkler connections and connections not
listed herein will be established by the Superintendent of the town water
utility subject to appeal in accordance with division (H) below. Tap fees shall
be in addition to connection fees and user fees. Tap fees are based on the
direct cost of service as determined by an independent study performed for the
town. These fees may be revised from time to time, as required by the town.
   (D)   Connection fees and tap fees to users outside of the corporate limits
will be the same as that charged to users located within the corporate limits
of the town.
   (E)   The following payment schedule shall apply.
      (1)   Connection fees shall be paid in full at the time of application
for such service and prior to work being started on such connection.
      (2)   Tap fees shall be paid in full at the time of application for such
service and prior to work being started on such connection.
      (3)   No connection to the water utility will be allowed prior to receipt
by the town of all connection fees and tap fees required under this subchapter.
      (4)   In the event an application for service is denied or the actual
connection is not made, any connection fees and tap fees paid shall be
refundable, without interest, to the applicant upon request. At the time a
refund is made, any previously issued permit for such utility service under
this subchapter shall be rescinded.
      (5)   Permits for utility service issued under this subchapter shall be
valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance.
   (F)   The connection fees and tap fees established by this subchapter shall
take effect with respect to applications for service filed.
   (G)   This subchapter, and the fees set out herein, may be amended from time
to time by the Town Council when conditions exist that indicate that the
established charges are no longer equitable to customers of the municipal
waterworks system or for developers of property connecting to said distribution
system.
   (H)   Any person, group, firm, company, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership or other organization
adversely affected by the application of this subchapter may present an appeal
to the Town Council.
      (1)   The appeal shall be filed with the Town Clerk who shall forward a
copy of the appeal to the Town Council and the Superintendent of the town’s
water utility.
      (2)   The appeal shall be submitted no later 30 days after the adverse
decision appealed from is made. The appellant shall submit such number of
copies of the appeal as the Town Council may prescribe from time to time. The
appeal shall be in such form and contain such information as the Town Council
may prescribe from time to time, but shall in all instances contain a concise
written statement explaining the nature of the appeal, identifying the issues
involved and presenting the position of the appellant.
      (3)   The Town Council shall review and consider the appeal at a hearing
prior to which the appellant shall be given at least ten days’ notice and at
which hearing the appellant shall be entitled to participate. Following the
review and decision, the Town Council shall transmit to the Town Clerk, the
Superintendent of the town’s water utility a written report giving its findings
and affirming, modifying or reversing the application of this subchapter to the
appellant.
      (4)   It is specifically provided that the failure to apply for and seek
any necessary permits as well as the failure to appeal any application of this
subchapter as provided under this section shall work as a bar in challenging
this subchapter or its requirements in court.
   (I)   Town equivalent dwelling unit table; connection charges per equivalent
dwelling unit:
Town Equivalent Dwelling Unit Table; Connection Charges per Equivalent
Dwelling Unit
Type of User Unit Equivalent*
Town Equivalent Dwelling Unit Table; Connection Charges per Equivalent
Dwelling Unit
Type of User                       Unit Equivalent*
Assembly halls, lodges, veteran    0.01 per seat
organizations
Barber and beauty shops            0.60 per chair
Bars and cocktail lounges          0.10 per seat
Bowling alleys                     0.32 per lane
Churches                           0.01 per seat
Day care centers                   0.03 per child and staff
Doctor/dentist office              2.00 per 1,000 square feet of building
                                   area
Drive-in/drive-through restaurants 0.40 per car space
Drive-in theaters                  0.02 per space
Hospitals                          0.50 per bed
Institutions other than hospitals  0.40 per bed
Kennel                             0.10 per cage
Laundromats                        1.00 per washing machine
                                   Based on industrial process used; usage
Manufacturing facilities           shall be estimated and converted to EDUs
                                   based on 310 gpd
Mobile home parks                  0.75 per space
Motels and hotels                  0.32 per room
Multi-family residences (per unit)
One bedroom                        0.64
Two bedrooms                       0.96
Three or more bedrooms             1.00
Nursing homes                      0.30 per bed
Offices/government agencies        0.50 per 1,000 sf of building area
Restaurants                        0.10 per seat
Retail space                       1.00 per 1,000 sf of building area
With fountain space add            0.10 per seat
Rooming houses                     0.30 per renter
Schools                            0.05 per pupil
With cafeteria and showers         0.09 per pupil
Service station                    0.70 per island
Single-family residences and       1.00
condominiums (per unit)
Theaters                           0.01 per seat
Unique facilities                  Negotiated
Warehouse                          0.04 per 1,000 sf of building area
NOTES TO TABLE:
Changes in use by addition or remodeling shall be subject to applicable
fees in accordance with this table
*Equivalent dwelling units are based on 310 gpd as typical for a single-
family dwelling
 
(Ord. 2009-1, passed - -)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating §
51.01 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 for each
violation. Any person who aids or abets another person in violating §
51.01 of this chapter shall, likewise, be in violation of §
51.01 of this chapter and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 for each
violation. Violations of §
51.01 of this chapter shall constitute continuing violations until corrected.
Each day that a person is in violation of §
51.01 of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
CHAPTER 52: SEWER USE; SEWER RATES
Section
Sewer Rate Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   User charges
   
52.03   Rates and charges
   
52.04   Quantities of water
   
52.05   Strength and content of wastewater
   
52.06   Users outside the town
   
52.07   Billing; delinquency
   
52.08   Study of rates and charges
   
52.09   Regulations and by-laws
   
52.10   Administrative relief
   
52.11   Special rate contracts
Sewer Use Provisions
   
52.25   Title
   
52.26   Definitions
   
52.27   Unlawful deposits and discharges
   
52.28   Where public sewer not available
   
52.29   General regulations
   
52.30   Unlawful discharges
   
52.31   Pretreatment
   
52.32   Measurements, tests and analysis
   
52.33   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
52.34   Users to notify town of unusual flows or wastes
   
52.35   Unlawful to damage and the like any part of sewage works
   
52.36   Representatives of town may enter premises
   
52.37   Appeal
 
   
52.99   Penalty
SEWER RATE PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMMONIA or NH3-N. Has the same meaning as in the Sewer Use Ordinance (§§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter).
   BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. Has the same meaning as in the Sewer Use
Ordinance (§§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter).
   CBOD or CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. Has the same meaning as in
the Sewer Use Ordinance (§§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter).
   COD or CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. Has the same meaning as in the Sewer Use
Ordinance (§§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter).
   COUNCIL. The Town Council, or any duly authorized officials acting in its
behalf.
   DEBT SERVICE COSTS. The average annual principal and interest payments on
all existing and proposed revenue bonds or other long-term capital debt.
   EXCESSIVE STRENGTH SURCHARGE. An additional charge which is billed to users
for treating sewage wastes with an average strength in excess of “normal
domestic sewage”.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater discharges from industrial, trade or
business processes as distinct from employee wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences.
   NPDES PERMIT or NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT. Has
the same meaning as defined in the Sewer Use Ordinance (§§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter).
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE.
      (1)   For the purpose of determining surcharges, wastewater or sewage
having an average daily concentration as follows:
         (a)   SS not more than 240 mg/l;
         (b)   BOD not more than 240 mg/l;
         (c)   Ammonia not more than 30 mg/l;
         (d)   Phosphorus not more than seven mg/l; and
         (e)   Fats, wax, grease or oils, collectively, whether emulsified or
not, not more than 100 mg/l.
      (2)   As defined by origin, wastewaters from segregated domestic and/or
sanitary conveniences as distinct from industrial wastes.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. Include all costs, direct and indirect,
necessary to provide adequate wastewater collection, transport and treatment on
a continuing basis and produce discharges to receiving waters that conform with
all related federal, state and local requirements. (These costs included
replacement.)
   OTHER SERVICE CHARGES. Tap charges, connection charges, area charges and
other identifiable charges other than excessive strength surcharges.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, partnership,
copartnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited
liability company, joint stock company, trust, estate, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency, the state and political
subdivisions thereof, the United States of America or other legal entity, or
their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall
include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated
by the context.
   PHOSPHORUS. Has the same meaning as defined in the Sewer Use Ordinance (§§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter).
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. The expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed.
   SS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Has the same meaning as defined in the Sewer Use
Ordinance (§§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter).
   SEWAGE. Has the same meaning as defined in the Sewer Use Ordinance (§§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter).
   SEWER USE ORDINANCE. A separate and related enactment to this subchapter,
codified in §§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter, which regulates the connection to and use of public and
private sewers, known as the TOWN SEWER USE ORDINANCE.
   SHALL. Mandatory; MAY is permissive.
   TOWN. The Town of Millersburg, acting by and through the Town Council.
   USER CHARGES. A charge levied on users of the wastewater treatment works for
the cost of operation and maintenance of such works pursuant to § 204(b) of
Pub. Law No. 92-500, being the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. §
1284(b).
   USER CLASS. The division of wastewater treatment customers by source,
function, waste characteristics and process or discharge similarities (i.e.,
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental in the user
charge system).
      (1)   COMMERCIAL USER. Any establishment involved in a commercial
enterprise, business or service which, based on a determination by the town,
discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences.
      (2)   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Any federal, state or local governmental user of
the wastewater treatment works.
      (3)   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial, manufacturing, business, trade or
processing facility that discharges industrial waste to a wastewater treatment
works.
      (4)   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Any establishment involved in a social,
charitable, religious and/or educational function which, based on a
determination by the town, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or
wastes from sanitary conveniences.
      (5)   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment works whose premises or
building is used primarily as a residence for one or more persons, including
all dwelling units and the like.
(Ord. 2019-06, passed 8-28-2019)
§ 52.02 USER CHARGES.
   (A)   Every person whose premises is served by the town’s sewage works shall
be charged for the service provided. These charges are established for each
user class, as defined, in order that the sewage works shall recover, from each
user and user class, revenue which is proportional to its use of the treatment
works in terms of volume and load.
   (B)   User charges are levied to defray the cost of operation and
maintenance (including replacement) of the treatment works. User charges shall
be uniform in magnitude within a user class.
      (1)   User charges are subject to the rules and regulations adopted by
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency at 40 C.F.R. § 35.2140. Replacement
costs, which are recovered through the system of user charges, shall be based
upon the expected useful life of the sewage works equipment.
      (2)   The various classes of users of the treatment works for the purpose
of this subchapter, shall be as follows: Class I - Residential, Commercial,
Governmental, Institutional and Industrial.
(Ord. 2019-06, passed 8-28-2019)
§ 52.03 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   For the use of the service rendered by the town sewage works, rates
and charges shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of
real estate or building that is connected with the town’s sanitary sewage
system or otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or
other liquids, either directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewage system
of the town.
   (B)   Such rates and charges include user charges, debt service costs,
excessive strength surcharges and other service charges, which rates and
charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in an amount
determined as follows.
      (1)   The sewage rates and charges shall be based on the quantity of
water used on or in the property or premises subject to such rates and charges
as the same is measured by the water meter there in use, plus a base charge
based on the size of water meter installed except as herein otherwise provided.
For the purpose of billing and collecting the charges for sewage service, the
water meters shall be read monthly and the users shall be billed each month (or
period equaling a month). If, for any reason, the monthly meter reading is not
available, a bill will be prepared, based on the estimated usage, and a
correction will be made when meter readings are available. The water usage
schedule on which the amount of said rates and charges shall be determined is
as follows: all Class I users:
         (a)   Treatment rate per 1,000 gallons of usage per month: $ ; plus
         (b)   Base rate per month:
Water Meter Amount
Water Meter               Amount
5/8-inch to 3/4-inch
1-inch
1-1/4-inch to 1-1/2- inch
2-inch
3-inch
4-inch
6-inch
 
      (2)   For users of the sewage works that are unmetered water users or
accurate meter readings are not available, the monthly sewer charge shall be
determined by equivalent single-family dwelling units, except as herein
provided. Sewage service bills shall be rendered once each month (or period
equaling a month). The schedule on which said rates and charges will be
determined is as follows: residential: single-family dwelling unit, monthly
rate: $ .
      (3)   As contemplated by applicable state law, the town and other
government users shall be subject to the same rates and charges established
herein for their use and receipt of sewage services by the town.
      (4)   In order to recover the cost of monitoring industrial wastes, the
town shall charge the user not less than $36 per sampling event, plus the
actual cost for collecting and analyzing the sample(s) as determined by the
town or by an independent laboratory. This charge will be reviewed on the same
basis as all other rates and charges in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2019-06, passed 8-28-2019)
§ 52.04 QUANTITIES OF WATER.
   The quantity of water discharged into the sanitary sewage system and
obtained from sources other than the water utility that serves the town shall
be determined by the town in such manner as the town shall reasonably elect,
and subject to payment by the user of the method used for measuring such usage,
and the sewage service shall be billed at the appropriate rates; except as
hereinafter provided in this section, the town may make proper allowances in
determining the sewage bill for quantities of water shown on the records to be
consumed, but which are also shown to the satisfaction of the town that such
quantities do not enter the sanitary sewage system.
   (A)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building other than a
single-family dwelling unit discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes,
water or other liquids into the town’s sanitary sewage system, either directly
or indirectly, is not a user of water supplied by the water utility serving the
town, and the water used thereon or therein is not measured by a water meter,
or is measured by a water meter not acceptable to the town, then the amount of
water used shall be otherwise measured or determined by the town. In order to
ascertain the rate or charge provided in this subchapter, the owner or other
interested party shall, at his or her expense, install and maintain meters,
weirs, volumetric measuring devices or any adequate and approved method of
measurement acceptable to the town for the determination of sewage discharge.
   (B)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into the town’s
sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, is a user of water
supplied by the water utility serving the town and, in addition, is a user of
water from another source which is not measured by a water meter or is measured
by a meter not acceptable to the town, then the amount of water used shall be
otherwise measured or determined by the town. In order to ascertain the rates
or charges, the owner or other interested parties shall, at his or her expense,
install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric measuring devices or any
adequate and approved method of measurement acceptable to the town for the
determination of sewage discharge.
   (C)   In the event two or more residential lots, parcels of real estate, or
buildings discharging sanitary sewage, water or other liquids into the town’s
sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, are users of water and
the quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then in each such
case, for billing purposes, the quantity of water used shall be averaged for
each user and the base charge and the flow rates and charges shall apply to
each of the number of residential lots, parcels of real estate or buildings
served through the single water meter.
   (D)   In the event two or more dwelling units, such as mobile homes,
apartments or housekeeping rooms discharging sanitary sewage, water or other
liquids into the town’s sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly,
are users of water and the quantity of water is measured by a single water
meter, then in such case, billing shall be for a single service in the manner
set out elsewhere herein; except that, the minimum charge shall be $21.25 per
month per dwelling unit served through the single water meter. In the case of
mobile home courts, the number of dwelling units shall be computed and
interpreted as the total number of mobile home spaces available for rent, plus
any other dwelling units served through a meter. A dwelling unit shall be
interpreted as a room or rooms or any other space or spaces in which cooking
facilities are provided.
   (E)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into the town’s
sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, and uses water in excess
of 25,000 gallons per month, and it can be shown to the satisfaction of the
town that a portion of water as measured by the water meter or meters does not
and can not enter the sanitary sewage system, then the owner or other
interested party may, at its expense, install and maintain meters, weirs,
volumetric measuring devices or any adequate and approved method of measurement
acceptable to the town for the determination of sewage discharge; but upon
failure to do so, the billing shall be based upon the water usage.
   (F)    In order that domestic and residential users of sewage services shall
not be penalized for sprinkling lawns during the months of June, July, August,
and September, the bill for sewage services for residential and/or domestic
user for said months shall be based upon the average water usage for the
previous billed months of October through December, if such average usage is
lower than the summer months, and if the owner of the property has remained the
same. Said sprinkling rate shall not apply to any premises that are partially
or wholly used for commercial or industrial purposes. In the event a portion of
such premises shall be used for commercial or industrial purposes, the owner
shall have the privilege of separating the water service so that the
residential portion of the premises is served through a separate meter, and in
such case the water usage as registered by the water meter serving such portion
of the premises used for residential purposes shall qualify under the
sprinkling rate.
   (G)   The provisions of division (F) above may from time to time be extended
to and be applicable in the months of May, June and/or October upon motion and
approval by the Town Council at a duly called public meeting of the Town
Council.
(Ord. 2019-06, passed 8-28-2019; Ord., passed 6-12-2024)
§ 52.05 STRENGTH AND CONTENT OF WASTEWATER.
   (A)   In order that the rates and charges may be justly and equitably
adjusted to the service rendered to users, the town shall base its charges not
only on the volume, but also on strength and character of the stronger-than-
normal domestic sewage and wastes for which it is required to treat and
dispose. The town shall require the user, at the user’s expense, to determine
the strength and content of all sewage and wastes discharged, either directly
or indirectly, into the sanitary sewage system, in such manner, by such method
and at such times as the town may deem practicable in light of the conditions
and attending circumstances of the case, in order to determine the proper
charge.
   (B)   The user shall furnish a central sampling point available to the town
at all times.
      (1)   Normal domestic sewage waste strength should not have: biochemical
oxygen demand in excess of 240 milligrams per liter of fluid; suspended solids
in excess of 240 milligrams per liter of fluid; ammonia in excess of 30
milligrams per liter of fluid; phosphorus in excess of seven milligrams per
liter of fluid; and fats, wax, grease or oils, collectively, whether emulsified
or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter of fluid. Additional charges for
treating stronger-than-normal domestic sewage shall be made on the following
basis.
         (a)   Rate surcharge based upon suspended solids. There shall be an
additional charge of $0.72 per pound of suspended solids for suspended solids
received in excess of 240 milligrams per liter of fluid.
         (b)   Rate surcharge based upon BOD. There shall be an additional
charge of $0.72 per pound of biochemical oxygen demand for BOD received in
excess of 240 milligrams per liter of fluid.
         (c)   Rate surcharge based upon ammonia. There shall be an additional
charge of $0.87 per pound of ammonia for ammonia received in excess of 30
milligrams per liter of fluid.
         (d)   Rate surcharge based upon phosphorus. There shall be an
additional charge of $2.02 per pound of phosphorus received in excess of seven
milligrams per liter of fluid.
         (e)   Rate surcharge based upon oils and grease. There shall be an
additional charge of $0.39 per pound of fats, wax, grease or oils,
collectively, whether emulsified or not, received in excess of 100 milligrams
per liter of fluid.
      (2)   The determination of suspended solids, biochemical oxygen demand,
ammonia, phosphorus and fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not,
contained in the waste shall be in accordance with the latest copy of Standard
Methods for the Elimination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes, as written
by the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association,
and the Water Pollution Control Federation, and in accordance with Guidelines
Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants, 40 C.F.R. part
136, as hereinafter amended, supplemented or replaced.
(Ord. 2019-06, passed 8-28-2019)
§ 52.06 USERS OUTSIDE THE TOWN.
   All provisions hereof to the contrary notwithstanding, the rates and charges
to users of the town sewage works, for lots, parcels of real estate, or
buildings, of any type or character, situated outside the corporate boundaries
of the town, shall be set and fixed at 150% of the rates and charges to users
(and lots, parcels of real estate or buildings) within the corporate limits of
the town.
(Ord. 2019-06, passed 8-28-2019)
§ 52.07 BILLING; DELINQUENCY.
   All rates and charges herein contemplated shall be prepared, billed and
collected by the town in the manner provided by law and ordinance.
   (A)   The rates and charges for all users shall be prepared and billed
monthly.
   (B)   The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant or tenants occupying
the properties served, unless otherwise requested in writing by the owner, but
such billing shall in no way relieve the owner from the liability in the event
payment is not made as herein required. The owners of properties served, which
are occupied by a tenant or tenants, shall have the right to examine the
collection records of the town for the purpose of determining whether bills
have been paid by such tenant or tenants; provided that, such examination shall
be made at the office at which such records are kept and during the hours that
such office is open for business.
   (C)   As is provided by applicable state statute, all rates and charges not
paid when due are hereby declared to be delinquent and a penalty of 10% of the
amount of the rates and charges not timely paid shall thereupon attach thereto
and be due and owing. The time at which such rates or charges shall be paid is
now fixed at 15 days after the date of mailing of the bill by the town to the
person responsible therefor. Additionally, the Council hereby reserves all
charging and collection rights and remedies permitted by I.C. 36-9-23, with
regard to the collection of rates and charges under this subchapter or the
Sewer Use Ordinance (§§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter), or amendments, supplements or replacements thereto,
dealing with hook-ups, connections and usage of the sewage system.
(Ord. 2019-06, passed 8-28-2019)
§ 52.08 STUDY OF RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   In order that the rates and charges for sewage services may remain
fair and equitable and be in proportion to the cost of providing services to
the various users of user classes, the town shall cause a study to be made
within a reasonable period of time following the first two years of operation,
following the date on which this subchapter goes into effect. Such study shall
include, but not be limited to, an analysis of the cost associated with the
treatment of excessive strength effluents from industrial users, volume and
delivery flow rate characteristics attributed to the various users and user
classes, the financial position of the sewage works and the adequacy of its
revenue to provide reasonable funds for the operation and maintenance,
replacements, debt service requirements and capital improvements to the
wastewater treatment systems.
   (B)   (1)   Thereafter, on a biennial basis, within a reasonable period of
time following the normal accounting period, the town shall cause a similar
study to be made for the purpose of reviewing the fairness, equity and
proportionality of the rates and charges for sewage services on a continuing
basis.
      (2)   Said studies shall be conducted by officers or employees of the
town or by a firm of certified public accountants, or a firm of consulting
engineers which firms shall have experience in such studies, or by such
combination of officers, employees, certified public accountants or engineers
as the town shall determine to be best under the circumstances.
      (3)   The town shall, upon completion of said study, revise and adjust
the rates and charges, as necessary, in accordance therewith in order to
maintain the proportionality and sufficiency of the rates.
(Ord. 2019-06, passed 8-28-2019)
§ 52.09 REGULATIONS AND BY-LAWS.
   (A)   The town shall make and enforce such by-laws and regulations as may be
deemed necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management of the
town’s sewage system, pumping stations and sewage treatment works, for the
construction and use of house sewers and connections to the sewage treatment
works, the sewage collection system, and for the regulation, collection and
rebating and refunding of such rates and charges.
   (B)   The town is hereby authorized to prohibit dumping of wastes into the
town’s sewage system which, in its discretion, are deemed harmful to the
operation of the sewage treatment works of the town, or to require methods
affecting pretreatment of said wastes to comply with the pretreatment standards
included in the NPDES permit issued to the sewage works, or as contained in the
EPA General Pretreatment Regulations, 40 C.F.R. part 403 and any amendments
thereto, or the town’s Pretreatment Program Plan.
(Ord. 2019-06, passed 8-28-2019)
§ 52.10 ADMINISTRATIVE RELIEF.
   Any person who believes himself or herself aggrieved through the enforcement
of this subchapter has the right to seek administrative relief before the Town
Council.
(Ord. 2019-06, passed 8-28-2019)
§ 52.11 SPECIAL RATE CONTRACTS.
   The Town Council is hereby further authorized to enter into special rate
contracts with customers of the sewage works where clearly definable reduction
in cost to the sewage works can be determined, and such reduction shall be
limited to such reduced costs.
(Ord. 2019-06, passed 8-28-2019)
SEWER USE PROVISIONS
§ 52.25 TITLE.
   This subchapter may be referred to as the “Town of Millersburg Sewer Use
Ordinance”.
§ 52.26 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as provided herein, the definitions contained in 40 C.F.R. § 401.11
and 40 C.F.R. § 403.3, as amended, shall be applicable in this subchapter and
are hereby incorporated by reference. For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   COUNCIL. The Town Council of Millersburg, Indiana, or any duly authorized
officials or representatives acting in its behalf.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The lowest horizontal piping of a building drainage system
which receives the discharge of sewage from drainage pipes inside the walls of
the building and conveys it to a point approximately five feet outside the
foundation wall of the building.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sanitary
sewer, private sewage disposal system or other place of disposal.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A minimum of four grab samples or aliquots, collected over
the period of the work day. The aliquots may be uniform aliquots withdrawn at
uniform flow intervals or flow-proportional aliquots withdrawn at uniform time
intervals.
   GARBAGE. Any solid wastes from the preparation, cooking or dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage or sale of produce.
   GRAB SAMPLE. An individual sample collected over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
   IDEM. The Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
   INSPECTOR. The person or persons duly authorized by the town, through its
Town Council, to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and
their connection to the public sanitary sewer system.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge into the public sanitary sewer system which, alone
or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, does one
or more of the following:
      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the sewage works, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal;
      (2)   Causes a violation of any requirement of the sewage works’ NPDES
permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation); or
      (3)   Prevents the use of the sewage work’s sludge use or disposal in
compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits
issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): § 405 of the
Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA),
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq. (including Title II commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
of the Solid Waste Disposal Act being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6941 et seq.); the Clean Air
Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.; and the Toxic Substances Control Act,
being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.
   NPDES PERMIT. A national pollutant discharge elimination system permit
setting forth conditions and limitations for the discharge of any pollutant or
combination of pollutants to the navigable waters of the United States pursuant
to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge into the public sanitary sewer system which exits
the sewage works into waters of the United States in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges
from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the sewage
works NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation).
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, partnership,
copartnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited
liability company, joint stock company, trust, estate, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency, the state and political
subdivisions thereof, the United States of America or other legal entity, or
their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall
include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated
by the context.
   pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage,
sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discarded into water.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewage works. The reduction or
alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes,
process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 C.F.R. § 403.6
(d), as amended. PRETREATMENT is subject to all applicable rules and
regulations contained in the Code of Federal Regulations, as published in the
Federal Register under regulation 40 C.F.R. part 403, as amended.
   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned by public authority.
   PROCESS WASTEWATER. Any water which, during manufacturing, processing or
clean-up comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use
of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or
waste product.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sanitary sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER. A sanitary sewer which is owned and controlled by the
public authority and will consist of the following increments.
      (1)   COLLECTOR SEWER. A sanitary sewer whose primary purpose is to
collect wastewater from individual point source discharges.
      (2)   FORCE MAIN. A sanitary sewer in which wastewater is carried under
pressure.
      (3)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sanitary sewer whose primary purpose is to
transport wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment facility.
      (4)   PUMPING STATION. A station positioned in the public sanitary sewer
system at which wastewater is collected and pumped to a higher level.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sanitary sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground water and other unpolluted water are not intentionally
admitted.
   SEWAGE. The combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions (including
polluted cooling water). The two most common types of SEWAGE are as follows.
      (1)   INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE. The combination of liquid and water-carried
wastes which is discharged from any commercial or industrial establishment
resulting from any trade or process carried on in that establishment. (This
shall include process wastewater, the wastes from pretreatment facilities and
polluted cooling water.) INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE excludes unpolluted water and waste
which contains exclusively sanitary sewage.
      (2)   SANITARY SEWAGE. The combination of liquid and water-carried wastes
discharged from toilets, lavatories, kitchens and other sanitary waste
producing facilities typically associated with domestic uses.
   SEWAGE WORKS. The public sanitary sewers, structures, equipment and
processes to collect, transport and treat sewage and dispose of the effluent
and accumulated residual solids.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SHALL. Mandatory; MAY is permissive.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch. N; and
      (2)   Any other industrial user that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process wastewater to the sewage works (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling
and boiler blowdown wastewater);
         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the sewage treatment
plant; or
         (c)   Is designated as such by the control authority as defined in 40
C.F.R. § 403.3(f) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the sewage works operation, the quality of
biosolids such that it may negatively impact land application or for violating
any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8
(f)(6)).
   SLUG. Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not
limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, of sewage
or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of
flow has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in
any other way violate the requirements of this subchapter.
   STORM SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying storm, surface and ground water
or other unpolluted water from any source and to which sanitary sewage and
industrial sewage are not intentionally admitted.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the municipal sewage works of the Town
of Millersburg, Indiana, or his or her authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids which either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquid and which are removable by
laboratory filtration. Their concentration shall be expressed in milligrams/
liter.
   TOWN. The Town of Millersburg, Indiana.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   U.S. EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   USER. A person who discharges any pollutant, sewage, process wastewater or
wastewater into the sewage works. The term includes both the owner and occupant
of real estate that is the source of a discharge into the sewage works.
   WASTEWATER. Water in which sewage has been discharged.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 52.27 UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS AND DISCHARGES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited, in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any human excrement,
garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sanitary
sewer under the jurisdiction of the town, either directly or indirectly, storm
water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, non-
contact cooling water or other unpolluted water.
   (C)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, non-contact cooling water or other unpolluted water may be admitted
to storm sewers under the jurisdiction of the town which have adequate capacity
for their accommodation. No person shall connect to such storm sewers, however,
without the specific written permission of the Superintendent.
   (D)   No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner on public or private property within the jurisdiction of the
town, any wastewater, sewage or other water containing pollutants, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter and an NPDES permit.
   (E)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural
outlet in the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any
wastewater, sewage or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with provisions of this subchapter and an NPDES
permit.
   (F)   Except as provided in the county’s Private Sewage Disposal System
Ordinance, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain in the town any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage.
   (G)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, abutting on any street,
alley or right-of-way in which there is now or may hereafter be located a
public sanitary sewer under the jurisdiction of the town, is hereby required at
the owner’s expense to install suitable toilet and sanitary facilities therein
and to connect such facilities with the proper public sanitary sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, within 90 days after date of
official notice to do so; provided that, said public sanitary sewer is within
300 feet of the property line. Any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
   (H)   No new connection to the town’s sewage works shall be approved that
would create either a hydraulic or organic overload on the treatment plant,
which is herein defined as any discharge that will exceed 10% of the dry
weather design capacity of the collection system or treatment plant, without an
approved containment or pretreatment plan.
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.28 WHERE PUBLIC SEWER NOT AVAILABLE.
   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of §
52.27(G) of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system in accordance and complying with the provisions of the
county’s Private Sewage Disposal System Ordinance.
§ 52.29 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into,
use, alter or disturb any public sanitary sewer, private sewer or appurtenance
thereof which is connected, directly or indirectly, to the town sewage works
under the jurisdiction of the town without first obtaining a written permit
from the Superintendent. No new connections shall be made to a public sanitary
sewer unless there is capacity available to all existing users, downstream
sewers, lift stations, force mains and the sewage treatment plant.
   (B)   The owner or his or her agent shall make application for a building
sewer permit on a form furnished by the town. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the inspector. An inspection fee shall be paid to
the town at the time the application is filed in accordance with the Sewer Rate
Ordinance (§§
52.01 through
52.11 of this chapter).
   (C)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer. A connection fee shall be paid to the
town prior to connection being made to the town’s sewage works in accordance
with the Sewer Rate Ordinance (§§
52.01 through
52.11 of this chapter).
   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, then the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer.
   (E)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the said inspector, to meet all
requirements of this subchapter.
   (F)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, joint
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (G)   (1)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor.
      (2)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sanitary sewer, sewage carried by such building
drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building
sewer.
   (H)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, sump pumps,
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, floor drains or other sources of
storm, surface and ground water or other unpolluted water to a building sewer
or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer under the jurisdiction of the town.
   (I)   (1)   The connection of a building sewer into the public sanitary
sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or
other applicable rules and regulations of the town.
      (2)   In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
      (3)   All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Superintendent before installation.
   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the inspector
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sanitary sewer. The construction shall be made under the supervision of the
said inspector or his or her representative.
   (K)   (1)   All excavations for building sewer installation must be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard.
      (2)   Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town.
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.30 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following to any public sanitary sewers under the jurisdiction of the town
which may cause or contribute to a pass through or interference event to occur.
These prohibitions apply to all users of the sewage works, whether or not the
user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other
federal, state or local pretreatment standard or requirements. A user shall not
discharge the following substances to the sewage works:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewage
works, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint
of less than 140°F or 60°C using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. §
261.21;
      (2)   Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction
to the flow in the sewage works resulting in interference;
      (3)   Subject to any other limitations or prohibitions contained within
this subchapter, wastewater from any user that exceeds the concentrations below
(hereafter referred to as surcharge limitations) may be accepted and the user
may be subject to surcharges for concentrations greater than as listed below,
in accordance with the terms of the town’s Sewer Rate Ordinance (§§
52.01 through
52.11 of this chapter), as amended:
 
Pollutant                                                      mg/l Sample Type
Ammonia                                                        30   Composite
BOD5                                                           240  Composite
Fats, wax, grease or oils, collectively, whether emulsified or 100  Grab
not
Phosphorus                                                     7    Composite
Total suspended solids (TSS)                                   240  Composite
 
      (4)   Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the
sewage works resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities
that the temperature at the sewage treatment plant exceeds 40°C (104°F);
      (5)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable and biodegradable cutting oil or
products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass
through;
      (6)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the sewage works in a quantity that may cause acute worker health
and safety problems;
      (7)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
      (9)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works or that interferes with any sewage treatment
process;
      (10)   Solid or viscous substances, diluted or undiluted, in quantities
or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to: ashes; cinders; sand; mud; straw; shavings; metal; glass; rags;
feathers; tar; plastic; wood; underground garbage; blood; paunch; manure; hair
and fleshings; entrails; paper; dishes; cups; cans; milk containers and the
like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;
      (11)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans
or animals, create a hazard or toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant or to exceed the limitations set forth in the applicable
federal categorical pretreatment standards or other pretreatment standards or
regulations issued by U.S. EPA or the IDEM. Toxic pollutants are those
identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), as amended. In no case shall any user discharge any
chemical, compound or substance in concentrations greater than 10% of the LD50
limit as listed on the most recent MSDS for that chemical, compound or
substance; or
      (12)   Wastewater containing concentrations of the following enumerated
pollutants exceeding the following limits (hereinafter referred to as local
limitations):
Pollutant Daily Maximum mg/l Sample Type
Pollutant             Daily Maximum mg/l Sample Type
Arsenic               0.15               Composite
Cadmium               0.33               Composite
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.25               Composite
Chromium (total)      2.50               Composite
Copper                2.00               Composite
Cyanide (total)       0.30               Composite
Lead                  0.33               Composite
Mercury               0.0001             Composite
Nickel                2.00               Composite
Phenols               0.67               Composite
Selenium              0.67               Composite
Silver                0.20               Composite
Zinc                  2.50               Composite
 
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following into a public sanitary sewer under the jurisdiction of the town
without a written permit from the Superintendent.
      (1)   In determining the acceptability of these wastes, the
Superintendent will give consideration to the public sanitary sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant and other
pertinent factors.
      (2)   The substances prohibited are:
         (a)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F or
65°C;
         (b)   Any water or waste containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150°F or 0° and 65°C;
         (c)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Superintendent;
         (d)   Any waters or wastes containing acid iron pickling wastes or
plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
         (e)   Any radioactive wastes;
         (f)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0;
         (g)   Materials which exert or cause:
            1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
            2.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions); or
            3.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes which
constitute a “slug”, as defined herein.
         (h)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharges to the receiving waters;
         (i)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants; or
         (j)   Any pollutant(s) that could otherwise cause pass through or
interference.
   (C)   No user shall increase the use of potable water or process wastewater,
or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment
requirement or standard.
   (D)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, to the public sanitary sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in divisions (A), (B) or (C) above as
determined by the Superintendent, the Superintendent may:
         (a)   Require the submission of information on wastewater
characteristics and obtain prior approval for such discharges from IDEM;
         (b)   Reject the wastes in whole or in part for any reason deemed
appropriate by the town;
         (c)   Require pretreatment of such wastes to within the limits of
normal sanitary sewage as defined or to within limits approved by IDEM;
         (d)   Require control of flow and equalization of such wastes so as to
avoid any “slug” loads or excessive loads that may be harmful to the treatment
works;
         (e)   Require payment of a surcharge on any excessive flows or
loadings discharged to the treatment works to cover the additional costs of
having capacity for and treating such wastes; and
         (f)   Require any other measures that the Superintendent or the
Council has legal authority to require.
      (2)   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Council and subject to the
requirements of all applicable laws, codes, ordinances and regulations.
   (E)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.
   (F)   The Superintendent may require the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer to install a suitable control manhole, together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer, to facilitate
observations, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be
installed and maintained by the owner at the owner’s expense so as to be safe
and accessible at all times. Agents of the town, the IDEM and the U.S. EPA
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing upon presentation of appropriate
credentials and identification.
   (G)   The Superintendent may control through permit, order or similar means,
the contribution to the sewage works by each user to ensure compliance with
this subchapter, the town’s NPDES permit and all other applicable standards and
requirements. In the case of a significant industrial user (SIU), this control
shall be achieved through an industrial wastewater pretreatment permit (IWP)
issued by IDEM.
   (H)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water
and wastes to which reference is made in this subchapter shall be determined in
accordance with appropriate methodologies accepted and approved by U.S. EPA,
and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable
samples taken at said control manhole. Report thereof shall be provided to the
Superintendent within five days after the results are received by the user. In
the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall
be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sanitary sewer
to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be
carried out pursuant to U.S. EPA accepted methods.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, discharge,
permit to be deposited or discharged, in any manner whatsoever, any substance
into a public sanitary sewer under the jurisdiction of the town at a point
different than the proposed building sewer connection to the sanitary sewer
system.
   (J)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any separate agreement or arrangement between the town and any user
whereby waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the town for
treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the user, at such rates as are
compatible with the Sewer Rate Ordinance (§§
52.01 through
52.11 of this chapter), so long as said agreement or arrangement does not
directly or indirectly allow any discharge which will cause pass through or
interference or in any way cause the town to violate the terms of its NPDES
permit.
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.31 PRETREATMENT.
   (A)   Any user discharging industrial sewage to the sewage works shall
comply with the rules and regulations adopted by the U.S. EPA (40 C.F.R. part
403), the Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants
(40 C.F.R. part 136), the state pretreatment standards (327 I.A.C. 5-18-8) and
this subchapter.
   (B)   Any SIU shall comply with the requirements of the IWP issued by IDEM.
   (C)   Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for approval of the town, and no
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until approval in writing is
granted. Where such facilities are provided, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operating order by the owner at the
owner’s expense and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the town to
determine that such facilities are being operated in conformance with the
applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and permits. The owner
shall maintain operating records of the influent and effluent to show the
performance of the treatment facilities and for comparison against town
monitoring records.
§ 52.32 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSIS.
   The Superintendent may require users of the sewage works to supply pertinent
information on wastewater flow characteristics and constituents in order to
verify compliance with the requirements of this subchapter. Such measurements,
tests and analyses shall be made by the user at the user’s expense. The town
may also have such measurements, tests and analyses performed with the expense
of such assessed to the user at the option of the town. Whenever the town
obtains or receives a wastewater or sewage sample for analysis, the town shall
offer to split the sample with the user in order to allow the user an
opportunity to conduct duplicate analytical tests in order to verify the
analytical results received by the town.
§ 52.33 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided by a user
when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful pollutants. All interceptors or traps
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent and shall be
located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All
interceptors or traps shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperatures, shall be of
substantial construction, shall be gas-tight and shall be equipped with easily
removable covers. Where installed, all interceptors or traps shall be
maintained by the owner, at the owner’s expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times. When the user fails to clean and/or maintain the
interceptor or trapssufficiently, the Superintendent may, in his or her
discretion, require the user to comply with a maintenance schedule established
by the Superintendent through a discharge permit.
   (B)   Specifications for grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be
in accordance with the state’s Plumbing Code, as amended or replaced from time
to time, at 675 I.A.C. 16.
§ 52.34 USERS TO NOTIFY TOWN OF UNUSUAL FLOWS OR WASTES.
   (A)   Any user discharging industrial sewage to the sewage works shall
notify the town at least 30 calendar days in advance of any substantial change
in the volume or character of the discharge.
   (B)   Users of the sewage works shall notify the town immediately after
becoming aware of any discharge by the user constituting a violation of this
subchapter. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type
of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by
the user.
   (C)   In the case of any slug discharge to the sewage works, the user shall
immediately notify the town of the slug discharge.
§ 52.35 UNLAWFUL TO DAMAGE AND THE LIKE ANY PART OF SEWAGE WORKS.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the town sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall
be subject to immediate arrest.
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.36 REPRESENTATIVES OF TOWN MAY ENTER PREMISES.
   (A)   The Superintendent, inspector and other duly authorized employees and
representatives of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall
be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, review of MSDS information, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. While performing any
necessary work on private property referred to herein, the Superintendent,
inspector and other duly authorized employees and representatives of the town
shall observe all reasonable safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the owner.
   (B)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees and
representatives of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall
be permitted to enter all private properties through which the town holds a
right-of-way or an easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on said easement, shall be done in accordance with the terms of the
easement.
   (C)   Should any person deny, prohibit, interfere with or otherwise stop or
impede the entry onto any property pursuant to this subchapter by the
Superintendent, inspector or other duly authorized employees or representatives
of the town bearing proper credentials and identification, the town shall be
entitled to seek and secure an immediate temporary restraining order without
notice, preliminary injunction or injunction prohibiting such stoppage or
blockage and authorizing and permitting the entry desired by the town. Any
person causing such stoppage or blockage, or in any fashion aiding or abetting
the same, shall be liable for all costs and expenses encountered by the town in
securing such entry, the same to include court costs, attorney fees and
reimbursement for administration and employee time and expense.
§ 52.37 APPEAL.
   Any person who believes himself or herself aggrieved through a decision or
action of the Superintendent in the administration of this subchapter may
appeal and seek review thereof before the Council.
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person required by §§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter to install a building sewer and connect the same to a
public sanitary sewer of the town who fails to do so consistent with the notice
provisions of §
52.27(G) of this chapter shall be required to pay to the town a civil fine of
$500. Additionally, any such person failing to install and connect such
building sewer to the public sanitary sewer within the 90-day notice provision
aforedescribed, shall immediately from and after the passage of said 90 days,
become liable and responsible for the sewage rate charges established by §§
52.01 through
52.11 of this chapter as would pertain to unmetered properties. The assessment
of such sewer charges shall continue for each month from and after the
commencement thereof until such time as the building sewer is properly
installed and connected to the public sanitary sewer consistent with the
provisions of §§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter. Any person failing to pay the $500 civil fine herein
stated, or failing to pay the sewer charges herein recited, shall be subject to
all rights and remedies of the town pertaining to failure to pay sewage
charges, to include interest, penalties, attorney fees and other costs of
collection, all as set forth in §§
52.01 through
52.11 of this chapter.
      (2)   Any person found to be violating any provision of §§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter, an IWP permit or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement may be served by the town with a written notice of violation (NOV)
stating the nature of the violation, providing a reasonable time limit to
achieve compliance and requiring submission by the user to the town within a
specific time a written response, including corrective measures taken or
planned to prevent recurrence of the violation. Nothing in this division (B)
shall limit the authority of the town to take any action, including emergency
actions or other enforcement actions, without first issuing a notice of
violation.
      (3)   Any user who is found to have violations under §§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter or any orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder may be subject to a civil fine of at least $1,000 per day, per
violation, but no more than $2,500 per day, per violation. Each day in which
any violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense under this
division (B)(3).
      (4)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in division (B)(2) above shall be subject to a civil fine of at
least $1,000 per day, per violation, but no more than $7,500 per day, per
violation for subsequent violations. Each day in which any violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense under this division (B)(4).
      (5)   For any continuing violation, the Superintendent may issue a
shutoff order allowing the town to shut off the user’s supply of municipal
water from the town or direct the user to halt operations or terminate
wastewater discharge until all violations have been corrected.
      (6)   Any civil penalties imposed on a user under §§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter shall be consistent with the town’s enforcement response
plan. In addition, any user violating any of the provisions of §§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter shall be liable to the town for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the town by reason of such violation, including, but not
limited to, the costs and expenses of locating the source of the violation,
repairing any damage to the sewage works caused by such violation, attorney
fees, court costs, sampling and laboratory costs, engineering fees,
administrative time and expense, labor and all other costs associated with
enforcement and compliance with §§
52.25 through
52.37 of this chapter.
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
72.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   School zones
Recreational Vehicles
   
70.15   Bicycles and skateboards
Golf Carts
   
70.25   Definitions
   
70.26   Operation of golf cart
   
70.27   Operator
   
70.28   Financial responsibility proof
   
70.29   Time of operation and lighting equipment
   
70.30   Slow moving vehicle sign
   
70.31   Occupants, seat belts
   
70.32   Traffic rules
   
70.33   Speed limit
   
70.34   Safety equipment required
   
70.35   Parking and place operation
   
70.36   Crossing State Road 13
   
70.37   Registration and inspection fee
   
70.38   Handicapped parking
   
70.39   Noise restrictions
   
70.40   Weather
   
70.41   Alcohol
   
70.42   Fines and fees
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   No person shall operate any vehicle in a school zone at a speed
greater than 20 mph during periods when children are present.
   (B)   The Town Marshal shall procure and erect a sufficient number of signs
advising the public of the speed limit and the periods when it is in effect.
(Ord. 1985-1, passed 2-4-1985) Penalty, see §
70.99
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
§ 70.15 BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS.
   (A)   The sidewalk on the east side of the 100 block of South Jefferson
Street in the town is declared to be for pedestrian traffic only.
   (B)   No person shall ride a bicycle, use a skateboard, or roller blades or
similar instrumentalities, or roller skate on that portion of the sidewalk
described in division (A) above.
   (C)   The Town Marshal may take any minor violating this section into
custody and shall deliver said minor to his or her parent, guardian, or any
person having legal custody of said minor forthwith, and may temporarily retain
possession of the bicycle, roller skates, skateboards, roller blades, or any
instrumentality used in violation of this section.
   (D)   This section shall become effective upon publication as required by
law and by posting signs limiting the use of the sidewalks to pedestrians or
forbidding riding bicycles, skating, roller blading, or skateboarding on said
sidewalk.
   (E)   The Marshal shall procure signs which conform to state highway
standards and post sufficient signs to inform all persons of the permitted or
prohibited uses.
(Ord. 1995-12, passed 10-2-1995)
GOLF CARTS
§ 7.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVER'S LICENSE. A valid current license to operate a motor vehicle issued
by Indiana or any  other state.
   FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Liability insurance coverage on a golf care in an
amount not less then required by Indiana Law for motor vehicles operated on
public highways in the State of Indiana.
   GOLF CART. The same definition provided in I.C. 9-12-2-69.7, as it now
exists, that term means “a four-wheeled motor vehicle originally and
specifically designed and intended to transport one or more individuals and
golf clubs for the purpose of playing the game of golf on a golf course.” No
self-assembled or changes will be made to the GOLF CART to prevent it from
staying within definition stated above. The GOLF CART must be a manufactured
cart for golfing and not a utility type vehicle, or a utility type vehicle
changed into a golf cart. No utility carts, three-wheel ATV, four-wheel ATV,
mini bikes, Gators or anything similar will be allowed on the town streets and
do not meet the qualifications for this subchapter.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.26 OPERATION OF GOLF CART.
   The operation of a golf cart on town streets within the town is strictly
prohibited unless the golf cart is operated and equipped in full compliance
with this subchapter.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.27 OPERATOR.
   Only persons 15 years of age or older holding a valid/current driver's
license, learner permit, or Indiana State ID may operate a golf/utility cart. A
driver will not allow a child to drive or press any pedals used to drive the
golf/utility cart while on the streets or in any public park.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.28 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY PROOF.
   (A)   The operator of a golf cart must show financial responsibility when
operating a golf cart. Written proof of financial responsibility must be
available either on the golf cart or carried by the operator at all times. The
owner of the golf cart must show written financial proof of insurance at time
golf cart is inspected by the Town Police Department. The Police Department has
the right to not issue an inspection sticker to any golf cart until the Town
Police Department is satisfied that the insurance meets the standard of
insurance required by the town.
   (B)   I.C. 9-25-2-3 proof of financial responsibility. “Proof of financial
responsibility” means proof of ability to respond in damages for each motor
vehicle registered by a person for liability that arises out of the ownership,
maintenance, or use of the motor vehicle in the following amounts:
      (1)   Twenty-five thousand dollars because of bodily injury to or death
of any one person.
      (2)   Subject to the limit in division (B)(1), $50,000 because of bodily
injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident.
      (3)   Ten thousand dollars because of injury to or destruction of
property in any one accident.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.29 TIME OF OPERATION AND LIGHTING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Golf carts will be allowed to operate at any time of day or night with
the following stipulations. The golf cart will be equipped with two headlights
(one on each side of the front of the golf cart), and two operating taillights
with brake lights (one on each side of the rear of the golf cart). All lights
will be visible 500 feet to the front (headlights) and rear (taillights).
Headlight will be aimed in a manner as to not blind or interfere with oncoming
vehicles and set to Indiana Traffic Code standards. The golf cart has the
option of having a flashing amber light visible from all sides, with visibility
of 500 feet. A standard size slow moving sign is required. Taillights,
headlights, will be in use and on, at any time the vehicle is in motion and or
on the town streets (unless parked in a proper parking space). Brake lights
will be on anytime the vehicle is stopping. Headlights will be white in color
and taillights will be red in color, and brake lights will be red in color
(optional amber side marker lights may be displayed on golf cart). Turn signals
are required and may be either red or amber in color on the rear and amber on
the front. Turn signals will be used anytime golf cart is on the street and
making a left or right turn. Turn signals will be placed on the front and rear
of the golf cart, close to each side of the front and rear of the golf cart. No
other color of lights, marker lights or ground type lights will be used on the
golf cart or displayed while other flashing lights will be allowed other than
the flashing amber light on top of golf cart and turn signals and brake lights
when engaged to stop.
   (B)   Rear view mirror shall be placed in a manner that the driver can
visibly see to the rear of the golf cart to observe traffic coming up to the
rear of the golf cart.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.30 SLOW MOVING VEHICLE SIGN.
   Under I.C. 9-21-9-0.5, 9-21-1-3, 9-21-1-3.3, golf carts will be required to
have full-size slow-moving sign affixed to the rear of the golf cart as close
to center as possible and not less than three feet from ground level and not
above five feet.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.31 OCCUPANTS, SEAT BELTS.
   The number of occupants in a golf cart shall be limited to the number of
persons for whom factory seating is installed and provided on the golf cart.
The operator and ail occupants shall be seated in the golf cart and no part of
the body of the operator or occupants shall extend outside the perimeter of the
golf cart while the golf cart is being operated. Operator and passengers must
wear seat belts at all times the vehicle is in motion or on a traveled portion
of the roadway. Seat belts must be approved by the Town Police Department and
meet their approval. No ropes, tie straps of any type will be used as a seat
belt.
   (A)   No person shall have a golf cart in motion while having a child or
animal sitting on their lap.
   (B)   Children are required to be sitting and restrained the same as an
adult. Smaller children will be required to be secured in a child seat as
required by I.C. 9-19-11-2 (age eight and below) and 9-19-11-3.6 (age nine to
16 years of age).
(Ord. 2012-2, 4-26-2023)
§ 70.32 TRAFFIC RULES.
   The operator of the golf cart will comply with all traffic rules and
regulations adopted by the State of Indiana and the town which govern the
operation of motor vehicles.
(Ord. 2012-2, 4-26-2023)
§ 70.33 SPEED LIMIT.
   No golf cart shall be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour
irrespective of posted speed limit. In the event any posted speed limit is less
than 20 miles per hour, the posted speed limit shall be the maximum.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.34 SAFETY EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Seat belts installed for each designated seating position and person;
   (B)   Brakes as specified in I.C. 9-19-3-1;
   (C)   Turn signal lamps front and rear. (Amber or red to the rear) (Amber to
the front);
   (D)   Rear view mirror;
   (E)   Flashing amber light (optional);
   (F)   Taillights;
   (G)   Headlights;
   (H)   Slow moving standard size sign on rear.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.35 PARKING AND PLACE OPERATION.
   (A)   Parking of golf carts shall be in designated area for parking golf
carts or motor vehicle. No parking on sidewalks or lawns, or area not used for
motor vehicles. No person shall operate a golf cart on any bicycle path,
running path or sidewalk.
   (B)   No golf cart will be driven along the easement or on State Road 13 at
any time. No golf cart will be driven in the grass along easement without
having written permission from property owners to do so, and have it on them at
all times to show police officers. Permission slip must have owners name,
address, telephone number and an explanation of what type of permission the
operator of the golf cart owner has on their property and their signature and
date.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.36 CROSSING STATE ROAD 13.
   (A)   Golf carts will only cross State Road 13 at designated location and
will only travel straight across and not at any angle. Crossings will only be
done where golf cart crossing signage is displayed.
   (B)   Designated crossings are as follows:
      (1)   Elm Street, crossing east into alley or from alley next to Farmers
State Bank west onto Elm Street.
      (2)   Washington Street crossing east to west or west to east.
      (3)   Person wishing to go to the gas station cannot travel along
easement but must go down alleys or streets and not down State Road 13.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.37 REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION FEE.
   (A)   A valid, current registration/inspection sticker must be affix to the
rear or driver side of golf cart at all times while operating on town streets.
      (1)   An annual golf cart inspection and registration shall occur by
appointment with the Town Police Department. This is a free service to have
golf carts inspected and registered.
      (2)   The Police Department will inspect all golf carts to determine if
they meet the standards of the town ordinance and State of Indiana.
      (3)   The Police Department will also at the time of inspection check the
insurance paperwork for proper financial responsibility, and determine if its
is current and valid.
      (4)   The annual inspection sticker must be displayed on the driver side
or rear of golf cart in a visible location.
      (5)   Inspection stickers will be valid from January 1 to December 31 no
matter when inspection sticker is applied during the year.
      (6)   Current inspection stickers can only be removed by the authority of
the Police Department and cannot be transferred from one golf cart to another.
   (B)   A temporary registration sticker may be obtained for a period of ten
days beginning on and including the day of issuance for a fee of $10, provided
the applicant for said temporary permit meets the same requirement for the golf
cart as the annual registration.
   (C)   The Town Council as a whole, and or the Police Department may waive a
registration for certain events or holidays that may come up during the year.
The Police Department will still have the right to remove any golf cart from
use if he/she determines the golf cart or occupant is a safety hazard.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.38 HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   (A)   Golf carts parked in a handicapped parking space must have a
handicapped sticker displayed.
   (B)   Failure to display will be subject to ticketing under I.C. 5-16-9-
5 and will be fined not less than $200.
(Ord. 2012-2, 4-26-2023)
§ 70.39 NOISE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No golf cart will emit sound from an electronic source to include
radios, and or any other device that can be heard further than 50 feet from the
golf cart, to include bass noise coming from a speaker.
   (B)   No golf cart will emit noise from the engine or any other components
that is not muffled as to not be heard further than 50 feet from the golf cart.
   (C)   No loud speakers will be used on a golf cart without permission from
the Town Council as a whole or the Town Police Department.
   (D)   No person in the golf cart either as the driver or passenger will make
excessive noise that would disturb the public. A police officer can enforce
this violation without a complaint from the public in order to be proactive.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.40 WEATHER.
   (A)   No golf cart will be allowed to drive on the town streets if there is
fog, rain or if streets are wet or snow covered or visibility in any manor
would hinder the golf cart from being seen by other traffic.
   (B)   Streets must be dry.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.41 ALCOHOL.
   (A)   No person will consume alcoholic beverage and drive a golf cart on
town streets or right of way.
   (B)   No person will have an open container in the golf cart, whether it is
the driver or a passenger.
   (C)   No person will have alcohol visible and must be transported in a
closed container not assessable to the driver of the golf cart.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.42 FINES AND FEES.
   A person, who violates this subchapter in part or any section as a whole,
shall be find an amount of $100. A person who violates this chapter a second
time within a calendar year of the first offense shall be fined the sum of
$250. For each violation over two times in a two-year period, the person will
be fine a sum of $500 and lose his/her permit to drive a golf cart in the town.
Fine and fees are payable to the Town Clerk Treasurers Office, and funds will
be placed in the Police Department LECE Account.
(Ord., 4-26-2023)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating §
70.15 shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not to exceed $100.
(Ord. 1995-12, passed 10-2-1995)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   One-way alleys
      
II.   Through streets
      
III.   Stop intersections
      
IV.   School zones
      
V.   Truck regulations
SCHEDULE I. ONE-WAY ALLEYS.
   (A)   (1)   The alley located between Jefferson and Clinton Streets running
from Main Street to Washington Street and sometimes referred to as “Salem Bank
Alley” shall be a one-way alley south and no one shall operate any vehicle in a
northerly direction thereon.
      (2)   The alley located between Washington and Main Streets and running
from Jefferson Street to Clinton Street shall be a one-way alley west and no
one shall operate any vehicle in an east direction thereon.
      (3)   The Town Marshal shall procure and erect a sufficient number of
signs advising the public of the existence of the one-way status of said
alleys.
   (B)   (1)   The portion of the north and south alley lying between Monroe
and Sherman Streets and running from Main Street to the alley south of Main
Street (commonly known as the Post Office Alley) shall be a one-way alley south
from Main Street to Washington Street.
      (2)   The portion of the east-west alley lying between Main and
Washington Streets and running from Sherman Street to the alley east of Sherman
Street (the Post Office Alley) shall be a one-way alley west from the Post
Office Alley to Sherman Street.
      (3)   The Marshal is directed to secure appropriate signs, conforming to
state standards as to size, designating said alley as one-way and prohibiting
entry from Sherman Street from the alley south of Main Street and from
Washington Street and to erect the same pursuant to state standards.
   (C)   (1)   The portion of the north and south alley lying between Jefferson
Street and Sherman Street shall be a one-way alley beginning at the east-west
alley intersection between Lincoln and Washington Streets going north.
      (2)   The Marshal is directed to secure appropriate signs, conforming to
state standards as to size, designating said alley as “one-way” and prohibiting
entry from Washington Street and erect the same pursuant to state standards.
   (D)   (1)   For each violation of division (B) above, the town shall be
entitled to a judgment of up to $50 together with court costs, and if a
defendant fails to satisfy a judgment entered against him or her for a
violation, the Clerk of the Court shall certify the unpaid judgment to the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
      (2)   For each violation of division (C) above, the town shall be
entitled to a judgment of up to $25 together with court costs, and if a
defendant fails to satisfy a judgment entered against him or her for a
violation, the Clerk of the Court shall certify the unpaid judgment to the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
(Ord. 1984-5, passed 8-27-1984; Ord. 1990-6, passed 7-2-1990; Ord. 2003-7,
passed 8-8-2003)
SCHEDULE II. THROUGH STREETS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle entering Maple Street from Cripe Drive shall
stop at the entrance to Maple Street and shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles which shall have entered the intersection from Maple Street or which
are approaching so closely on Maple Street as to constitute an immediate
hazard, but said driver having so yielded may proceed and the drivers of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection on Maple Street shall yield the
right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into Maple Street.
   (B)   The Marshal shall procure a stop sign conforming to the state’s manual
on uniform traffic- control devices and shall erect the same at the
intersection of Cripe Drive and Maple Street in the manner specified by law so
as to notify drivers of vehicles on Cripe Drive to stop.
   (C)   For each violation, a judgment of up to $500 may be entered against
the defendant.
(Ord. 1990-12, passed 11-5-1990)
SCHEDULE III. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The intersection of the north-south one-way alley running from
Main Street to Washington Street between Jefferson and Clinton Streets and the
east-west alley running from Jefferson Street to Clinton Street between Main
and Washington Streets is designated a three-way stop and that south bound
traffic on the north-south alley stop before entering the intersection and that
east-west bound traffic on the east-west alley stop before entering the
intersection.
      (2)   Stop signs conforming to state traffic regulations as to size and
shape be erected at said intersection to regulate traffic in accordance with
division (A)(1) above.
   (B)   (1)   All traffic on Timber Valley Boulevard shall stop before
entering West Lincoln Street (also known as County Road 42), and West Lincoln
Street is declared to be a through street.
      (2)   All traffic on Bryan Court shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic on Timber Valley Boulevard, and Timber Valley Boulevard is declared to
be a preferential street.
      (3)   All traffic on Travis Court shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic on Timber Valley Boulevard or Cindy Court, and with respect to Travis
Court, Timber Valley Boulevard, and Cindy Court are declared to be preferential
streets.
      (4)   The Town Marshal is directed to procure the necessary signs, such
signs to be in conformity with state highway standards and to post them
according to the same rules as state highway signs are posted.
   (C)   (1)   The intersection of Jefferson Street and Main Street in the town
is hereby designated as a four-way stop intersection so that all vehicles
crossing or turning at this intersection shall be required to stop and yield
the right-of-way in compliance with state law before entering the intersection
of the two roads.
      (2)   The town’s Street and Utilities Department is hereby authorized and
directed to post stop signs in accordance with I.C. 9-21 at the intersection of
Jefferson Street and Main Street.
      (3)   Violations shall be enforced under proceedings brought pursuant to
I.C. 34-28-5 et seq. in a manner similar to that of infractions with complaint
and summons described in I.C. 9-30-3-6 issued by the town’s Police Department
or other police agency. Any person who is found to have violated any provision
of this division shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than
$500 for each separate offense.
      (4)   Revenues generated from fines for violations of this division (C)
shall be deposited in the General Fund of the town.
   (D)   (1)   Placing traffic-control devices. Pursuit to recommendations of
the Town Marshal and the Police Department thereof, the town’s Police
Department and town’s Street Department are hereby authorized, empowered, and
directed to place the respective traffic-control devices listed in division (D)
(2) below to regulate and control local traffic, within the jurisdiction of the
town, as set forth in division (D)(2) below that said traffic-control devices
shall be placed in accordance with I.C. 9-21-4-1 et seq., and the state manual
and specifications for traffic-control devices used in the state. From and
after the date of the placement of said traffic-control devices and the
effective date of the ordinance codified herein, all persons, drivers, or
operators of vehicles, or pedestrians, be, and the same hereby are, directed
and required to obey the instructions of all such traffic-control devices
placed in accordance with the provisions of this section and state law, and
should any ... MISSING CONTENT
      (2)   Location of traffic-control devices.
Traffic-Control Device Intersection Regulated Direction of Traffic Flow
                                              Regulated
Traffic-Control Device Intersection Regulated         Direction of Traffic Flow
                                                      Regulated
Stop                   On North Cook Street at Main   South
                       Street
Stop                   On North Cook Street at Elm    North
                       Street
Stop                   On West Walnut at North Cook   West
                       Street
Stop                   On North Depot Street at Main  North
                       Street
Stop                   On North Depot Street at West  North
                       Elm Street
Stop                   On North Depot Street at Main  South
                       Street
Stop                   On West Main Street at North   East
                       Depot Street
Stop                   On West Main Street at North   West
                       Depot Street
Stop                   On West Main Street at         Northwest
                       Railroad Street
Stop                   On North Depot Street at       Southeast
                       Railroad Street
Stop                   On West Walnut at North Depot  East
                       Street
Stop                   On West Walnut at North Depot  West
                       Street
Stop                   On West Walnut at North Depot  East
                       Street
Stop                   On West Walnut at North Depot  West
                       Street
Stop                   On North Clinton Street at     North
                       West Elm Street
Stop                   On North Clinton Street at     North
                       Main Street
Stop                   On Alley behind Farm Bureau    East
                       Credit Union
Stop                   On Alley Behind Farm Bureau    West
                       Credit Union
Stop                   On North Cripe at East Maple   South
                       Street
Stop                   On Blessing Street at North    West
                       Cripe Street
Stop                   On Blessing Street at North    East
                       Larimer Street
Stop                   On East Oak Street at North    East
                       Larimer Street
Stop                   On East Maple at North Larimer West
                       Street
Stop                   On North Larimer Street at     South
                       East Elm Street
Stop                   On North Larimer Street at     South
                       South Elm Street
Stop                   On East Elm Street at North    East
                       Benton Street
Stop                   On East Carriage Lane at North West
                       Benton Street
Stop                   On East Walnut Street at North West
                       Benton Street
Stop                   On East Main Street at North   East
                       Benton Street
Stop                   On South Wabash Street at East South
                       Lincoln Street
Stop                   On East Washington at Wabash   East
                       Street
Stop                   On East Washington at North    West
                       Benton Street
Stop                   On East Washington at North    East
                       Benton Street
Stop                   On East Lincoln Street at      East
                       South Benton Street
Stop                   On East Lincoln Street at      West
                       South Benton Street
Stop                   On South Jackson Street at     North
                       East Lincoln Street
Stop                   On South Jackson Street at     South
                       East Lincoln Street
Stop                   On South Jackson Street at     North
                       East Washington Street
Stop                   On South Jackson Street at     South
                       East Washington Street
Stop                   On North Jackson Street at     North
                       East Main Street
Stop                   On South Sherman Street at     South
                       East Lincoln Street
Stop                   On North Sherman Street at     North
                       East Main Street
Stop                   On South Sherman Street at     North
                       East Washington Street
Stop                   On South Sherman Street at     South
                       East Washington Street
Stop                   On South Monroe at East        North
                       Lincoln Street
Stop                   On South Monroe at East        South
                       Lincoln Street
Stop                   On North Monroe at East        South
                       Washington Street
Stop                   On South Monroe at East        North
                       Washington Street
Stop                   On North Monroe at East Main   North
                       Street
Do Not Enter One-Way   North-east between Main and    North
                       Washington Alley
Stop                   On East Lincoln at Jefferson   West
                       Street
Stop                   On West Lincoln at Jefferson   East
                       Street
Stop                   On South Jefferson Street at   South
                       Lincoln Street
                       On South Timber Valley
Stop                   Boulevard at West Lincoln      North
                       Street
Stop                   On Brooke Lane at South Timber East
                       Valley Boulevard
Yield                  On Bryan Court at South Timber West
                       Valley Boulevard
 
   (E)   (1)   The intersection of East Lincoln Street and South Jefferson
Street in the town is hereby designated as a stop intersection for westbound
traffic on East Lincoln Street so that all westbound vehicles on Lincoln Street
are required to stop and yield the right-of-way in compliance with state law
before entering this intersection.
      (2)   The intersection of South Jefferson Street and Lincoln Street in
the town is hereby designated as a yield intersection for southbound traffic on
South Jefferson Street so that all southbound vehicles on Jefferson Street are
required to yield the right-of-way in compliance with state law before entering
this intersection.
      (3)   The town’s Street Department is hereby authorized, in accordance
with I.C. 9-21, to post a stop sign for westbound traffic on Lincoln Street at
the intersection with Jefferson Street, and a yield sign for southbound traffic
on Jefferson Street at the intersection with Lincoln Street.
      (4)   All vehicles approaching any stop or yield intersection in the
town, as its boundaries may change from time to time, in a direction for which
the vehicle is designated to stop at the intersection by traffic signs posted
in accordance with I.C. 9-21 are required to stop and yield the right-of-way in
compliance with state law before entering any designated stop or yield
intersection.
      (5)   Ordinance violations shall be enforced under proceedings brought
pursuant to I.C. 34-4-32-1 et seq. in a manner similar to that of infractions
with complaint and summons described in I.C. 9-30-3-6 issued by the town’s
Police Department or other police agencies.
      (6)   Revenues generated from fines for violations of this division (E)
shall be deposited in the Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund of the
town’s Police Department.
   (F)    Any person who is found to have violated any provision of division
(E) above, or who violates any future ordinance designating a stop or yield
intersection, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than
$500 for each separate offense.
   (G)   (1)   The intersection of Jefferson Street and Elm Street in the town
is hereby designated as a four-way stop intersection so that all vehicles
crossing or turning at this intersection shall be required to stop and yield
the right of way in compliance with state law before entering the intersection
of the two roads.
      (2)   The Town Street and Utilities Department is hereby authorized and
directed to post stop signs in accordance with I.C. 9-21 at the intersection of
Jefferson Street and Elm Street.
      (3)   Ordinance violations shall be enforced under proceedings brought
pursuant to I.C. 34-28-5-1 et seq. in a manner similar to that of infractions
with complaint and summons described in I.C. 9-30-3-6 issued by the Millersburg
Police Department or other police agency. Any person who is found to have
violated any provisions of this division shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $500 for each separate offense.
      (4)   Revenues generated from fines for violations of this section shall
be deposited in the General Fund of the town.
(Ord. 1987-2, passed 7-6-1987; Ord. 1991-6, passed 7-1-1991; Ord. 1997-7,
passed 3-17-1997; Ord. 2003-10, passed 9-22-2003; Ord. 2005-1, passed 4-13-
2005; Ord. 2023-02, passed 4- -2023)
SCHEDULE IV. SCHOOL ZONES.
   The portion of Main Street between Jefferson and Jackson Streets and that
portion of Elm Street between Jefferson Street and Larimer Drive are designated
school zones.
(Ord. 1985-1, passed 2-4-1985)
SCHEDULE V. TRUCK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Drivers are prohibited from driving trucks or freight carrying
vehicles exceeding one ton payload capacity on Larimer Street and Maple Street
(from Larimer to Cripe Street) in the town.
      (2)   Ordinance violations shall be enforced under proceedings brought
pursuant to I.C. 34-4-32-1 et seq. in a manner similar to that of infractions
with complaint and summons described in I.C. 9-30-3-6 issued by the town’s
Police Department or any other police agency.
      (3)   Revenues generated from such fines for violation of this division
(A) shall be deposited in the Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund of the
town.
      (4)   The town’s Street Department is hereby authorized and directed to
post “No Through Trucks” signs in accordance with I.C. 9-21.
   (B)   (1)   Drivers are prohibited from driving trucks with payload capacity
of one ton, or pickup trucks being used for commercial transportation or the
pulling of trailers, campers, or other items for commercial use, to or from a
business, on Cook Street, Depot Street, Clinton Street, the 300 block of West
Elm Street, and Washington Street East of S.R. 13 in the town.
      (2)   Ordinance violations shall be enforced under proceedings brought
pursuant to I.C. 34-4-32-1 et seq. in a manner similar to that of infractions
with complaint and summons described in I.C. 9-30-3-6 issued by the town’s
Police Department or other police agency.
      (3)   Revenues generated from fines for violations of this division (B)
shall be deposited in the General Fund LECE line item of the town.
   (C)   (1)   Any person who is found to have violated any provision of
division (A) above shall be punished by a $50 fine for each separate offense.
      (2)   Any person who is found to have violated any provision of division
(B) above shall be punished by a $100 fine for each separate offense.
(Ord. 2005-3, passed 6-8-2005; Ord. 2013-9, passed 8-14-2013)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking regulations
SCHEDULE I. PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   From December 1 of each year until the last day of February
following, parking shall not be permitted on the portions of the streets
designated and between the hours specified, as follows:
         (a)   On Washington Street from Clinton Street to the alley between
Jefferson and Sherman, and on the north side of Washington from said alley to
Benton Street (S.R. 13) from midnight to 6:00 a.m.;
         (b)   On Jefferson Street between Main Street and Lincoln Street from
midnight to 6:00 a.m.;
         (c)   On the south side of Washington Street from the alley between
Jefferson and Sherman Streets to Benton Street (S.R. 13) from 8:00 a.m. to
noon; and
         (d)   On any street during a snow emergency. A snow emergency shall be
declared to exist by the President of the Board of Trustees whenever snow
removal is necessary to permit the movement of traffic and access to businesses
and residences by emergency vehicles.
      (2)   Permitting a vehicle to remain on the streets shall constitute a
violation of this division (A) and any person found to have violated this
division (A) shall be fined in any amount not to exceed $25.
      (3)   The Town Marshal is authorized to have any vehicle parked on the
streets in violation of this division (A) towed away at the owner’s expense.
      (4)   Signs shall be placed on the affected parts of Washington and
Jefferson Streets on December 1 of each year and removed on March 1 following,
prohibiting parking during the designated hours. No person shall be convicted
for any violation prior to the erection of the signs or on or after March 1.
      (5)   The proper authorities of the town shall make all reasonable
efforts to notify the affected citizens of a snow emergency, including releases
to the news media.
   (B)   (1)   In the Central Business District of the town, being defined as
Washington Street between Clinton Street and the north-south alley east of
Jefferson Street and Jefferson Street from Lincoln Street to the east-west
alley north of Washington Street, there is established four parking spaces for
handicapped parking.
      (2)   The Town Marshal shall conduct a survey of business and public
facilities and based upon that survey shall designate the spaces to be reserved
for handicapped parking.
      (3)   The Town Marshal shall procure signs bearing the official
international wheelchair symbol conforming to state standards as to size and
shall erect the same immediately adjacent to the reserved space.
      (4)   Any person who parks a motor vehicle which does not display a
handicapped person’s or disabled veteran’s placard issued under I.C. 9-18.5-
8 et seq. shall, upon convection, be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
      (5)   Any person using a handicapped parking space shall conform to all
other ordinances and regulations as to time and snow removal now in effect or
hereinafter adopted.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any motor vehicle,
whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled portion of
Larimer Drive or obstruct the road in any way so that there is less than 18
feet of pavement available for the movement of vehicles.
      (2)   No person shall park a motor vehicle on any street having a curb
with the right front wheel more than 12 inches from the curb.
      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this division (C)
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any amount not exceeding $100.
   (D)   (1)   Parking is prohibited on the south side of Elm Street and 15
feet south of the south edge of the Elm Street pavement from the intersection
of Jefferson and Elm Street for a distance of 1,000 feet east along Elm Street.
      (2)   Parking is prohibited on the south side of Maple Street and 15 feet
south of the south edge of the Maple Street pavement.
      (3)   Revenues generated from such fines for violations of this division
shall be deposited in the General Fund of the town.
      (4)   A $25 fine shall be imposed for a violation of this division (D).
   (E)   (1)   Parking is prohibited on the south side of Lincoln Street and
ten feet south of the south edge of the Lincoln Street pavement from the
intersection of Timber Valley Boulevard and Lincoln Street for a distance of
225 feet west of the pavement of Timber Valley Boulevard.
      (2)   Revenues generated from fines for violations of this division (E)
shall be deposited in the General Fund of the town.
      (3)   Violations may be enforced under proceedings brought pursuant to
I.C. 34-28-5 et seq. in a manner similar to that of infractions with complaint
and summons described in I.C. 9-30-3-6 issued by the town’s Police Department
or other police agency.
      (4)   A $15 fine shall be imposed for a violation of this division (E).
   (F)   (1)   The portion of Washington Street east of South Jefferson Street
to Sherman Street shall be designated “Angle” parking on the south side of the
street and “No Parking” on the north side of the street.
      (2)   A portion on the east side of North Jefferson Street shall be
designated as “Angle” parking. A portion on the west side of North Jefferson
Street shall be designated as “Angle” parking.
      (3)   Angle parking will be changed to parallel parking in the 100 block
of East Main Street west of Sherman Street to Jefferson Street.
      (4)   Two parking spaces in the 100 block of South Jefferson Street shall
be designated and signed as “Ten Minute” parking.
      (5)   One space in the 100 block of South Jefferson Street shall be
designated and signed as “Handicap” parking.
      (6)   The Marshal is directed to secure appropriate signs, conforming to
state standards as to size, designating said areas as “Ten Minute” parking and
“Handicap” parking and erect the same pursuant to state standards.
      (7)    For each violation of this division (F), the town shall be
entitled to a judgment of up to $25 together with court costs, and if defendant
fails to satisfy a judgment entered against him or her for a violation, the
Clerk of the Court shall certify the unpaid judgment to the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles.
   (G)   ( 1)   Parking is prohibited on the north and south side of Main
Street or within ten feet of the pavement, between Jackson Street and Sherman
Street.
      ( 2)   No stopping or parking on the roadway will be allowed unless
directed by a crossing guard or police officer.
      ( 3)   Exception will be that vehicles may park in the designated parking
spaces that are clearly marked as long as the vehicles are properly parked
within the spaces and lines designated.
      (4)   Revenues generated from fines for violations of this division (G)
shall be deposited in the LECE Fund of the town.
      (5)   Violations may be enforced under proceedings brought pursuant to
I.C. 34-4-32-1 et seq. in a manner similar to that of infractions with
complaint and summons described in I.C. 9-30-3-6 issued by the town’s Police
Department or other police agency.
      (6)   A $10 fine will be imposed for a violation of this division (G).
   (H)   (1)   Parking is prohibited on the south side of Elm Street and 15
feet south of the south edge of the Elm Street pavement from the intersection
of Jefferson and Elm Streets for a distance of 1,000 feet east along Elm
Street.
      (2)   Parking is prohibited on the south side of Maple Street and 15 feet
south of the south edge of the Maple Street pavement.
      (3)   Parking facing traffic is prohibited on all town designated
streets.
   (I)   (1)   Parking is prohibited on the south side of Elm Street and 15
feet south of the south edge of the Elm Street pavement from the intersection
of Jefferson and Elm Streets for a distance of 1,000 feet east along Elm
Street.
      (2)   Parking is prohibited on both sides of East Washington Street for a
distance of 80 feet west of State Road 13. There will be three marked
designated street parking spaces on both sides of East Washington Street beyond
the restricted 80 feet to the north-south alley intersection.
      (3)   Parking is prohibited on the south side of Maple Street and 15 feet
south of the south edge of the Maple Street pavement.
      (4)   Parking facing traffic is prohibited on all town designated
streets.
      (5)   (a)   Parking is prohibited on all posted designated emergency snow
routes when snow fall exceeds two inches or more until the designated street
has been cleared.
         (b)   Street parking is prohibited within a cul-de-sac when snow fall
exceeds two inches or more until the designated area has been cleared.
         (c)   Cul-de-sac street parking is prohibited from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. Monday through Friday. (Holidays are exempt).
      (6)   Parking is prohibited on both sides of the street of Blessing
Street.
      (7)   Parking is prohibited at Eagle Park except for the designated
parking area along Depot Street which shall be limited to park patrons only.
      (8)   Revenues generated from such fines for violations of this division
shall be deposited in the LECE Fund.
      (9)   A $50 fine shall be imposed for violations of this division (I). In
addition, vehicles parked on designated emergency snow routes may be towed at
the vehicle owner’s expense when the parked vehicle becomes a traffic hazard.
   (J)   (1)   Violations of parking ordinances established by the town shall
be punished by fines as set forth hereafter:
         (a)   Violations of ordinances, regulations, and statutes restricting
parking in a snow route: $25;
         (b)   Violations of ordinances, regulations, and statutes establishing
handicapped parking spaces: $15;
         (c)   Violations of ordinances, regulations, and statutes establishing
no parking areas near fire hydrants: $15; and
         (d)   Violations of ordinances, regulations, and statutes prohibiting
double parking, parking in a no parking area designated by yellow curbs,
obstructing traffic, and any other parking violation: $15.
      (2)    Revenues generated from fines as set forth above shall be
deposited in the General Fund of the town.
   (K)   (1)   (a)   Parking is prohibited on the south side of Elm Street and
15 feet south of the south edge of the Elm Street pavement from the
intersection of Jefferson and Elm Streets for a distance of 1,000 feet east
along Elm Street.
         (b)   Parking is prohibited on both sides of East Washington Street
for a distance of 80 feet west of State Road 13. There will be marked
designated street parking spaces on both sides of East Washington Street beyond
the restricted 80 feet to the north/south alley intersection.
      (2)   Parking is prohibited on the south side of Maple Street and 15 feet
south of the south edge of the Maple Street pavement.
      (3)   Parking facing traffic is prohibited on all town designated
streets.
      (4)   Parking is prohibited on all posted designated emergency snow
routes when snow fall exceeds two inches or more until the designated street
has been cleared.
         (a)   Street parking is prohibited within a cul-de-sac when snow fall
exceeds two inches or more until the designated area has been cleared.
         (b)   Cul-de-sac streeting parking is prohibited from 8:00 a.m. - 5:00
p.m Monday through Friday. (Holidays are exempt.)
      (5)   Parking is prohibited on both sides of the street of Blessing
Street.
      (6)   Angle parking will be changed to parallel parking in the 100 block
of East Main Street west of Sherman Street to Jefferson Street.
      (7)   Parking is prohibited at Eagle Park except for the designated
parking area along Depot Street which shall be limited to park patrons only.
      (8)   Parking is prohibited on any street, as to create a traffic hazard,
in the town limits that is a north/south, east/west, two-way, also to include
streets that are angled southeast/northwest, between Clinton Street and Benton
Street as long as no driveways, alleys, or fire hydrants are blocked.
      (9)   Parking on Washington Street is allowed, except on special
occasions such as on the Farmers Day Parade, or emergency snow route.
      (10)   A $50 fine shall be imposed for violations of this division. In
addition to vehicles parked on designated emergency snow routes may be towed at
the vehicle owner's expense when the parked vehicle becomes a traffic hazard.
      (11)   Revenues generated from such fines for violations of this division
shall be deposited in the General Fund.
(Ord. 1985-3, passed 5-6-1985; Ord. 1989-8, passed 12-4-1989; Ord. 1992-4,
passed 4-6-1992; Ord. 1996-9, passed 1-20-1997; Ord. 1997-9, passed 5-5-1997;
Ord. 1998-8, passed 5-4-1998; Ord. 2003-8, passed 8-8-2003; Ord. 2008-1, passed
9-24-2008; Ord. 2016-05, passed 10-26-2016; Ord. 2018-09, passed 8-22-2018;
Ord. 2020-03, passed 5-13-2020; Ord., passed 9-10-2025)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   PARK REGULATIONS
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   FAIR HOUSING
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Running at large
   
90.02   Diseased animals running at large
   
90.03   Livestock and wild animals
   
90.04   Vicious dogs
Humane Treatment of Animals
   
90.15   Definitions
   
90.16   Jurisdiction
   
90.17   Control measures
   
90.18   Female dogs and cats
   
90.19   Abandonment of animals
   
90.20   Inoculation
   
90.21   Vicious animals
Chickens Permitted in Town Limits
   
90.35   Keeping of chickens
   
90.36   Registration requirements
   
90.37   Revocation of registration
   
90.38   Location of coops
   
90.39   Construction of coops and runs
   
90.40   Odor free and sanitary environment required
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any animal to
run at large, provided, however, that this section shall not apply to domestic
animals.
   (B)   All animals found running at large are hereby declared to be a
nuisance and shall be impounded.
   (C)   The owner of any animal shall be responsible for any damages to the
person or property of others caused by said animal while running at large.
(Ord. 1984-7, passed 8-27-1984) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 DISEASED ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   All animals which are afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease and
have been found at large, or have come into contact with or exposed to any
public place, shall be placed in an animal shelter provided for that purpose by
contract or otherwise by the town, under the supervision and direction of the
Marshal.
(Ord. 1984-7, passed 8-27-1984)
§ 90.03 LIVESTOCK AND WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, or otherwise
maintain within the corporate limits of the town, any livestock, fowl, or wild
animal, excepting household pets as hereinafter defined, unless such livestock,
fowl, or wild animal is confined not less than 150 feet from the residence of
any other person; provided, however, that no such livestock, fowl, or wild
animal shall be so kept or maintained if noxious and/or offensive odors are
thereby caused to enter upon and cross the real estate owned and/or occupied by
another.
   (B)   (1)   LIVESTOCK AND FOWL shall be construed to mean all animals and
fowl that provide food and/or are beasts of burden such as cattle of all
species, cows, bulls, horses, mules, ponies, burros, goats, sheep, hogs,
chickens, ducks, and any other animal of a similar kind, nature, type, or use.
      (2)   HOUSE PETS shall be construed to be dogs, cats, parakeets,
canaries, and other small animals or birds which are normally kept within the
living quarters of an abode.
      (3)   WILD ANIMALS shall be construed to mean all poisonous reptiles or
any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile, any vicious or
dangerous domesticated animal, or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious,
or dangerous propensities. This term shall include, but not be restricted to,
apes, bears, constrictor snakes over six feet in length, coyotes, deer, foxes,
gamecocks and other fighting birds, monkeys, and wolves.
(Ord. 1984-7, passed 8-27-1984) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any cross,
vicious, or unruly dog.
   (B)   The Marshal or his or her deputy is hereby authorized to kill any
dangerous or vicious animal when it is necessary for the protection of any
person or property.
(Ord. 1984-7, passed 8-27-1984) Penalty, see §
90.99
HUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS
§ 90.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT. The voluntary relinquishment or possession by the owner with
the intention of terminating his or her ownership but without vesting it in any
other person.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner’s property or residence while not
under the control of the owner or other person by leash, cord, chain, or other
device of actual physical restraint. An exception to AT LARGE shall be for
instances where a dog, cat, or other animal would be under voice control while
engaged in hunting, tracking, or other verifiable training procedures.
   DOG, CAT, AND ANIMAL. Include both the male and female of all forms of dogs,
cats, or other animals of any type or character.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, association, entity, group, or corporation owning,
keeping, boarding, or harboring a dog, cat, or other animal within the
unincorporated areas of the county.
   VICIOUS. With a propensity, inclination, tendering or attitude toward, or
causing an unprovoked attack or assault on a human or another animal.
(Ord. 87-308, passed 4-20-1987)
§ 90.16 JURISDICTION.
   This subchapter and the rules, regulations, restrictions, and punishments
herein provided shall pertain only to activities arising from or occurring
within the unincorporated areas of the county.
(Ord. 87-308, passed 4-20-1987)
§ 90.17 CONTROL MEASURES.
   (A)   An owner shall keep his or her dog, cat, or other animal under control
at all times.
   (B)   It shall be deemed that an owner does not have control of his or her
animal if he or she permits said animal to:
      (1)   Run at large at any time within the unincorporated areas of the
county;
      (2)   Damage or defile the premises or property of another within the
unincorporated areas of the county;
      (3)   Bark or howl unduly, for periods exceeding 30 minutes, so as to
disturb the quiet of the neighborhood or any person or persons; provided,
however, that this division (B)(3) shall not apply to duly licensed and
operated kennels permitted by the county zoning ordinance to be operated at the
location at issue, by specific zoning ruling, special use permit, or other
provisions of the zoning ordinance; or
      (4)   Bite, or attempt to bite, attack, or belligerently pursue any
person or persons.
(Ord. 87-308, passed 4-20-1987) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.18 FEMALE DOGS AND CATS.
   Any female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a secure enclosure by its
owner in such manner that the female cannot come in contact with a male animal
of its own species.
(Ord. 87-308, passed 4-20-1987)
§ 90.19 ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or any animal to abandon the same within
the unincorporated areas of the county.
(Ord. 87-308, passed 4-20-1987) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.20 INOCULATION.
   All dogs or cats kept, harbored, or maintained by their owners in the
county, and over the age of six months, shall have current and valid rabies
inoculations, and must wear a tag at all times attached to a properly fitted
collar or harness verifying the inoculation.
(Ord. 87-308, passed 4-20-1987)
§ 90.21 VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, or have in his
or her possession or under his or her control within the unincorporated areas
of the county, any dangerous dog or other animal with vicious or dangerous
propensities toward humans or other animals.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit trained law enforcement dogs nor
certified, trained production dogs.
(Ord. 87-308, passed 4-20-1987) Penalty, see §
90.99
CHICKENS PERMITTED IN TOWN LIMITS
§ 90.35 KEEPING OF CHICKENS.
   (A)   Each single-family dwelling holding a registration may keep no more
than five chickens (hens) at any time.
   (B)   No roosters are permitted in town limits.
   (C)   Tenants not owning the residence must receive permission from the
owner of the property prior to the construction of a coop and/or keeping of
chickens.
   (D)   Chickens must not run-at-large, and must be in a habitable coop with
an attached run.
   (E)   Multiple family dwellings including double residences shall not keep
chickens. But, shall be allowed only with acceptable permission from adjoining
neighbors.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 6-12-2024; Ord. 2024-03-01, passed 7-10-2024)
§ 90.36 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A registration is required to keep chickens in the town.
   (B)   Registrations are issued annually with the Clerk Treasurer's Office
with a one-time fee of $20 that shall be receipted into the general fund under
fines and fees. Resident's shall keep a copy of their first registration as
proof of payment.
   (C)   Registrations are issued by the Clerk Treasurer or Marshal's Office.
   (D)   Registration must include a design plan for the coop and run, a map of
the yard indicating where the coop and run will be placed. Preferably shielded
from public view.
   (E)   Registration needs to be approved by the Marshal's Office and or
governing body.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 6-12-2024; Ord. 2024-03-01, passed 7-10-2024)
§ 90.37 REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Registration to keep chickens may be revoked by the Marshal's Office
and or governing body at any time due to violations of this chapter.
   (B)   Appeals of revocation may be heard by petitioning the governing body
of the town.
   (C)   After notification of revocation of registration, all chickens must be
removed from the property within 48 hours, unless an appeal is filed. If the
appeal is denied the chickens must be removed within 48 hours of denial.
Chickens that remain on the property are subject to confiscation by the
Marshal's Office or governing body.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 6-12-2024; Ord. 2024-03-01, passed 7-10-2024)
§ 90.38 LOCATION OF COOPS.
   (A)   Coops and runs must be located no less than ten feet from the side
property lines.
   (B)   Coops and runs may only be kept in the rear yards, lots with rear
yards that also are considered front yards due to being adjacent to roadways
are considered rear yards for the purpose of this chapter.
   (C)   Coops and runs are not permitted within 30 feet of any neighborhood
dwelling.
   (D)   Coops and runs must be screened with year-round landscaping, walls,
and/or fencing so as not to be visible from any public street, sidewalk, or
adjoining lot when viewed from an observation height of four feet above ground.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 6-12-2024; Ord. 2024-03-01, passed 7-10-2024)
§ 90.39 CONSTRUCTION OF COOPS AND RUNS.
   (A)   Coops and runs shall be well maintained.
   (B)   Coops shall be enclosed on all sides and have a roof and doors. All
access doors must be able to be shut and locked overnight. Coops must have at
least one solid door and window that be opened for ventilation. Windows and
vents must be covered with predatory and bird-proof wire containing less than
one-inch openings.
   (C)   Coop must not exceed 36 square feet in size. Coop must have at least
three-square feet of space per chicken.
   (D)   Coop shall be constructed, repaired, and maintained in a manner to
prevent rodents from being harbored underneath or within the walls of the
closures.
   (E)   Coop shall be built of solid weatherproof materials such as wood,
metal, or plastic. Wood shall be treated wood and not particle board. Coop
floors shall be made of wood or cement and set a minimum of one-foot above
ground level with a slight slope towards the door or other opening to prevent
puddling.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 6-12-2024; Ord. 2024-03-01, passed 7-10-2024)
§ 90.40 ODOR FREE AND SANITARY ENVIRONMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   There must not be any discernable odor emanating from the coop and run
at the property line.
   (B)   The coop and run must be regularly cleaned as to not permit the
accumulation of feces.
   (C)   Chicken feed must be stored in rat proof containers.
(Ord. 2024-03, passed 6-12-2024; Ord. 2024-03-01, passed 7-10-2024)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A person violating any provision of §§
90.01 to
90.04 shall be fined in any sum not to exceed $500.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
90.15 to
90.21 shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine
of not less than $25 nor more than $200, together with the court costs or other
assessments imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction. Any person convicted
of a subsequent violation or violations of §§
90.15 to
90.21, within one year after a prior conviction, shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $25 nor more than $500, together with the court costs or other
assessments imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction. For purposes of §§
90.15 to
90.21, each day’s violation of any of the terms or provisions hereof shall be
deemed a separate offense.
   (D)   (1)   Any violations of §§
90.35 to
90.40 may be fined not less than $500 and not more than $2,500, animal seized,
and subject to any state or federal charges. Any violation of these provisions
shall be guilty of an infraction and may be punished. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which violation occurs or
continues.
      (2)   The owner of any animal found at large or in violation of any other
provisions of §§
90.35 to
90.40 shall be punished with fines with respect to each animal as follows:
         (a)   First offense: $25.
         (b)   Second offense within six months: $75.
         (c)   Subsequent offenses within six months: $150.
(Ord. 1984-7, passed 8-27-1984; Ord. 87-308, passed 4-20-1987; Ord. 2024-03,
passed 6-12-2024; Ord. 2024-03-01, passed 7-10-2024)
CHAPTER 91: PARK REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Construction and scope of chapter
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Possession or use of alcoholic beverages
   
91.04   Possession of firearms and weapons
   
91.05   Inflicting injury to wildlife and vegetation
   
91.06   Causing damage to signs, shelters, and other structures
   
91.07   Camping
   
91.08   Commercial sales, solicitations, and commercial photography
   
91.09   Disorderly behavior
   
91.10   Other prohibited activity
   
91.11   Traffic control
   
91.12   Vehicle use restriction
   
91.13   Vehicles to be removed before park closing
   
91.14   Pets to be on leash
   
91.15   Fire is restricted to proper containers
   
91.16   Enforcement
Cook Station Park
   
91.30   Park hours
   
91.31   Being in the park after hours prohibited
   
91.32   Revenue from fines
   
91.33   Signage
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   General offenses, see
Ch. 130
   Town organization, see
Ch. 30
   Town policies, see
Ch. 31
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 CONSTRUCTION AND SCOPE OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   Construction. In the interpretation of this subchapter affecting
parks, its provisions shall be construed as follows.
      (1)   Any term in the singular shall include the plural.
      (2)   Any term in the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
      (3)   Any requirements or provisions of this subchapter relating to any
act shall respectively extend to and include the causing, procuring, aiding, or
abetting directly or indirectly of such act; or the permitting or the allowing
of any minor in the custody of an adult, doing any act prohibited by any
provision hereof.
      (4)   No provision hereof shall make unlawful any act necessarily
performed by officers or employees of the town’s Park and Recreation Department
in the line of duty or work as such, or by any person, his or her agents or
employees, in the proper and necessary execution of the terms of any agreement
with the Board.
      (5)   Any act otherwise prohibited by this subchapter, provided it is not
otherwise prohibited by law or local ordinance, shall be lawful if performed
under, by virtue of, and strictly in compliance with, the provisions of permit
and to the extent authorized thereby.
      (6)   This subchapter is in addition and supplemental to all municipal,
state, and federal laws and ordinances.
   (B)   Territorial scope. This subchapter shall be effective within and upon
all areas under the jurisdiction of the Park Board, and shall regulate the use
thereof by all persons.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK. Include the land and water constituting all parks and other recreation
areas within the jurisdiction and control of the town’s Park and Recreation
Department.
   PARK BOARD. The town’s Park and Recreation Department.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013)
§ 91.03 POSSESSION OR USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into any park or use, consume,
sell, give away, or have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverage.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, unless licensed, to bring into any park
or have in his or her possession any weapons, missile propelling devices, or
ammunition. Additionally, the use of fireworks or other explosive devices shall
only be permitted with the express consent of the town’s Park and Recreation
Board. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to bring into any park, or
have in his or her possession, any firearms, unless licensed, permitted, and
authorized by the appropriate police department having jurisdiction over said
individual and/or park to carry or possess such firearm.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 INFLICTING INJURY TO WILDLIFE AND VEGETATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, wound, hunt, trap, shoot,
throw rocks or missiles at, chase, molest, or remove squirrel nests or remove
the young of any such animal, or the eggs, or young of any such reptile or
bird, or knowingly buy, receive, have in his or her possession, sell, or give
away any such animal, reptile, bird, or egg so killed or taken within any park
boundary. Notwithstanding the above, the Park Board reserves the right to grant
its express written permission to allow the hunting or trapping of certain
species under restricted conditions to protect against species overpopulation.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to harvest, remove, cut, break,
disturb, set fire to, or otherwise damage any vegetation or other growing
things within the boundaries of any park. The word VEGETATION includes, but is
not limited to, any plant, flower, flowerbed, shrub, tree growth, or any
branch, stem, fruit, or leaf thereof. No person shall attach a rope, tether,
cable, or other contrivance to any such vegetation. Notwithstanding the above,
the ripe fruit and seeds of plants and trees may be collected from the ground.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 CAUSING DAMAGE TO SIGNS, SHELTERS, AND OTHER STRUCTURES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, remove, set fire to, tamper
with, damage, or destroy any artificial structures within the park boundaries
or use any such structure for purposes other than that for which it was
intended. Artificial structures include, but are not limited to, any drive,
walk, bridge, wall, monument, statue, sign, building, tower, parking lot, post,
gate, recreational equipment, and the like. No person shall displace or carry
away any asphalt, curb, rock, stone, gravel, sand, or make any excavation of
any kind within the boundaries of any park.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.07 CAMPING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to pitch or maintain a tent or other
improvised shelter or otherwise camp within any park boundary without the
express written permission of the Park Board, which permission must be
conspicuously posted at the campsite.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.08 COMMERCIAL SALES, SOLICITATIONS, AND COMMERCIAL PHOTOGRAPHY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or solicit, advertise,
photograph, or promote for sale any commercial product or commercial event
within the boundaries or any park without the express written permission of the
town’s Park and Recreation Board, which permission must then be conspicuously
posted at the site of such activity.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.09 DISORDERLY BEHAVIOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within any park boundary to:
   (A)   Disobey any order of the police officer or park employee designated by
the Park Board to give orders, or disobey or disregard the notices,
prohibitions, instructions, or directions on any park sign. This includes the
rules, regulations of playground areas, recreation centers, shelter houses,
museums, and zoological or botanical buildings, which rules are posted on the
grounds or buildings or structures connected with or used for any purpose under
the jurisdiction, control, operation, or supervision of the Park Board;
   (B)   Use threatening, abusive, or insulting language;
   (C)   Do, engage in, aid, or abet any obscene or indecent act;
   (D)   Solicit alms, subscriptions, or contributions for any purpose without
the express written permission of the Park Board;
   (E)   Molest or annoy other persons or otherwise interfere with their lawful
use of park facilities;
   (F)   Interfere with, encumber, obstruct, or render dangerous any part of
the park street;
   (G)   Climb or lie upon any wall, fence, or shelter; and/or
   (H)   Engage in, instigate, or encourage a contention or fight.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.10 OTHER PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   No person shall engage in any conduct or activities dangerous to themselves
or others or use the facilities and structures of the park for purposes other
than those for which they were intended. Activities specifically prohibited
under this section include, but are not limited to, hang gliding, repelling
from towers, and any other use of the trees, towers, or other structures for
technical climbing activities.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.11 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   The maximum speed of any vehicle operated within the park boundaries
is limited to 15 mph. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle
in excess of this speed limit.
   (B)   No person shall cause or permit any vehicle within his or her use or
control to obstruct traffic and shall not stop such vehicle, except at those
places specifically designed or designated as parking areas.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.12 VEHICLE USE RESTRICTION.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated within the park boundaries except upon
the roadway or within any area expressly designed for vehicular traffic.
Snowmobiles, mini-bikes and persons on horseback are restricted to those areas
specifically designated for their use.
   (B)   The parking of vehicles in any park area not designated or designed
for parking use is prohibited.
   (C)   No vehicles shall enter or leave any park except at established
entrance ways or exits, and except at established times.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.13 VEHICLES TO BE REMOVED BEFORE PARK CLOSING.
   No vehicles shall be left within the park boundaries after the park has
closed. Any vehicle so left on the park premises may be towed from the park
without further notice to the owner or operator. The registered owner shall be
responsible for any towing fee so incurred. The hours the park is open and the
closing time shall be posted at the entrance to the park or prominently
displayed in the park.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.14 PETS TO BE ON LEASH.
   Dogs and other pets may be brought into the parks providing that they are
continuously restrained by a leash not exceeding six feet in length. No person
owning or having control of any such animal shall cause or permit the animal to
run at large within the park boundaries.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.15 FIRE IS RESTRICTED TO PROPER CONTAINERS.
   No person shall kindle, build, maintain, or use a fire except in fireplaces
provided for that purpose or under special written permit. Any fire shall be
continuously under the care and direction of a competent person over 18 years
of age from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. No fire shall be
built within ten feet of any tree or building or beneath the branches of any
tree or in any underbrush. No person shall throw away or discard a lighted
match, cigar, or cigarette within the park boundaries.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.16 ENFORCEMENT.
   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions and regulations of this
subchapter, the town’s Police Department will be vested with the power to issue
notices of violation of this subchapter. Such notices shall be prepared and
issued in accordance with I.C. 34-4-32-1 et seq. and I.C. 9-7-7-4.
(Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013)
COOK STATION PARK
§ 91.30 PARK HOURS.
   Cook Station Park shall be open to the public from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
between and including the dates of April 2 through November 1, and from 6:00
a.m. to 2:00 p.m. between and including the dates of November 2 through April
1.
(Ord. 1997-8, passed 4-7-1997)
§ 91.31 BEING IN THE PARK AFTER HOURS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any individual to be within
the boundaries of Cook Station Park during hours other than set forth in §
91.30, except in the event that the individual is participating in an event
approved and scheduled by the town’s Park and Recreation Board, which event has
extended beyond normal park hours.
(Ord. 1997-8, passed 4-7-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.32 REVENUE FROM FINES.
   Revenues generated from fines for violations of this subchapter shall be
deposited in the General Fund of the town.
(Ord. 1997-8, passed 4-7-1997)
§ 91.33 SIGNAGE.
   The town’s Street and Utilities Department are hereby authorized and
directed to place a sign or signs at the Cook Station Park setting forth the
hours the park is open to the public.
(Ord. 1997-8, passed 4-7-1997)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of any of the provisions of §§
91.01 to
91.16 shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.
   (C)   A $25 fine shall be imposed for a violation of §§
91.30 to
91.33.
(Ord. 1997-8, passed 4-7-1997; Ord. 2013-8, passed 5-8-2013)
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
Property Maintenance
   
92.001   Accumulation of junk
   
92.002   Accumulation of water
   
92.003   Location of vehicles
   
92.004   Enforcement procedure
   
92.005   Hearings
Weeds and Rank Vegetation
   
92.020   Removal of weeds required
   
92.021   Definition
   
92.022   Notice of violation
   
92.023   Abatement by the town
   
92.024   Cost of abatement
   
92.025   Hearings
Bushes and Shrubs
   
92.040   Height limitation
   
92.041   Notice of violation
   
92.042   Failure to comply is a violation
   
92.043   Location to deposit yard waste
Junked Vehicles
   
92.055   Definitions
   
92.056   Abandonment prohibited
   
92.057   Procedure for removal and disposal of abandoned vehicles
   
92.058   Vehicle abandoned on rental property
   
92.059   Abandoned vehicle report
   
92.060   Bureau procedures
   
92.061   Liability
Disposal of Construction and Demolition Waste
   
92.075   Definition
   
92.076   Accumulation of wastes
   
92.077   Waste disposal container
   
92.078   Landowner responsibility
   
92.079   Notice of violation
   
92.080   Abatement by the town
   
92.081   Cost of abatement
   
92.082   Compliance with notice required
   
92.083   Liability of the town
   
92.084   Right to refuse service for lack of payment
Open Burning
   
92.095   Leaf burning
   
92.096   Application
   
92.097   Exceptions
   
92.098   Enforcement
Public Nudity
   
92.110   Public nudity prohibited
   
92.111   Definition
   
92.112   Aiding a violation of regulations
Noise
   
92.120   Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited
 
   
92.999   Penalty
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 92.001 ACCUMULATION OF JUNK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to accumulate or to allow the accumulation upon
any premises within the corporate limits of the town, any garbage, ashes,
refuse, rubbish, manure, offal, carcasses, debris, or junk, to include, but not
limited to, scrap metal, lumber, barrels, buckets, plastics, and tires.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to accumulate furniture, stoves, refrigerators,
freezers, cans or containers, or other appliances.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 8-8-2012) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.002 ACCUMULATION OF WATER.
   It shall be unlawful to allow pools of water or other liquids to accumulate
and remain upon the premises so as to become stagnant and desirable to insects,
or to be of unsightly appearance.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 8-8-2012) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.003 LOCATION OF VEHICLES.
   No person shall accumulate automobiles, trucks, trailers, RVs, lawn mower
type vehicles, machinery, or parts of any items similar, but not limited to:
   (A)   All vehicles, trailers, and RVs are required to be properly registered
by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles and properly plated with current registration
showing and visible on such vehicle, and in running condition. A vehicle with
expired registration plates will be considered in violation;
   (B)   Junk vehicles and vehicles not in running condition will not be
allowed to have flat tires and all engine, transmissions, and normal body parts
will be on the vehicle and in working condition. All vehicles, trucks, trailer,
RVs, and lawn mowers that are not in running condition and not properly
registered if required by law, or parts of any of these vehicles and or
anything similar, are required to be kept inside a garage or building that is a
normal type structure that will enclose the parts and/or vehicles on all four
side and include a roof. No temporary type structure will be allowed, including
tarps, tarp made structures, or plastic, tin, or metal structures that do not
meet normal building codes; and
   (C)   The exception of division (B) above can be as follows:
      (1)   If a person wishes to use a manufactured tarp enclosure, he or she
may bring a photo or magazine clipping to the Town Council for it to approve
the use of the structure for storing of junk vehicles and other parts described
in division (B) above;
      (2)   Vehicles and parts described in division (B) above that are on a
trailer that is properly registered; and
      (3)   Vehicles and parts described in division (B) above that are behind
a privacy fence and not able to be seen by the public or from any property
owner joined next to the property.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 8-8-2012) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.004 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Marshal or police officer designated by the Town Council will have
the right to enforce this subchapter without complaint. The Marshal’s Office or
other police agencies, including Sheriff’s Department and/or State Police, have
the right to enforce this subchapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the directions of
a notice served personally upon him or her pursuant to this subchapter.
   (C)   The landowner shall be notified in writing of the property found in
violation. The landowner is ultimately responsible for the property and its
cleanup of said property. However, if the owner of any of the listed items in
§§
92.001 to 92.003 would come forward and admit the violation is his or hers,
then the officer may give that person notice to removed such violation. This
does not excuse the land owner from the responsibility if the violation is not
resolved. The officer will have the choice of citing either the owner of the
items causing the violation or the property owner.
   (D)   The landowner will be given an initial 30 days to remove and comply
with this subchapter. After 30 days the property will be inspected and if still
in violation, the officer will write a citation to the neglectful party and
give him or her 15 days to pay the fine at the Clerk-Treasure’s office or
Violation Bureau. If the citation is not paid in 15 days, the citing officer
will file such case with a county or town court for trial. The officer does has
the right to extend the 30 day limit if he or she sees that the property owner
is making every attempt to fix the problem and request additional time, this
will be at the discretion of the officer.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 8-8-2012) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.005 HEARINGS.
   A person may request a hearing and may be represented by counsel if desired.
A person requesting the hearing shall have the right to cross-examine the
person alleging the violation, and to testify in their own behalf. He or she
will also have the right to bring in witnesses to testify for him or her and to
obtain information, prior to the hearing, concerning the evidence that the town
will present to establish the violation. The Town Council will then determine
if the violation stands or is dismissed. The Town Council will also have the
right to give extensions if needed to fix the problem as determined in the
hearing if not dismissed.
(Ord. 2012-5, passed 8-8-2012)
WEEDS AND RANK VEGETATION
§ 92.020 REMOVAL OF WEEDS REQUIRED.
    The owners of real estate located within the corporate limits of the town
shall remove weeds and other rank vegetation growing on their property.
(Ord. 1994-21, passed 11-5-1994; Ord., passed 6-14-2023)  Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.021 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WEEDS AND OTHER RANK VEGETATION. Any plant which exceeds six inches in
height other than flowers, shrubbery, garden vegetables, agricultural crops or
trees.
(Ord. 1994-21, passed 11-5-1994; Ord., passed 6-14-2023)
§ 92.022 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
    Upon discovering a parcel of real estate on which weeds or other rank
vegetation is growing, the Clerk-Treasurer or Deputy Clerk-Treasurer shall
notify in writing the owner or his/her agent upon which the weeds and rank
vegetation are growing to cause such weeds and rank vegetation to be cut or
destroyed within five days of the service of the notice. For the purpose of
this subchapter, an agent includes renters, lessees, land contract purchasers,
managers and real estate brokers with whom a parcel is listed for sale, and
service of notice shall be adequate if served upon any person occupying the
premises, any representative of a broker with whom the property is listed for
sale, or mailed to the record title holder at the address where tax statements
are sent, such notice sent by first class mail.
(Ord. 1994-21, passed 11-5-1994; Ord., passed 6-14-2023)
§ 92.023 ABATEMENT BY THE TOWN.
   (A)    Should any owner who has been notified pursuant to §
92.022 herein fail, neglect or refuse to cause such weeds and rank vegetation
to be cut and removed within five days after notice has been delivered or
mailed, the Clerk-Treasurer or Deputy Clerk-Treasurer shall direct the
appropriate town employee of the town to cut and remove such weeds and other
vegetation.
   (B)   After the weeds and other rank vegetation are cut or removed, the
Clerk-Treasurer and/or Deputy Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a bill to the owner
or the agent of the owner as defined in §
92.021 for $50 for the first ordinance violation the amount shall increase by
$50 for each additional ordinance violation within a 12 month time period.
   (C)   Should any owner of a business within the corporate limits be notified
pursuant to §
92.022 herein fail, neglect or refuse to cause such weeds and rank vegetation
to be cut and removed within five days after notice has been delivered or
mailed, the Clerk-Treasurer shall direct the appropriate town employee of the
town to cut and remove such weeds and other vegetation.
   (D)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a record of the billing and collect the
same as it does other charges for the town. The billing shall carry a notice
that it is due 15 days after the date of the billing.
(Ord. 1994-21, passed 11-5-1994; Ord., passed 6-14-2023)
§ 92.024 COST OF ABATEMENT.
    If the bill is not paid within 60 days, the Clerk-Treasurer shall record
such obligation as a lien upon the real estate upon proper notification to the
County Auditor and shall certify to the County Auditor the amount of the bill
plus any additional administrative costs incurred in certification or
recording. The County Auditor shall place the amount certified on the tax
duplicate for the affected parcel and the total amount including any accrued
interest shall be collected as delinquent taxes and shall be distributed to the
General Fund of the town as provided by I.C. 36-7-10.1-4.
(Ord. 1994-21, passed 11-5-1994; Ord., passed 6-14-2023)
§ 92.025 HEARINGS.
   (A)   In the event that a person receiving notification of violation of this
subchapter believes that the vegetation growing on the property does not
constitute a violation of the subchapter, such person may request a hearing
before the Town Council, which hearing shall be held within 15 days of the
request, which shall be in writing and delivered to the Clerk-Treasurer's
Office. The Town Council shall enter a finding that the person notified is the
owner or agent of the owner of the real estate, and whether the vegetation
growing thereon is in violation of the subchapter. Such written notice shall be
delivered within the time specified for the removal or the vegetation and if so
delivered, the vegetation shall not be removed pending the hearing.
   (B)   (1)   At the hearing before the Town Council, the person requesting
the hearing may be represented by counsel, shall have the right to cross-
examine the persons alleging the violation, to testify on their own behalf, and
to bring in witnesses to testify for them and to obtain, prior to the hearing,
the evidence that the town will present to establish the violation.
      (2)   If the Town Council determines that the vegetation growing on the
parcel is “weed and rank vegetation” as defined in § 91.021, the owner or his
agent shall have five days from the date of the hearing to remove the offending
vegetation, and should the owner or agent fail, neglect or refuse to do so, the
steps set out in §
92.023 shall be followed.
(Ord. 1994-21, passed 11-5-1994; Ord., passed 6-14-2023)
BUSHES AND SHRUBS
§ 92.040 HEIGHT LIMITATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, or corporation to permit
or allow any bushes or shrubs to grow to a height more than 30 inches above the
center grade of the street adjoining said bushes or shrubbery, and for a
distance of 40 feet from the intersection of the edges of the pavements of
paved streets or the edge of the traveled portions of unpaved streets.
(Ord. 1984-1, passed 3- -1984) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.041 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   It shall be the duty of the Town Marshal to notify owners or tenants in
writing delivered personally to said owner or tenant or affixed to the
residence of said owner or tenant that bushes and shrubbery must be trimmed,
should there be a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1983-2, passed 7-11-1983)
§ 92.042 FAILURE TO COMPLY IS A VIOLATION.
   After such notice in writing is delivered or posted by the Town Marshal,
failure to trim bushes and shrubbery by such owner or tenant within 30 days
shall constitute a violation of this subchapter and each day thereafter that
the bushes and shrubbery remains untrimmed shall constitute a separate
violation.
(Ord. 1983-2, passed 7-11-1983) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.043 LOCATION TO DEPOSIT YARD WASTE.
    In accordance with I.C. 13-17-9-1(a)(1), the Street Department provides a
place for residents to conveniently deposit limbs and brush for disposal. The
area is located at the Street Department next to the school and is visibly
marked and contained. Only vegetation from a farm, an orchard, a nursery, a
tree farm, a cemetery, or a drainage ditch may be deposited at this location.
The Council requests that no other form of debris be left behind as it may
result in the cancellation of this service. The pile will ultimately be burned
in accordance with I.C. 13-17-9-1(c).
(Ord. passed - -)
JUNKED VEHICLES
§ 92.055 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   (a)   Any vehicle located on public property illegally;
         (b)   Any vehicle which has been left on any public property without
being moved for a period of three days or more;
         (c)   Any vehicle located on public property in such a manner as to
constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or vehicle
traffic on a public right-of-way;
         (d)   Any vehicle that has remained on private property for more than
48 hours without the consent of the owner or person in control of such
property;
         (e)   Any vehicle from which there has been removed the engine,
transmission, or differential or that is otherwise partially dismantled or
inoperable, and left on public property;
         (f)   Any vehicle which has been removed by a towing or wrecker
service or a public agency upon the request or order of a police officer
enforcing a statute or ordinance if the impounded vehicle is not claimed or
redeemed by the owner or his or her agent within 15 days of its removal; and
         (g)   Any vehicle that is six or more model years old and mechanically
inoperable, and is left continuously on private property in a location visible
from public property for more than 30 days.
      (2)   This definition and subchapter do not apply to a vehicle in
operable condition specifically adapted or constructed for operation on
privately owned raceways; a vehicle stored as the property of a member of the
United States Armed Forces who is on active duty assignment; any vehicle
located on a vehicle sale lot or at a commercial vehicle servicing facility;
any vehicle located upon property licensed or zoned as an automobile scrapyard;
any vehicle properly registered and licensed as an antique vehicle; or any
vehicle housed in a garage or other building or within a fenced area which
blocks the vehicle from public view.
   GARAGE OR OTHER BUILDING. As contemplated by this subchapter, these words
shall be given their ordinary meaning, but shall also be defined so as not to
include a tarp, plastic sheeting, or any other similar material or impermanent
means that are used to cover a vehicle.
   OFFICER or POLICE OFFICER. A sworn member of any law enforcement agency or
police department having jurisdiction to enforce this chapter and possessing
police powers within the corporate limits of the town.
   OWNER. The last known record titleholder of a vehicle according to the
records of the state’s Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
   PARTS. All components of a vehicle that as assembled do not constitute a
complete vehicle.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property located within the corporate limits of
the town which is not a public street or highway or other public property that
is owned by a private person.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. A public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park, or
other state, county, or municipal property.
   REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT. The taking of any vehicle considered to be
abandoned in violation of this subchapter by a police officer from its location
by a duly-authorized towing or wrecker service to a storage facility either
owned by the town or the wrecker or towing service on the request or orders of
the officer, and the storage of the vehicle until it is claimed or otherwise
disposed of pursuant to this chapter.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width of any public way or property which has
been dedicated as a public street, highway, or alley that is publicly
maintained as such and is open for use by the public for the purpose of
vehicular travel within the corporate limits of the town.
   VEHICLE. An automobile, motorcycle, truck, trailer, semitrailer, truck
tractor, tractor, bus, school bus, recreational vehicle, or motorized bicycle.
(Ord. 1997-10, passed 5-19-1997)
§ 92.056 ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any vehicle on any public
street or highway, other public property, or private property in violation of
this subchapter. Any person observing any such violation should notify the
town’s Police Department to report it and the location thereof.
(Ord. 1997-10, passed 5-19-1997) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.057 PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   The removal and disposal of abandoned vehicles pursuant to this
subchapter shall be in accordance with I.C. 9-22-1 depending upon the value
assessed to the vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   When an officer observes a vehicle or vehicle parts which appear
to be abandoned, he or she shall securely attach to the windshield or other
conspicuous place thereon a notice tag containing the following information:
         (a)   The date, time, officer’s name, name and address of the law
enforcement agency of which the officer is a member, and the address and
telephone number to contact for information;
         (b)   The vehicle or parts are considered abandoned;
         (c)   The vehicle or parts will be removed after 72 hours;
         (d)   The owner will be held responsible for all costs incidental to
the removal, storage, and disposal; and
         (e)   The owner may avoid these costs by removal of the vehicle or
parts within 72 hours.
      (2)   In addition, a substantially similar notice shall be served upon
any adult occupying the real estate on which the vehicle is located and upon
the owner of the vehicle if such owner can be found. A notice affixed to any
building on the real estate shall constitute notice to the owner and occupant
of the real estate. If the real estate is private property and there is no
building on the private property, the notice may be affixed at any prominent
place on the real estate.
   (C)   If the tagged vehicle or parts is not moved within 72 hours from the
issuance of the notice, the officer shall complete the “Police Officer Report
(On Abandoned/Impounded Vehicles)” adopted by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles,
including information on the condition, missing parts, and other facts to
substantiate the estimated market value. Photographs shall be taken showing the
condition of the vehicle or parts.
   (D)   If in the opinion of the officer the market value of the vehicle or
parts is less than $100, the officer shall immediately dispose of the vehicle
or parts to an automobile scrapyard. A copy of the abandoned vehicle report and
photographs relating to the abandoned vehicle or parts shall be forwarded to
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles. The original records and photographs of the
vehicle or parts shall be retained for a period of at least two years.
   (E)   If in the opinion of the officer the market value of the vehicle or
parts is at least $100, the officer shall, before placing a notice tag on the
vehicle or parts, make a reasonable effort to ascertain the person who owns or
is in control of the vehicle or parts and directly notify him or her to remove
the vehicle or parts. After notifying the person who owns the vehicle or parts,
or if the officer is unable to do so despite reasonable efforts, the officer
shall then affix to the vehicle or parts the notice tag required by division
(B) above. If the vehicle or parts are not removed within 72 hours thereafter,
the officer shall require the vehicle or parts to be towed to a storage area.
   (F)   In determining whether the vehicle is valued at less than $100 or at
$100 or more, the officer shall use the following criteria plus guidelines
adopted by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
      (1)   An abandoned vehicle should be valued at less than $100 if:
         (a)   It is ten or more model years old and has extensive
deterioration to the interior or exterior;
         (b)   It appears to be inoperable because of faulty or missing major
parts; and/or
         (c)   It is five model years old or older and has been extensively
destroyed by fire, explosion, vandalism, or other causes (excluding traffic
accidents), and is inoperable.
      (2)   All other vehicles should be valued at $100 or more.
      (3)   Vehicles in demand by collectors or auto rebuilders (e.g., 1957
Chevrolet, 1965 Mustang) should be valued over $100.
   (G)   Before the owner or lienholder of an impounded abandoned vehicle may
redeem it from the storage facility, that person must appear at the office of
the Clerk-Treasurer to pay the appropriate penalty, plus $10 as processing
costs, in order to obtain a release of the vehicle by the town. The owner or
lienholder shall then appear at the storage facility to obtain release of the
vehicle, pay all costs incident to the tow and storage, and receive a release
from the storage facility. A copy of that release must be forwarded to the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles by the storage facility.
(Ord. 1997-10, passed 5-19-1997)
§ 92.058 VEHICLE ABANDONED ON RENTAL PROPERTY.
   A person who finds a vehicle believed to be abandoned on the person’s rental
property shall do the following:
   (A)   Attach in a prominent place a notice tag containing the following
information:
      (1)   The date, time, name, and address of the person who owns the rental
property and a telephone number to contact for information;
      (2)   The vehicle is considered abandoned;
      (3)   The vehicle will be removed after 72 hours;
      (4)   The person who owns the vehicle will be responsible for all costs
incidental to the removal, storage, and disposal of the vehicle; and
      (5)   The person who owns the vehicle may avoid costs by removal of the
vehicle or parts within 72 hours.
   (B)   If the vehicle is not removed after 72 hours, the person who owns the
rental property may have the vehicle towed from the property. The towing
operator shall:
      (1)   Contact the Bureau to obtain the name and address of the person who
owns the vehicle; and
      (2)   Deliver, by certified mail, a copy of the information required in
the notice under §
92.057 to the person who owns the vehicle within five business days after the
vehicle is removed.
(Ord. 1997-10, passed 5-19-1997)
§ 92.059 ABANDONED VEHICLE REPORT.
   (A)   Within 72 hours after removal of an abandoned vehicle to a storage
area, the officer or storage area shall prepare and forward to the Bureau of
Motor Vehicles an Abandoned Vehicle Report containing a description of the
vehicle, including the following information concerning the vehicle:
      (1)   The make;
      (2)   The model;
      (3)   The identification number; and
      (4)   The number of the license plate.
   (B)   The officer or storage lot shall request that the Bureau advise the
officer or storage lot of the name and most recent address of the person who
owns or holds a lien on the vehicle.
(Ord. 1997-10, passed 5-19-1997)
§ 92.060 BUREAU PROCEDURES.
   The Bureau of Motor Vehicles shall be responsible for conducting a search to
determine the names and addresses of the owner of the vehicle or parts and any
lienholder of record. The Bureau shall be further responsible for notification
of such owner and lienholder and for the sale of the vehicle in compliance with
the provisions of I.C. 9-22-1.
(Ord. 1997-10, passed 5-19-1997)
§ 92.061 LIABILITY.
   Neither the owner, lessee, or occupant of the property from which an
abandoned vehicle or parts are removed, nor the town, its officers, agents,
employees, duly-contracted towing service, or automobile scrapyard is liable
for loss or damage to any vehicle or parts occurring during its removal,
storage, and disposition pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 1997-10, passed 5-19-1997)
DISPOSAL OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE
§ 92.075 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE. Includes, but not be limited to: any
plastic bag; wrapper; lumber; roofing material; sheathing; rubble; broken
concrete; plaster and brick; conduit; pipe; wire; nails; metal; insulation; and
similar material which results from a construction, demolition, or remodeling
process.
(Ord. 2006-4, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 92.076 ACCUMULATION OF WASTES.
   It shall be unlawful for any landowner to allow material or waste from
construction or demolition to accumulate, causing any of the following:
   (A)   Causing danger to persons or animals in the immediate area;
   (B)   Allowing material or waste to leave the premises by natural
occurrences, including, but not limited to, wind or rain;
   (C)   Allowing material or waste to fall from vehicles or containers used to
transport waste or material onto roadways or properties of others; or
   (D)   Allowing materials or waste to accumulate in a manner to harbor
unwanted rodents, reptiles, or animals, including, but not limited to, mice,
rats, groundhogs, raccoons, snakes, and squirrels.
(Ord. 2006-4, passed 7-12-2006) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.077 WASTE DISPOSAL CONTAINER.
   All waste shall be secured in a dumpster or waste disposal container that
will prevent the waste being visible from the street and from becoming airborne
or leaving the premises.
(Ord. 2006-4, passed 7-12-2006) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.078 LANDOWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   The landowner shall be responsible for the rental or purchase of such
dumpster or waste container.
(Ord. 2006-4, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 92.079 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   The Marshal or police officer designated by the Town Council or the
Marshal’s office shall notify the landowners in writing of any property found
to be in violation.
   (B)   If the property is vacant, a copy of the violation shall be mailed by
the Clerk-Treasurer to the last known owner of record disclosed by the office
of the County Auditor.
   (C)   The written notice of violation shall notify such owner to correct
such stated violation or violations within 30 days.
(Ord. 2006-4, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 92.080 ABATEMENT BY THE TOWN.
   In the event that such violation has not been corrected within such 30-day
period, the Town Council Board shall authorize the Street Department to enter
upon said premises and correct the unlawful act.
(Ord. 2006-4, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 92.081 COST OF ABATEMENT.
   The Street Department shall certify the cost of such correction to the
Clerk-Treasurer, who shall in turn certify such costs to the County Auditor be
added to the tax statements and collected in the same manner as real estate
taxes are collected upon such premises.
(Ord. 2006-4, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 92.082 COMPLIANCE WITH NOTICE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the directions of the
notice served personally upon him or her, or by certified mail, pursuant to
this subchapter.
(Ord. 2006-4, passed 7-12-2006) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.083 LIABILITY OF THE TOWN.
   The Town Council, the town, its officers, agents, employees, or other
contractors, shall not be liable for loss or damage to property during the
removal of waste or material to correct the unlawful act pursuant to this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2006-4, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 92.084 RIGHT TO REFUSE SERVICE FOR LACK OF PAYMENT.
   The Town Council reserves the right to refuse use of town utilities until
all penalties, fees, and fines are paid and shall have the right to turn off
utilities until the same are paid.
(Ord. 2006-4, passed 7-12-2006)
OPEN BURNING
§ 92.095 LEAF BURNING.
   Leaf burning within the corporate limits of the town is prohibited.
(Ord. 1995-14, passed 11-6-1995) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.096 APPLICATION.
   All outdoor burning of any material is hereby banned and declared unlawful
within the municipal corporate limits of the town, except as provided in §
92.097, which is consistent with but not inclusive of the exceptions under 326
I.A.C. 4-1-3.
(Ord. 2004-4, passed 6-23-2004) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.097 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The following types of fires are permitted subject to the limitations
contained in division (B) below:
      (1)   Persons may address the Town Council at a scheduled or special Town
Council meeting to request a special need or circumstance for a fire, and must
be approved by the Town Council as a whole. This approval can be rescinded by
the Town Council as a whole at any time;
      (2)   It is permitted to have campfires that are contained or enclosed on
all sides by stones or metal ring, providing that the fire is of all natural
wood and flames are limited to no higher than three feet;
      (3)   Farm burning and burning by the Department of Natural Resources as
allowed by 326 I.A.C. 4-1-3;
      (4)   Burning with prior receipt of a variance application and approval
of the state’s Air Pollution Control Board or its designated agent as allowed
by 326 I.A.C. 4-1-4;
      (5)   Use of charcoal and/or natural wood may be used in designated
cooking grills located at the town parks, but not on the ground or in any
building under park control, unless permitted by the Park Department and/or
Town Council as a whole; and
      (6)   Use of charcoal and/or natural wood may be used in cooking grills
at private residences.
   (B)   All permitted fires shall be subject to the following limitations.
      (1)   Only untreated wood products shall be burned unless otherwise
stated.
      (2)   Fires shall be attended at all times until completely extinguished.
      (3)   If a fire creates an air pollution problem, a nuisance, a health
hazard, or a fire hazard, it shall be extinguished.
      (4)   All farm burning shall occur between the hours of 12:00 noon and 6:
00 p.m., during which times the fire may be replenished, but only in such
manner that all of the burning material is consumed by 6:00 p.m.
      (5)   No burning shall be conducted unless the wind is at least five mph
and no more than 15 mph.
      (6)   No burning shall be conducted on property owned by another party,
to include public owned streets, roads, highways, and parks, except as
permitted by division (A)(2) above.
      (7)   No burning shall be conducted within 25 feet of a structure owned
by another party.
(Ord. 2004-4, passed 6-23-2004) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.098 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The town my extinguish any fire that is in violation of this
subchapter and charge the party responsible $250 for each such extinguishment.
   (B)   Subchapter violations shall be enforced under proceedings brought
pursuant to I.C. 34-28-5-1 et seq. in a manner similar to that of infractions
with complaint and summons described in I.C. 9-30-3-6 issued by the town’s
Police Department or any other police agency.
   (C)   The Town Council gives authority to the town’s Police Department,
Clinton Township Fire Department, Benton Township Fire Department, and/or any
other police or fire department to enter upon any property in violation of this
subchapter in order to extinguish any and all fire, smoke, or kindling in
violation of this subchapter.
   (D)   The provisions of this subchapter shall be interpreted so as to be
valid and enforceable and consistent with, but more restrictive than, 326
I.A.C. 4-1-1.
(Ord. 2004-4, passed 6-23-2004)
PUBLIC NUDITY
§ 92.110 PUBLIC NUDITY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly or intentionally appear in a
state of nudity in a public place.
(Ord. 1998-7, passed 3-16-1998) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.111 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, or the exposure of the female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola with less than a fully
opaque covering, including the entire lower portion of the human female breast,
but shall not include the exposure of any portion of the cleavage of the human
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or
other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
(Ord. 1998-7, passed 3-16-1998)
§ 92.112 AIDING A VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.
   It is unlawful for a person to knowingly or intentionally aid, induce, or
cause another person to violate §
92.110, even if the other person:
   (A)   Has not been prosecuted for the offense;
   (B)   Has not been convicted of the offense; or
   (C)   Has been acquitted of the offense.
(Ord. 1998-7, passed 3-16-1998) Penalty, see §
92.999
NOISE
§ 92.120 LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for a person to make or
allow property under his or her control to make any loud, raucous, improper,
unreasonable, offensive or unusual noise which disturbs, injures, or endangers
the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or quiet enjoyment of others within
the Town.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every real property owner, the owner or
manager of any business in the Town, or motor vehicle driver operating a
vehicle within the Town, to prevent persons using property under their control
from violating this subchapter.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 5-13-2020) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A person found to be in violation of §§
92.001 to
92.005 will be subject to a $250 fine non-spendable. If a second notice is
given and another 30 days have passed, the party involved may be fined $500. If
this fine is not paid in 15 days, the citing officer will file such case with a
county court or town court for trial. If found guilty, the $500 is a non-
suspendable fine.
      (2)   The town reserves the right to enter onto the property and remove
such violation if the home owner fails to comply with §§
92.001 to
92.005 after being cited a second time. The home owner will be responsible for
the cost of manpower at $50 an hour per person and the cost of the use of any
equipment used to remove such violation at a cost of $250 per hour, per piece
of equipment used. Any items or scrap sold will be put toward the cost of the
manpower and equipment fees.
      (3)   Fines and fees not paid may result in the filing of a lien against
the home.
      (4)   All fines will be placed in the General Fund LECE account.
   (C)   Each violation of §§
92.041 to
92.043 shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
92.055 to
92.061 shall be subject to a penalty of $25 payable to the Clerk-Treasurer, and
any vehicle parked or left standing as an abandoned vehicle or parts in
violation of §§
92.055 to
92.061 shall be subject to being removed, towed, and stored at the owner’s
expense. If said penalty has not been paid within 15 days after the date of
removal of the vehicle, the penalty shall then be $50. If the penalty has not
been paid within 30 days after the date of removal, the owner shall become
subject to a penalty of $500.
   (E)   (1)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
92.075 to
92.084 shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $250 for the first
offense. If the penalty is not paid within 30 days of notice of penalty, the
penalty shall increase to $500.
      (2)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
92.075 to
92.084 a second time shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $500. If
the penalty is not paid within 30 days of notice of such penalty, the penalty
shall increase to $750.
   (F)   In addition to any charges imposed by the Fire Department to
extinguish a leaf fire, any person burning leaves in violation of §
92.095 shall, upon conviction, be fined in a sum not to exceed $50.
   (G)   (1)   Any person found to be in violation of §§
92.095 to
92.098 shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500
plus costs for each separate violation.
      (2)   Any person found in violation of §§
92.095 to
92.098 who rekindles a prohibited fire extinguished by the town shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $500 plus costs for each such violation.
   (H)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this subchapter for which no
specific penalty is otherwise provided, shall, upon citation thereof, pay a
fine of not more than $250. Each day any violation shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable, or may
be created by different clauses or sections of the ordinances of the Town, the
Town Attorney may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery
shall be had against the same person for the same offense.
      (3)   Whoever violates any provisions of this subchapter shall be
considered guilty of an infraction and upon conviction shall be punishable by a
fine not less than $50.
      (4)   All fines delinquent in payment for 14 calendar days or longer from
the date of the violation will be double the original fine.
      (5)   If the violator has received one or more citations for violations
or written warnings from Town police officers of the existence of a violation
of this subchapter, the Town Board of Town Marshal may issue notice of the
violation and a penalty of up to $250 may be assessed. If the violation is not
terminated within 24 hours of delivery of the notice and the fine paid within
ten days, the Town Manager or Town Marshal may pursue civil proceedings,
including injunctive relief to prevent further violations. In such event, the
Town may collect all costs of such action, including attorney fees.
(Ord. 1983-2, passed 7-11-1983; Ord. 1995-14, passed 11-6-1995; Ord. 1997-10,
passed 5-19-1997; Ord. 2004-4, passed 6-23-2004; Ord. 2006-4, passed 7-12-2006;
Ord. 2012-5, passed 8-8-2012)
CHAPTER 93: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
93.01   Policy statement
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Application
   
93.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
93.05   Discrimination in residential real estate related transactions
   
93.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage service
   
93.07   Interference, coercion, or intimidation
   
93.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
   
93.09   Exemptions
   
93.10   Administration enforcement
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   It shall be the policy of the town to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the Federal Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-26-2002)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who:
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-2)
   COMMISSION. The Indiana Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C. 22-
9-1-4 et seq.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)
   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint under
I.C. 22-9.5-6.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
93.04 to
93.08 or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that
is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale, or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building of
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a
residence by one or more families.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-8)
   FAMILIAL STATUS. One or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18
years being domiciled with:
      (1)   A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual
or the written permission of such parent or other person; or
      (2)   The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process
of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18
years.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual with the status of such family being
further defined above.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-9)
   HANDICAP. 
      (1)   Includes, with respect to a person:
         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of such person’s major life activities;
         (b)   A record of having such an impairment or being regarded as
having such an impairment;
         (c)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the Federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; and
         (d)   Any other impairment defined under I.C. 22-9-5-6 and 22-9-7-5.
      (2)   The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use of or
addictions to a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802; nor does
the term HANDICAP include an individual solely because that individual is a
transvestite.
(I.C. 22-9-5-6 and 22-9-7-5)
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under Title 11 of U.S.C., receivers, and fiduciaries.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for
a consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the occupant.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-26-2002)
§ 93.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of division (A)(2) below, §
93.09, and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale
or rental of housing set forth in I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in §
93.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (A)(2) below and I.C.
22-9.5-3;
      (2)   Other than the provisions of division (B) below, nothing in §
93.04 shall apply to:
         (a)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses
at any one time; provided that in the sale of such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or
exemption shall apply to one such sale within any 24-month period. The private
individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or reserved on his
or her behalf, title to, or any-right to all or a portion of the proceeds from
the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one
time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from
application of this section only if such house is sold or rented:
            1.   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental
facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson, or any
person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or
agent of any such broker, agent or salesperson, or person; or
            2.   Without the publication, posting, or mailing after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
93.04(C), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstracters, title companies, and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title.
         (b)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied
or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently
of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (B)   For the purposes of division (A)(2) above, a person shall be deemed to
be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
       (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions
involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
      (3)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended
for occupancy by, or occupied by five or more families.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-26-2002)
§ 93.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   As made applicable by §
93.03 and except as exempted by §§
93.03(B) and
93.09, it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status, or national origin;
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services of
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin;
   (C)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or
published, any notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicated any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status,
or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or
discrimination;
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available;
   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin; or
   (F)   (1)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of:
         (a)   That buyer or renter;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of:
         (a)   That person;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, DISCRIMINATION includes:
         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises’ occupied or to be occupied by
such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on
the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months after
September 13, 1998, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a
manner that:
            1.   The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
            2.   All doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
            3.   All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
               a.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
               b.   Light, switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other
environmental controls in accessible locations; and
               c.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
      (4)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard of Buildings and
Facilities providing accessibility an usability for physically handicapped
people (commonly cited as “ANSI A117.1”) suffices to satisfy the requirements
of (F)(3)(c)3. above.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (F) requires that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-26-2002) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED
TRANSACTION means any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status,
or national origin.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-26-2002) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICE.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers
organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her
in the terms or conditions of such access, or participation, on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-26-2002) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 93.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
93.03 to
93.06.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-26-2002) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 93.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates, or interferes with, or attempt to injure,
intimidate, or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status, or national origin and because he or she is or has been
selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting, or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings;
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or had been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account to race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in §
93.05(A); or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-26-2002) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq. shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those activities or
organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of
dwellings, which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. Nor shall anything in this
chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an
incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its
members.
   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply
with respect to housing for older persons.
      (2)   As used in this section, HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS means housing:
         (a)   Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary
of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the state’s Civil
Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly person (as defined in the state or federal program); or
         (b)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, people 62 years of age or
older; or
         (c)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55
years of age or older per unit.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-26-2002)
§ 93.10 ADMINISTRATION ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering this
chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioner as set forth
in division (B) below shall be vested in the chief elected official of the
town.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the town, because
of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully administer
enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this chapter, herein
elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the articles of this
chapter by complainants to the state’s Civil Rights Commission for
administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6 and the chief
elected official of the town shall refer all said complaints to the Commission
as provided for under division (A) above to said Commission for purposes of
investigation, resolution, and appropriate relief as provided for under I.C.
22-9.5-6.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the town shall administer
their departments, programs, and activities relating to housing and urban
development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter
and shall cooperate with the Chief Elected Official and the Commission to
further such purposes.
   (D)   The Chief Elected Official of the town, or the Chief Elected
Official’s designee, shall provide information on remedies available to any
aggrieved person or complainant requesting such information.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-26-2002)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in §
93.08(A), or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any
denial of the opportunity to participate shall be fined according to local,
state, and federal law; and if bodily injury results shall be fined not more
than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and if death
results shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for life.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-26-2002)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
[Reserved]
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
Curfew
   
130.01   Definitions
   
130.02   Prohibited acts
   
130.03   Enforcement
   
130.04   Fund distribution
Firearms
   
130.15   Discharge of firearms prohibited
 
   
130.99   Penalty
CURFEW
§ 130.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURFEW HOURS FOR INDIVIDUALS 15, 16, AND 17 YEARS OF AGE. Refers to the time
between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday; after 11:00 p.m. on
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday; and before 5:00 a.m. on
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday.
   CURFEW HOURS FOR INDIVIDUALS LESS THAN 15 YEARS OF AGE. Refers to the time
after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m. on any day.
   EMERGENCY. Refers to unforeseen circumstances, or the status or condition
resulting therefrom, requiring immediate action to safeguard life, limb, or
property. The term includes, but is not limited to, fires, natural disaster,
automobile accidents, or other similar circumstances.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Refers to any privately owned place of business within the
town operated for a profit, to which the public is invited, including, but not
limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. With respect to such
establishment, the term “operator” shall mean any person, and any firm,
associates, partnership (and the members or partners thereof), and/or any
corporation or limited liability company (and the officers or managers thereof)
conducting or managing that ESTABLISHMENT.
   MINOR. Refers to any person under 18 years of age.
   PARENT. Refers to:
      (1)   A person who is a minor’s biological or adoptive parent and who has
legal custody of a minor (including either parent, if custody is shared under a
court order or agreement);
      (2)   A person who is the biological or adoptive parent with whom a minor
regularly resides;
      (3)   A person judicially appointed as a legal guardian of the minor;
and/or
      (4)   A person 18 years of age or older standing in loco parentis (as
indicated by the authorization of an individual listed in divisions (1) to (3)
above, for the care or physical custody of the child, or as indicated by any
other circumstances).
   PERSON. Refers to an individual, not to any association, corporation, or any
other legal entity.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Refers to any place to which the public or a substantial group
of the public has access, including, but not limited to, streets, highways,
roads, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, parks, and/or the common area of schools,
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities, and
shops.
   REMAIN. Refers to the following actions:
      (1)   To linger or stay at or upon a place; and/or
      (2)   To fail to leave a place when requested to do so by an officer of
the town’s Police Department, a member of its Police Reserves, or any other
state or county police officer with law enforcement jurisdiction within the
town.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 11-27-2000)
§ 130.02 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a minor, during curfew hours, to remain in or
upon any public place within the town, to remain in any motor vehicle operating
or parked therein or thereon, or to remain in or upon the premises of any
establishment within the town, unless:
      (1)   The minor is accompanied by a parent;
      (2)   The minor is involved in an emergency;
      (3)   The minor is engaged in an employment activity, or is going to or
returning home from such activity, without detour or stop;
      (4)   The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he or
she resides with a parent;
      (5)   The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school,
religious, or civic organization or agency, or by another similar organization
or entity, which activity is supervised by an adult, and/or minor is going to
or returning from such an activity without detour or stop;
      (6)   The minor is involved in interstate travel through, or beginning or
terminating in, the town; or
      (7)   The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the bona fide free exercise of religion,
freedom of speech, and the right to assembly.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a minor’s parent to knowingly permit, allow,
or encourage such minor to violate any term of this subchapter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person who is the owner or operator of any
motor vehicle to knowingly permit, allow, or encourage a violation of any term
of this subchapter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any establishment, or for any
person, who is an employee thereof, to knowingly permit, allow, or encourage a
minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during the curfew hours.
It shall be a defense to prosecution under this division (D) that the operator
or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police Department that a
minor was present at the establishment after curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 11-27-2000) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   A police officer, before taking any legal action, may take steps necessary
to question any individual who appears to be under the age of 18 years for the
specific purpose of enforcing this subchapter. Before taking any enforcement
action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s
age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a
citation under this subchapter unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances,
none of the factors referenced in §
130.02(A)(1) to (A)(7) is present. An effort will be made on behalf of the
town’s Police Department to contact the minor’s parent to inform them of the
alleged curfew violation under this subchapter.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 11-27-2000)
§ 130.04 FUND DISTRIBUTION.
   (A)   Monies so collected and deposited shall be dedicated to the Marshal’s
program.
   (B)   Monies collected as fines assessed as described in §
130.99(B) shall be deposited in the Marshal’s program and shall used solely for
the purpose designated in division (A) above.
(Ord. 2000-7, passed 11-27-2000)
FIREARMS
§ 130.15 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm or cannon or
detonate any explosives with the corporate limits of the town, or to assist any
other person or persons to engage in any such discharging or detonation unless
such person or persons have been granted special permission to do so by the
Town Marshal, provided, however, that this section does not apply in the
following situations or circumstances:
   (A)   Any law enforcement officer who shall discharge a firearm within the
lawful performance of his or her. . . MISSING MATERIAL
   (B)   Any personal who shall discharge a firearm in a shooting gallery
pursuant to regulations established by the town;
   (C)   Any person who shall discharge a firearm in the protection of his or
her life or property or in the protection of another person’s life when the
surrounding facts or circumstances justify such action;
   (D)   The discharge of firearms during a ceremonial occasion (including
practice drills), when permission has been received from either the Town
Council or the Town Marshal; and
   (E)   The Fire Chief (or his or her designated representative) of the
Clinton Township Fire Department for the purpose of a fireworks display for
Independence Day celebrations, Farmers’ Day celebrations, or any other
occasions for which permission has been granted by the Town Council.
(Ord. 1992-8, passed - - ) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A person who violates a provision of §§
130.01 to
130.04 is in violation of a separate offense for each day or part of a day,
during which a violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense is
punishable by fine, plus court costs.
      (2)   The fines shall be punishable by the following schedule:
         (a)   First offense: $50, plus court costs;
         (b)   Second offense: $100, plus court costs; and
         (c)   Third offense and each offense thereafter: $200, plus court
costs.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §
130.15 shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not to exceed $1,000.
(Ord. 1992-8, passed - -; Ord. 2000-7, passed 11-27-2000)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING CODES
      151.   PLANNING AND ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODES
Section
   
150.01   Purpose
   
150.02   Structures
   
150.03   State codes
   
150.04   Other codes
   
150.05   Administration
   
150.06   Enforcement
   
150.07   Employment
   
150.08   Permits
   
150.09   Fees
   
150.10   Appeals
 
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the safety, health, and
public welfare of the citizens and residents of the town through structural
strength and stability; means of egress; adequate sanitation, plumbing,
lighting, and ventilation; conservation of energy in buildings; and protection
of life and property from fire and hazard incident to the design, construction,
and alteration of buildings in the town.
   (B)   In the administration of this chapter and any other ordinances
incident to it, the office of the Building Commissioner shall coordinate its
activities with the Plan Commission at all times to prevent unnecessary
overlapping, duplication, and waste in the administrative processes. BUILDING
COMMISSIONER as used in this section refers to the County Building
Commissioner, who is designated to administer this chapter on behalf of the
town.
(Ord. 1988-7, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 150.02 STRUCTURES.
   Construction and remodeling of single-family and multi-family residences,
buildings to which the public has access, and accessory buildings and all other
structures including tanks, signs, transmission towers, water towers, and gas
tanks above or below ground, shall conform with this chapter and all ordinances
adopted for those purposes by the Board.
(Ord. 1988-7, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 150.03 STATE CODES.
   (A)   The following rules, regulations, and codes are hereby incorporated by
reference in this section as the rules and regulations governing the
construction and alterations of buildings and structures in the county.
   (B)   Two copies of these items are on file in the offices of the County
Auditor and the Clerk- Treasurer of the town and are available for public
inspection:
      (1)   Construction Rules and Regulations, Volume I, 1980 Edition of the
State of Indiana, (660 I.A.C. 1.1) (3 IR 2148) which identifies, amends, and
incorporates therein the Uniform Building Code, 1979 Edition, and the Uniform
Building Code Standards, 1979 Edition;
      (2)   Indiana Plumbing Rules and Regulations, 1981 Edition, Volume III,
(660 I.A.C. 1-9), (4 IR 2398) which identifies, amends, and incorporates
therein the Uniform Plumbing Code, 1979 Edition;
      (3)   Indiana Mechanical Rules and Regulations, 1981 Edition, Volume IV,
(660 I.A.C. 1-8) (4 IR 1828) which identifies, amends, and incorporates therein
the Uniform Mechanical Code, 1979 Edition;
      (4)   One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code of Indiana, 1981 Edition, (660
I.A.C. 3-1) (4 IR 916) which identifies, amends, and incorporates therein the
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, 1979 Edition;
      (5)   Indiana Energy Conservation Rules and Regulations for New Building
Construction, Volume V, 1979 Edition, (660 I.A.C. 4) (1980 Supp.) published
under that title;
      (6)   Swimming Pool Code, (660 I.A.C. 5) (1979) published as the Indiana
Swimming Pool Code, 1978 Edition;
      (7)   Indiana Electric Rules, 1984 Edition, (660 I.A.C. 1-7) (7 IR 1716)
which identifies, amends, and incorporates therein the National Electrical
Code, 1984 Edition; and
      (8)   Indiana Standard for the Permanent Installation of Manufactured
Homes, (660 I.A.C. 3-2), adopted July 13, 1983.
(Ord. 1988-7, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 150.04 OTHER CODES.
   For those areas of regulation not specifically covered by and not in
conflict with the state codes adopted in §
150.03, the 1975 Edition of the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc. (commonly known as BOCA) Basic Building Code, as the same
may from time to time be amended, is hereby re-adopted for use and enforcement
in the town.
(Ord. 1988-7, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 150.05 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees hereby designates the County Building
Commissioner as the Building Commissioner of the town.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner shall administer all town ordinances or
codes governing the construction, repair, alteration, or extension of building,
heating, ventilation, air conditioning, electrical, and plumbing construction,
except when other persons or bodies are given the specific authority to enforce
them.
(Ord. 1988-7, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 150.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Building Commissioner shall enforce all town ordinances or codes adopted
by the town for the regulation of construction, repair, alteration, or
extension of building, heating, ventilation, air conditioning, electrical, and
plumbing construction.
   (A)   Right-of-entry.
      (1)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this section, the Building Commissioner or his or her authorized
representative may enter any building or premises at all reasonable times to
inspect them or to perform any duty imposed upon the Building Commissioner by
this section. If that building or premises is occupied, he or she shall first
present proper credentials and demand entry. If that building or premises is
unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner
or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and
demand entry. If entry is refused, the Building Commissioner or his or her
authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law
to secure entry.
      (2)   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall include the officers named in §
150.07.
      (3)   No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care, or
control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper demand
is made as provided in this section, to promptly permit entry in the building
or premises by the Building Commissioner or his or her authorized
representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this
section.
   (B)   Stop order. Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the
provisions of this section, the Building Commissioner may order the work
stopped by written notice served on any persons engaged in or causing that work
to be done, and all those persons shall immediately stop that work until
authorized by the Building Commissioner to proceed with the work. As an
additional part of the notice, the Building Commissioner shall post the stop
work order in a prominent place on the building or project and shall serve a
copy of the notice of the order to stop work by regular United States mail on
the person requesting the permit.
(Ord. 1988-7, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 150.07 EMPLOYMENT.
   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Building
Commissioner may use the additional personnel provided by the County Building
Department as the county may permit, including personnel supplied to the county
pursuant to contractual arrangements made by the county.
(Ord. 1988-7, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 150.08 PERMITS.
   (A)   A building permit is a license to perform construction in accordance
with all requirements of this section.
   (B)   No person shall construct, extend, or alter any building before
submitting a written application to the office of the Building Commissioner. No
permit is required for any outside or inside painting if the building is
altered or extended.
   (C)   No person shall extend, repair, or alter any building or portion of a
building, fireplaces, or chimneys of any existing building, plumbing,
electrical work, heating work, ventilation work, or air conditioning work
before the application to do so is approved by the Building Commissioner and a
permit is issued by him or her for the proposed work. Normal maintenance or
repairs which do not affect electric, plumbing, heating, ventilation, air
conditioning, or structural stability are specifically exempted from this
portion of the section.
   (D)   Before issuing any permit, the Building Commissioner may require the
applicant to file a set of detailed plans and specifications, a copy of which
may be retained in the office of the Building Commissioner. No building permit
shall be issued until all necessary sanitation, sewer, and septic tank permits
are issued by the County Board of Health.
   (E)   Any changes from those approved plans or specifications shall be made
only after a revised copy of them has been submitted to and approved by the
Building Commissioner.
   (F)   Building permits shall be valid for three years after the date of
issuance and shall be null and void if the construction, alteration, or
extension has not begun during that period.
   (G)   All applications for new building permits issued by the Building
Department shall state the code number assigned by the County Auditor to that
parcel of real estate.
   (H)   Building permits may be issued to owners of land adjacent to
subdivision streets which have not been opened or constructed in accordance
with specifications.
(Ord. 1988-7, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 150.09 FEES.
   The building fee schedule, as adopted by county ordinance and as amended
from time to time, is hereby adopted as the building fees for the town.
(Ord. 1988-7, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 150.10 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeal procedures are provided in the specified codes which are
enumerated in §
150.03. Where an appeal process is not specifically provided as in §
150.03, any decision of the Building Commissioner made in enforcement of this
section may be appealed to the Board of Trustees by any person claiming to be
adversely affected by that decision, and shall be processed under all laws,
rules, and regulations applicable to that Board.
   (B)   In addition, any person, partnership, association, or corporation
aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Trustees as a result of appealing to
that Board shall have the right of appeal as in other civil actions if he, she,
or they give 15 days’ written notice of intent to do so to the Board by
certified United States mail. The notice shall concisely state the grievance.
It is specifically provided that failure to appeal to the Board and exhaust
other remedies shall work as a bar to the right to appeal the decision of the
Building Commissioner to the state courts.
   (C)   Any appeal to the Board must be taken no later than 11 days following
the posting of the stop work order.
(Ord. 1988-7, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Beginning 11 days after the stop work order is posted, including the
day of posting as one of the 11 days, any person who violates any provision of
this chapter and not having begun the appeal process shall be deemed guilty of
an ordinance violation and, upon conviction, may be fined not less than $10 and
no more than $50 for that day and for each day thereafter that the violation
remains unabated. If the Board of Trustees or any other body to whom an appeal
is processed finds on appeal that the ruling of the Building Commissioner is
correct, the penalties set out in this division (A) accrue immediately
irrespective of the number of days since the posting of the stop work order.
Unless the Board or any other body determines that the stop work order was
improperly posted, the order shall remain in full force and effect.
   (B)   The Building Department may institute suit for injunction in the
County Circuit Court to restrain an individual from violating the provisions of
this section or any rules and regulations established pursuant to the terms of
this section. The Building Department may also institute a suit for mandatory
injunction directing an individual to remove a structure erected in violation
of the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 1988-7, passed 10-3-1988)
CHAPTER 151: PLANNING AND ZONING
Section
   
151.01   Municipal Plan Commission
   
151.02   County rules applicable
   
151.03   Zoning districts jurisdiction
Cross reference:
   Comprehensive Plan, see §
31.05
§ 151.01 MUNICIPAL PLAN COMMISSION.
   The Elkhart County Plan Commission is hereby designated as the Municipal
Plan Commission for the town. Further, the Elkhart County Board of Zoning
Appeals has jurisdiction within the corporate boundaries of the town. The
Elkhart County Plan Commission and the Elkhart County Board of Zoning Appeals
as so designated have for the town all the powers and duties granted, under the
Advisory Planning Law, to a Municipal Plan Commission and Board of Zoning
Appeals.
(Ord. 2022-11, passed 2-6-2023)
§ 151.02 COUNTY RULES APPLICABLE.
   (A)   All planning and zoning ordinances and all policies and procedures
heretofore adopted, and now in force and effect by the Elkhart County Plan
Commission, the Elkhart County Board of Zoning Appeals, and the Board of
Commissioners of the County of Elkhart, Indiana, as the legislative body of
Elkhart County, Indiana, to include a comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, and
subdivision control ordinance, be, and the same hereby are, approved by the
town and made binding upon all real estate situated therein.
   (B)   All planning and zoning ordinances and all policies and procedures
hereafter adopted, and hereafter placed in force and effect by the Elkhart
County Plan Commission, the Elkhart County Board of Zoning Appeals, and the
Board of Commissioners of the County of Elkhart, Indiana, as the legislative
body of Elkhart County, Indiana, to include changes, revisions, and amendments
of the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, and subdivision control ordinance,
be, and the same hereby will be, binding upon the town and all real estate
situated therein, upon approval thereof by the town.
(Ord. 2022-11, passed 2-6-2023)
§ 151.03 ZONING DISTRICTS JURISDICTION.
   The legislative function of dividing the town into zoning districts and
approving zoning maps, as provided in the Elkhart County zoning ordinance,
shall be retained and carried out by the Town Council consistent with the
rules, regulations, and ordinances otherwise adopted by or for the Elkhart
County Plan Commission and the Elkhart County Board of Zoning Appeals; further,
that all such zoning districts and zoning maps heretofore adopted by the Town
Council be, and the same are, hereby continued in full force and effect until
amended or repealed by action of the Town Council taken under authority of the
advisory local planning and zoning laws of the State of Indiana.
(Ord. 2022-11, passed 2-6-2023)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   PROPERTY TRANSFERS
      
II.   AGREEMENTS
      
III.   FRANCHISES
      
IV.   ZONING
TABLE I: PROPERTY TRANSFERS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No.   Date Passed Description
Res. 2006-7     - -         Annexation of C & P Oil Company Inc. parcel
Ord.            12-26-1961  Annexation of land in Rogers Heights
Ord. 1984-8     12-3-1984   Vacation of alley
Ord. 1987-4     8-3-1987    Vacation of two alleys
Ord. 1988-5     6-6-1988    Annexation of property
Ord. 1989-5     4-3-1989    Annexation of property
Ord. 1989-6     5-1-1989    Annexation of property
Ord. 1990-7     7-2-1990    Annexation of property
Ord. 1990-10    8-27-1990   Vacation of alley
Ord. 1991-2     4-1-1991    Annexation of property
Ord. 1991-9     8-5-1991    Annexation of property
Ord. 1991-15    12-2-1991   Annexation of property
Ord. 1994-4     5-16-1994   Annexation of property
Res.            12-1-1994   Purchase of property
Ord. 1995-1     1-17-1995   Annexation of real estate
Ord.            11-17-1997  Vacation of public way
Ord. 1997-18    11-17-1997  Vacation of public way
Ord. 2004-3     4-28-2004   Vacation of public way
Ord. 2006-8     8-9-2006    Annexation of C & P Oil Company, Inc. parcel
Ord. 2011-2     4-7-2011    Annexation of property contiguous to the town
                            boundaries
Res. 2011-1     5-25-2011   Annexation of Curt Haberstich parcel
Ord. 2012-11    11-14-2012  Annexation of Forest River, Inc. parcels
Ord. 2012-12    11-14-2012  Annexation of Carriage, Inc. parcels
Ord. 2020-2     2-26-2020   Vacation of public way
Ord. ML-2020-13 12-9-2020   Vacation of public way
Res. 2025-05    6-25-2025   Purchase of 2.01 acres identified as tax parcel No.
                            20-12-34-00- 01.000-007
                           
 
TABLE II: AGREEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. 1985-2   5-6-1985    Contract for street lighting
Ord. 1992-5   4-6-1992    Approval of contract for purchase of electrical
                          services
Res.          5-8-1996    Separation agreement with Town Marshal
Ord. 1999-2   1-27-1999   Agreement concerning signs to be posted
Ord.          6- -2001    Agreement with the County Humane Society
Ord.          1-27-2003   Contract for animal control service
Ord.          3-1-2013    Agreement with software systems company
Res. 2022-04  3-25-2022   Retroactive authorization for execution of INDOT
                          agreements
Res. 2022-05  3-25-2022   Authorization for execution of INDOT agreements
                         
 
TABLE III: FRANCHISES
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. 2004-5   6-9-2004    Granting television franchise to company
                         
 
TABLE IV: ZONING
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No.   Date Passed Description
Ord. 1985-9     12-2-1985   Rezoning property
Ord. 1987-5     8-3-1987    Authorizing a planned unit development
Ord. 1987-6     11-2-1987   Rezoning property
Ord. 1988-4     5-2-1988    Rezoning property
Ord. 1991-4     6-3-1991    Rezoning property
Ord. 1991-5     7-1-1991    Rezoning property
Ord. 1991-8     8-5-1991    Rezoning property
Ord. 1991-12    10-7-1991   Rezoning property
Ord. 1994-17    10-3-1994   Accepting Brooke Lane as part of the town
Ord. 1998-16    - -1998     Amendment to planned unit development
Ord. 2007-7     12-26-2007  Rezoning property
Ord. 2011-3     10-26-2011  Rezoning property
Ord. 12-10      10-10-2012  Rezoning property
Ord. 2012-16    12-19-2012  Rezoning property
Res. 2016-001   1-23-2013   Creation of Forest River Economic Development Area
Ord. 2015-4     2-11-2015   Rezoning property
Ord. 2015-5     4-22-2015   Rezoning property
Ord. 2018-7     8-22-2018   Rezoning property
Ord. 2020-07    8-12-2020   Rezoning property
Ord. ML-2022-03 4-13-2022   Rezoning property
                           
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Cites Code Section
I.C. Cites          Code Section
1-1-1-5             10.04
1-1-1-7             10.12
1-1-1-8             10.06
1-1-4-5             10.05
1-1-5-1             10.11
1-1-6-1             10.08
4-33-13-5           32.07
4-33-13-5(1)        32.07
5-3-1               33.25
5-11-10             33.10
5-11-10-1           33.09
5-16-9-5            70.38
5-22                33.02
5-22-8              33.08
5-22-12             33.07
6-1.1-17            32.01,
                    32.09
6-1.1-18.5-17       32.09
6-1.1-26            32.09
6-1.1-41            32.15
6-3.6-9-17          32.04
6-3.6-9-17(h)(1)(A) 32.04
8-1-2.2             32.05
8-1.5-3-11          32.05
8-1.5-3-11(a)       32.05
8-14-16-4(a)        32.01
8-14-16-4(d)        32.01
8-14-16-5           32.01
8-16-3              32.08
8-22-3-25           32.08
9-7-7-4             91.16
9-12-2-69.7         70.25
9-18.5-8 et seq.    Ch. 72, Schd. I
9-19-3-1            70.34
9-19-11-2           70.31
9-19-11-3.6         70.31
9-21                Ch. 71, Schd. III
9-21-1-3            70.30
9-21-1-3.3          70.30
9-21-4-1 et seq.    Ch. 71, Sch. III
9-21-9-0.5          70.30
9-22-1              92.057,
                    92.060
9-25-2-3            70.28
                    Ch. 71, Sch. III,
9-30-3-6            Ch. 72, Schd. I,
                    92.098
13-17-9-1(a)(1)     92.043
13-17-9-1(b)        92.043
14-27-6-48          32.08
14-33-14            32.08
16-23-1-40          32.08
22-9-1-4 et seq.    93.02
22-9-5-6            93.02
22-9-7-5            93.02
22-9.5-1 et seq.    93.01
22-9.5-2-2          93.02
22-9.5-2-3          93.02
22-9.5-2-4          93.02
22-9.5-2-8          93.02
22-9.5-2-9          93.02
22-9.5-2-11         93.02
22-9.5-2-13         93.02
22-9.5-3            93.03
22-9.5-3 et seq.    93.09
22-9.5-4-8          93.10
22-9.5-5            93.02
22-9.5-5-1          93.03
22-9.5-6            93.02,
                    93.10
25-31 et seq.       50.02
34-4-32-1 et seq.   Ch. 72, Schd. I,
                    91.16
34-28-5 et seq.     Ch. 71, Schd. III
34-28-5-1 et seq.   Ch. 71, Schd. III,
                    92.098
36-1-3-8(a)(10)     10.99
36-1-6           50.18
36-1-14-2           32.16
36-4-8           33.10
36-5-2-2            10.15
36-7-4-509          31.05
36-7-9-2            50.18
36-7-10.1-4         92.024
36-8-14             32.08
36-8-19-8.5         32.15
36-9-4-48           32.08
36-9-6-19           50.16
36-9-15.5           32.08
36-9-15.5-2         32.08
36-9-16-2           32.08
36-9-16-3           32.08
36-9-16.5           32.08
36-9-17             32.08
36-9-23             52.07
36-9-26             32.08
36-9-27-100         32.08
36-10-3-21          32.08
36-10-4-36          32.08
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
2006-7   - -         TSO Table I
-        12-1-1994   TSO Table I
-        5-8-1996    TSO Table II
-        4-7-1997    32.03
2001-3   2-12-2001   32.03
2003-6   6-23-2003   31.04
2003-12  8-25-2003   32.07
2006-2   2-8-2006    31.03
2011-1   5-25-2011   TSO Table I
2016-001 1-23-2013   TSO Table IV
2013-02  2-27-2013   31.21
2013-03  2-27-2013   31.22
2013-04  2-27-2013   31.20
2015-2   1-14-2015   32.03
2018-1   1-10-2018   32.03
2018-3   2-14-2018   32.03
2018-8   9-12-2018   32.03
2021-12  9-22-2021   31.05
2022-04  3-25-2022   TSO Table II
2022-05  3-25-2022   TSO Table II
2025-05  6-25-2025   TSO Table I
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
-          - -         92.043
1992-8     - -         130.15,
                       130.99
2004-2     - -         32.08
2018-13    - -         32.05
-          12-26-1961  TSO Table I
1982-4     8-30-1982   31.05
                       92.041,
1983-2     7-11-1983   92.042,
                       92.999
1984-1     3- -1984    92.040
1984-5     8-27-1984   Ch. 71, Schd. I
                       90.01 –
1984-7     8-27-1984   90.04,
                       90.99
1984-8     12-3-1984   TSO Table I
1985-1     2-4-1985    70.01,
                       Ch. 71 Schd. IV
1985-2     5-6-1985    TSO Table II
1985-3     5-6-1985    Ch. 72, Schd. I
1985-9     12-2-1985   TSO Table IV
                       90.15 –
87-308     4-20-1987   90.21,
                       90.99
1987-2     7-6-1987    Ch. 71, Schd. III
1987-4     8-3-1987    TSO Table I
1987-5     8-3-1987    TSO Table IV
1987-6     11-2-1987   TSO Table IV
1988-4     5-2-1988    TSO Table IV
1988-5     6-6-1988    TSO Table I
                       150.01 –
1988-7     10-3-1988   150.10,
                       150.99
1989-5     4-3-1989    TSO Table I
1989-6     5-1-1989    TSO Table I
1989-8     12-4-1989   Ch. 72, Schd. I
1990-6     7-2-1990    Ch. 71, Schd. I
1990-7     7-2-1990    TSO Table I
1990-10    8-27-1990   TSO Table I
1990-12    11-5-1990   Ch. 71, Schd. II
1991-2     4-1-1991    TSO Table I
1991-4     6-3-1991    TSO Table IV
1991-5     7-1-1991    TSO Table IV
1991-6     7-1-1991    Ch. 71, Schd. III
1991-8     8-5-1991    TSO Table IV
1991-9     8-5-1991    TSO Table I
1991-10    8-26-1991   30.01
1991-12    10-7-1991   TSO Table IV
1991-15    12-2-1991   TSO Table I
1992-4     4-6-1992    Ch. 72, Schd. I
1992-5     4-6-1992    TSO Table II
1992-10    8-31-1992   32.08
1994-4     5-16-1994   TSO Table I
1994-12    9-19-1994   33.09
1994-13    9-19-1994   32.13
1994-17    10-3-1994   TSO Table IV
1994-21    11-5-1994   92.020 –
                       92.025
1995-1     1-17-1995   TSO Table I
1995-8     8-7-1995    32.11
1995-11    9-18-1995   32.12
1995-12    10-2-1995   70.15,
                       70.99
1995-13    11-6-1995   33.09
1995-14    11-6-1995   92.095,
                       92.999
1996-2     4-1-1996    32.53
1996-9     1-20-1997   Ch. 72, Schd. I
1997-7     3-17-1997   Ch. 71, Schd. III
                       91.30 –
1997-8     4-7-1997    91.33,
                       91.99
1997-9     5-5-1997    Ch. 72, Schd. I
                       92.055 –
1997-10    5-19-1997   92.061,
                       92.999
-          11-17-1997  TSO Table I
1997-18    11-17-1997  TSO Table I
1998-7     3-16-1998   92.110 –
                       92.112
1998-8     5-4-1998    Ch. 72, Schd. I
1998-16    - -1998     TSO Table IV
                       33.01 –
1998-18    12-28-1998  33.08,
                       33.20-
                       33.29
1999-2     1-27-1999   TSO Table II
                       130.01 –
2000-7     11-27-2000  130.04,
                       130.99
-          6- -2001    TSO Table II
2002-8     5-13-2002   32.09
                       93.01 –
2002-12    8-26-2002   93.10,
                       93.99
2002-15    10-28-2002  31.55 –
                       31.58
-          1-27-2003   TSO Table II
2003-7     8-8-2003    Ch. 71, Schd. I
2003-8     8-8-2003    Ch. 72, Schd. I
2003-10    9-22-2003   Ch. 71, Schd. III
2004-1     2-10-2004   32.06
2004-3     4-28-2004   TSO Table I
2004-5     6-9-2004    TSO Table III
                       92.096 –
2004-4     6-23-2004   92.098,
                       92.999
2005-1     4-13-2005   Ch. 71, Schd. III
2005-3     6-8-2005    Ch. 71, Schd. V
2005-5     12-28-2005  32.45 –
                       32.52
                       92.075 –
2006-4     7-12-2006   92.084,
                       92.999
2006-8     8-9-2006    TSO Table I
2006-10    9-13-2006   32.01
2007-7     12-26-2007  TSO Table IV
2008-1     9-24-2008   Ch. 72, Schd. I
                       51.15,
2009-1     - -         51.16,
                       51.18
2011-2     4-7-2011    TSO Table I
2011-3     10-26-2011  TSO Table IV
                       92.001 –
2012-5     8-8-2012    92.005,
                       92.999
12-10      10-10-2012  TSO Table IV
2012-9     10-24-2012  30.02
2012-11    11-14-2012  TSO Table I
2012-12    11-14-2012  TSO Table I
2012-16    12-19-2012  TSO Table IV
-          2-27-2013   31.02
-          3-1-2013    TSO Table II
                       91.01 –
2013-8     5-8-2013    91.16,
                       91.99
2013-9     8-14-2013   Ch. 71 Schd. V
2014-2     1-22-2014   31.35 –
                       31.41
2015-4     2-11-2015   TSO Table IV
-          4-8-2015    32.03
2015-5     4-22-2015   TSO Table IV
2016-02    6-22-2016   31.01
2016-03    8-24-2016   32.04
2016-05    10-26-2016  Ch. 72, Schd. I
2016-07    12-14-2016  32.02
2018-4     2-14-2018   32.25 –
                       32.34
2018-7     8-22-2018   TSO Table IV
2018-09    8-22-2018   Ch. 72, Schd. I
2019-03    8-14-2019   50.15,
                       50.16
2019-06    8-28-2019   52.01 -
                       52.11
2020-2     2-26-2020   TSO Table I
-          4-22-2020   32.08
2020-03    5-13-2020   Ch. 72, Schd. I
2020-04    5-13-2020   92.120
2020-07    8-12-2020   TSO Table IV
ML-2020-13 12-9-2020   TSO Table I
2021-06    6-9-2021    32.14
2021-10    8-11-2021   31.66
2021-11    8-11-2021   31.65
2021-13    9-8-2021    31.06
-          3-23-2022   32.15
ML-2022-03 4-13-2022   TSO Table IV
2022-07    6-22-2022   33.09
2022-08    6-22-2022   33.10
2022-09    8-10-2022   50.17
2022-11    2-6-2023    151.01 -
                       151.03
2023-02    4- -2023    Ch. 71, Schd. III
-          4-26-2023   70.25 -
                       70.42
2023-03    5-4-2023    32.16
-          6-14-2023   92.020 -
                       92.025
2024-01    3-13-2024   32.45 -
                       32.51
-          6-12-2024   52.04
                       90.35 -
2024-03    6-12-2024   90.40,
                       90.99
                       90.35 -
2024-03-01 7-10-2024   90.40,
                       90.99
2025-06    7-9-2025    50.18
-          9-10-2025   Ch. 72, Schd. I
                      
 
 
 
 
