TOWN OF PRINCE'S LAKES, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2023 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2022-11, passed 12-19-2022, and
State legislation current through 2023 Advance Legislative Service Pamphlet #3
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TOWN OFFICIALS
COUNCIL
Greg Nelson
Mike Gallamore
Karen Harrison
Phil Motarsi
Bryan Tearman
CLERK TREASURER
Erica Lyden-Giger
 
Contact Information:
14 East Lakeview Drive
Nineveh, IN 46164
317-933-2163
townofprinceslakes.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 318
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES (“TOWN CODE”) FOR THE TOWN OF
PRINCE'S LAKES, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING, AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF PRINCE'S LAKES
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the Town of
Prince's Lakes are inadequately arranged and classified, and are insufficient
in form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace,
health, safety, and general welfare of the Town and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the Indiana Code empowers and authorizes the Town of Prince's Lakes
to revise, amend, restate, codify, and compile any existing ordinances and all
new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such
ordinances into one ordinance in code book form; and
   WHEREAS, the Town Council of the Town of Prince's Lakes has authorized a
general compilation, revision, and codification of the ordinances of the Town
of Prince's Lakes of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in code book form; and
   WHEREAS, the final version of the proposed code book provided by the
publisher contains a few provisions that need to be revised or corrected;
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of the Town of Prince's
Lakes, Indiana, as follows:
   Section 1. Subject to the revisions contained within this Ordinance, the
general ordinances of the Town of Prince's Lakes as revised, amended, restated,
codified, and compiled in code book form are hereby adopted as and shall
constitute the “Prince's Lakes Code of Ordinances”, which may also be referred
to as the “Prince's Lakes Town Code” or the “Town Code.”
   Section 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 consists of the
following Titles and Chapters:
   TABLE OF CONTENTS
      Chapter
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      10.   General Provisions
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      30.   Town Council
      31.   Police and Emergency Services
      32.   Finance; Funds
      33.   Personnel
      34.   Ordinance Violations Bureau
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      50.   Sewers
      51.   Water
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      70.   General Traffic Provisions
      71.   Traffic Schedules
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      90.   Abandoned Vehicles
      91.   Animals
      92.   Nuisances
      93.   Parks and Recreation
      94.   Streets and Sidewalks
      95.   Burning
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      110.   Peddlers, Transient Merchants and Solicitors
   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      130.   General Offenses
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      150.   Building Regulations
      151.   Flood Damage Prevention
      152.   Zoning
      153.   Subdivision Regulations
   Section 3. In § 32.01 of the Code, citation “I.C. 6-7-1-21-1” shall be
replaced with “I.C. 6-7-1-31.1”. Furthermore, § 32.01(B) shall be revised to
read as follows:
   (B)   (1)   The term “capital improvements” means:
         (a)   The purchase of land, easements, or rights-of-way;
         (b)   The purchase of buildings;
         (c)   The construction or improvement of city owned property;
         (d)   The design, development, purchase, lease, upgrade, maintenance,
or repair of:
            1.   Computer hardware;
            2.   Computer software;
            3.   Wiring and computer networks; and
            4.   Communications access systems used to connect with computer
networks or electronic gateways;
         (e)   The services of full-time or part-time computer maintenance
employees;
         (f)   Conducting nonrecurring in-service technology training of unit
employees;
         (g)   Undertaking Internet application development; or
         (h)   Retirement of general obligation bonds issued by the city or
town for one (1) of the purposes stated in subdivision (a), (b), (c), (d), (e),
or (f).
   (B)   (2)   The term capital improvement shall not include salaries of any
public official or employees except those which are directly chargeable to a
capital improvement or as specifically stated in Subsection (B)(1) above.
   Section 4. Section 32.03 concerning the operation of a vending machine
outside Town Hall shall be deleted in its entirety.
   Section 5. In Section 51.01, providing the schedule of water utility rates,
the note marked with an asterisk shall be revised to read “A minimum charge per
month, based on the size of the meter, will be charged according to the amount
provided on the Minimum Charges Per Month schedule above.”
   Section 6. Section 130.06(A) concerning Use of Firearms shall be revised to
read as follows:
   (A)   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person or persons to fire,
shoot, or otherwise discharge any gun, revolver, rifle, shot-gun, or any other
type of firearm within the corporate limits of the Town for any purpose other
than in the defense of his or her life, or the life of another person, or the
protection of his or her property or property entrusted to him or her by
another person.
   Section 7. Section 152.999 concerning Penalties for violations of the Zoning
Code shall be revised to read as follows:
   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter,
including violation of commitments, conditions, restrictions, and safeguards
established pursuant to provisions of the Zoning Code or during proceedings
authorized by or governed by the Zoning Code, for which another penalty is not
specifically provided shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,500 and
payment of reasonable attorney's fees for the enforcement action. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs
or continues.
   Section 8. The italicized title for § 153.047(G) shall be revised to read
“Sight distances at intersections.”
   Section 9. The last sentence of § 153.070(F) shall be replaced with the
following sentence, “Public improvements shown on the plat, or otherwise, must
be presented to and accepted by the Council.”
   Section 10. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances (the “Code”) shall be deemed repealed from and after the
effective date of this Ordinance except as they are included and reordained in
whole or in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any
offense committed, penalty incurred, or any right established prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions
of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or
borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public
use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor
shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature
or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
   Section 11. Such Code shall be deemed published and in full force and effect
as of the day of adoption and approval of this Ordinance No. 318 by the
Prince's Lakes Town Council, and the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Prince's
Lakes is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
   Section 12. Such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places
of all provisions, sections, penalties, and regulations therein contained and
of the date of adoption, and that the same is properly signed, attested,
recorded, and approved, and that any public hearings and notices thereof as
required by law have been given.
   Introduced to the Town Council of the Town of Prince's Lakes, Indiana, on
the 17th day of November, 2003.
   Passed through first reading by the Town Council on the 17th day of
November, 2003, by a vote of 5 in favor and 0 against.
   Duly passed and adopted on second and final reading this 17th day of
November, 2003, by a vote of 5 in favor and 0 against.
   PRINCE'S LAKES TOWN COUNCIL
   Diane Bieszczat /s/
   Diane Bieszczat, President
FOR                     AGAINST
Charles Bourne /s/                                          
Bryce Pierson /s/                                          
J.P. Renner /s/                                           
Pete Ketchum /s/                                           
Diane H. Biezczat /s/                                          
ATTEST:
Jill Jackson /s/    
Jill Jackson, Clerk-Treasurer
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.17   Town codes as property of the town
   
10.18   Effective date and repeal of prior ordinances
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component codes,
titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the “Town
Code,” for which designation “Code of Ordinances,” “Codified Ordinances” or
“Code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto, and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or subsection.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted, or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered
by the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only, and do not affect the meaning,
application, or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only, and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent
or context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary, and
usual sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of such persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving such authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the town.
      COUNCIL. The Town Council.
      COUNTY. Johnson County, Indiana.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads, and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. The word PERSON shall extend and be applied to trustees, lessees,
or receivers, associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, bodies
politic and corporate, or any other group acting as a unit as well as to
natural persons. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity
shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      TOWN. The Town of Prince’s Lakes, Indiana.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing, or other modes
of permanently representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a
person is required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or the
person's mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(I.C. 1-1-4-5)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable.
If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority, or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; or at the time of the effective date of that ordinance or
subsequent thereto, the rights, powers, duties, or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then such named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which such duties,
liabilities, powers, and rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday, or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall
not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under
such section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. Such section
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture,
or liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code shall not be affected by
the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings, and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement of this code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make
formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement, and make changes
in such catchlines, headings and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers;
      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to
“this chapter”, “this article”, “this division”, and the like, as the case may
be, or to “sections              to           ” (inserting sections numbers to
indicate the sections of this code which embody the substantive sections of the
ordinance incorporated into the code); and
      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (I.C. 36-5-2-2) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway right-of-
ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.17 TOWN CODES AS PROPERTY OF THE TOWN.
   All copies of the town code, except those which are purchased by the general
public, shall be the property of the town, and such copies delivered over to
elected and/or appointed officials, or other officials of the town, shall not
be retained and shall be returned to the town after the expiration of their
term or terms of office or appointment. The Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain a
record of all the persons or offices having a copy of the town code, other than
those persons purchasing the town code, and the Clerk-Treasurer shall be
responsible for securing the return of the codes in accordance with this
section.
§ 10.18 EFFECTIVE DATE AND REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCES.
   All of the provisions of this code shall be in full force and effect from
the date of passage and publication pursuant to I.C. 36-5-2-10, and all
ordinances of a general and permanent nature in force at that time that include
the subject matter of the chapters denominated herein, are repealed from and
after the date.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code for
which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $2,500. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
   Power to prescribe fines up to $2,500 granted, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   TOWN COUNCIL
      
31.   POLICE AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
      
32.   FINANCE; FUNDS
      
33.   PERSONNEL AND OTHER TOWN POLICIES
      
34.   ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
CHAPTER 30: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Number of Council members
   
30.02   Election at-large
   
30.03   Election years; terms of Council members
By-Laws and Rules of Procedure
   
30.15   Rules
   
30.16   Officers
   
30.17   Meetings
   
30.18   Official action
   
30.19   Conduct during public meetings
   
30.20   Minutes
   
30.21   Committees
Civil Emergencies
   
30.35   Definitions
   
30.36   Proclamation by Council, imposition of curfew
   
30.37   Orders and emergency powers
   GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 NUMBER OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   The Town Council shall be composed of five members.
(Ord. 262, passed 12-14-98)
§ 30.02 ELECTION AT-LARGE.
   (A)   Town Council districts for the town are hereby abolished.
   (B)   All members of the Town Council are hereby designated to be elected at
large.
(Ord. 265, passed 12-28-98)
§ 30.03 ELECTION YEARS; TERMS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   A municipal election to elect all five Town Council members and the
Clerk Treasurer will be held in 2023.
   (B)   (1)   Beginning in 2024, elections for Town Council members shall be
held in:
         (a)   Two thousand twenty-four (2024) and every four years thereafter;
and
         (b)   Two thousand twenty-six (2026) and every four years thereafter.
      (2)   Beginning in 2026, elections for Clerk Treasurer will be held in
2026 and every four years thereafter.
   (C)   The three elected Town Council members, who receive the greatest
number of votes in the 2023 municipal election, shall serve for a term of three
years, beginning at noon on January 1, 2024. Their successors shall be elected
at the 2026 general election, and every four years thereafter, and shall serve
for a term of four years, beginning at noon on January 1 of the year
immediately following the year in which they are elected.
   (D)   The two elected Town Council members, who receive the fewest number of
votes in the 2023 municipal election, shall serve for a term of one year,
beginning at noon on January 1, 2024. Their successors shall be elected at the
2024 general election and every four years thereafter and shall serve for a
term of four years, beginning at noon on January 1 of the year immediately
following the year in which they are elected.
   (E)   The Clerk Treasurer elected at the 2023 municipal election, shall
serve for three years, beginning at noon on January 1, 2024. His or her
successor shall be elected at the 2026 general election and every four years
thereafter and shall serve for a term of four years beginning at noon on
January 1 of the year immediately following the year in which he or she is
elected.
   (F)   The town’s municipal primary elections and municipal elections shall
be conducted by the County Election Board and/or Clerk. All candidates for all
elected town offices shall be nominated in primary elections as provided in
I.C. 3-8-5-2. The Town Council President is authorized and instructed to enter
into all requisite agreements with the County Election Board and or Clerk for
the county to conduct all town elections. See I.C. 3-10-7-4.
(Ord. 2022-9, passed 12-19-22)
   BY-LAWS AND RULES OF PROCEDURE
§ 30.15 RULES.
   In all matters not otherwise provided for by statute, ordinance, or these
rules, the Council presiding officer shall govern the conduct of all meetings.
(Ord. 191, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 191, passed 1-16-01)
§ 30.16 OFFICERS.
   (A)   At the first regularly scheduled meeting in each calendar year, the
Council shall elect from the voting membership of the Council a President and
Vice-President. Each shall serve during the period of their membership on the
Council for the balance of the calendar year.
   (B)   The President of the Council shall preside over meetings, decide
questions of order, subject to appeal by the Council, and preserve decorum in
the meeting room.
   (C)   The Vice-President shall have authority to act as President of the
Council during the absence or disability of the President.
   (D)   Upon resignation of the President the Vice-President ascends to the
Presidency and the Council shall elect a Vice-President at the next regularly
scheduled meeting.
(Ord. 191, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 191, passed 1-16-01)
§ 30.17 MEETINGS.
   (A)   All regular and administrative council meetings shall be conducted in
accordance with I.C. 5-14-1.5, the Indiana Open Door Law, and any amendments
thereto.
   (B)   Executive council meetings shall be closed to the public in accordance
with statute.
   (C)   Regular and executive meetings shall require 48 hours notice be
provided unless to deal with a bona fide emergency.
   (D)   The regular meetings of the Council shall be the third Monday of each
month at 6:30 p.m. The location of the meetings shall be the Prince's Lakes
Town Hall. The President of the Council shall be responsible for the
preparation and distribution of a written agenda for each Council meeting,
which shall be distributed to the members of the Council at least 48 hours
prior to the meeting; if a meeting is called to deal with an emergency under
the Open Door Law (I.C. 5-14-1.5-5), a written agenda shall not be required.
   (E)   The order of business at regular Town Council meetings shall be:
      (1)   Call to order;
      (2)   Pledge of Allegiance;
      (3)   Guest speakers (if any);
      (4)   Approval of minutes of previous meeting;
      (5)   Public forum;
      (6)   Department reports (police, street, water, and sewage);
      (7)   Other reports (plan commission, park board, public relations);
      (8)   Clerk's report;
      (9)   Attorney's report;
      (10)   Old business;
      (11)   New business;
      (12)   Adjournment.
   (F)   No one who is not a member of the Council shall be permitted to
address the Council except by request and consent of the President.
(Ord. 191, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 231, passed 3-11-96; Am. Ord. 239, passed
7-14-97; Am. Ord. 191, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 368, passed 4-15-13)
§ 30.18 OFFICIAL ACTION.
   (A)   A majority of the members of the Council who are qualified to vote
shall constitute a quorum. Action of the Council shall not be official unless
it is authorized at a regular or properly called special meeting by a majority
of the Council.
(I.C. 36-5-2-9.2)
   (B)   Decisions of the Council shall be by roll call vote of the members.
All members present shall vote on every question unless they have disqualified
themselves because of conflict of interest as defined under division (C) of
this section.
   (C)   No member of the Council shall participate in any discussion or
decision of the Council in which they have a direct or indirect financial
interest. The Council shall enter into its records the fact that a member has
such a disqualification.
   (D)   Any member of the Council who voted with the majority may call for
reconsideration of any vote at the same meeting of the Council at which it
passed, and if sustained by a majority of the votes, the reconsideration shall
be ordered.
   (E)   An ordinance shall be finally adopted after being approved by the Town
Council at two meetings occurring on separate days. A two-thirds vote of all
the elected members, after unanimous consent of the members present to consider
the ordinance, is required to pass an ordinance of the Town Council on the same
day or at the same meeting at which it is introduced. This section does not
apply to a zoning ordinance or amendment to a zoning ordinance adopted under
I.C. 36-7 et seq., or an ordinance to increase the number of Town Council
members adopted under I.C. 36-5-2-4.2, unless the ordinance also establishes
new legislative body districts.
(Ord. 191, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 258, passed 6-22-98; Am. Ord. 191, passed
1-16-01)
§ 30.19 CONDUCT DURING PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   (A)   All persons wishing to be heard on any matter in a public meeting must
stand before the Council and provide their name and address for the record.
   (B)   All commentary at a public meeting shall be addressed to the Council
through its President. Such commentary shall not be permitted between opposing
parties without the consent of the presiding officer.
   (C)   The President shall have the authority to prohibit repetitious and
irrelevant commentary and shall have the authority to limit the length of
commentary by each speaker as deemed appropriate for a public meeting.
   (D)   Every person appearing before the Council shall abide by the order and
direction of the President. Discourteous, disorderly, or contemptuous conduct
shall not be tolerated, and the President may take such action as is deemed
necessary to prevent such conduct.
(Ord. 191, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 191, passed 1-16-01)
§ 30.20 MINUTES.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare and maintain minutes of Council
meetings. The minutes shall include the vote of each member on each question
presented to the Council.
   (B)   The minutes of the Council meetings and all records shall be filed in
the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and are public records as defined by law.
   (C)   The minutes shall be presented to the Council for approval at the next
regular meeting. When approved, the minutes shall be signed by all members of
the Council and attested by the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 191, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 191, passed 1-16-01)
§ 30.21 COMMITTEES.
   (A)   The President, with approval of the Council, shall establish such
committees as deemed necessary and desirable.
   (B)   Members of committees shall be appointed by the President of the
Council and may be changed by the President of the Council at any time at his
or her discretion.
   (C)   Committees shall have no authority to enter into contracts or
financial obligations on behalf of the town.
(Ord. 191, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 201, passed 4-25-94; Am. Ord. 191, passed
1-16-01)
   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
§ 30.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIL EMERGENCY.  
      (1)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual
force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power
to execute such force by three or more persons acting together without
authority of law; or
      (2)   Any natural disaster or man-made calamity, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate
limits of the town resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   CURFEW. A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the town during the
hours in which a curfew has been imposed, excepting persons officially
designated to duty with reference to the civil emergency.
(Ord. 59, passed 2-25-70)
§ 30.36 PROCLAMATION BY COUNCIL, IMPOSITION OF CURFEW.
   (A)   Proclamation by Town Council. When in the judgment of the Town Council
a civil emergency as defined herein is deemed to exist, they shall forthwith
proclaim in writing the existence of same. In case of the absence of the Town
Council from the town, the Marshal shall be authorized to act in their stead.
   (B)   Imposition of curfew. After proclamation of a civil emergency by the
Town Council, they may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical
areas of the town or to the town as a whole, as they deem advisable and
applicable during such hours of the day or night as they deem necessary in the
interest of the public safety and welfare.
(Ord. 59, passed 2-25-70)
§ 30.37 ORDERS AND EMERGENCY POWERS.
   (A)   Additional regulations. After proclamation of a civil emergency, the
Town Council may also in the interest of the public safety and welfare make any
or all of the following orders:
      (1)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores;
      (2)   Order the closing of all taverns;
      (3)   Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof wherein
the consumption of intoxicating liquor and/or beer is permitted.
      (4)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer;
      (5)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
      (6)   Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments,
the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid
flammable or combustible products;
      (7)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of firearms and/or ammunition;
      (8)   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the
protection of life and property.
   (B)   Emergency powers. During the period of a declared state of emergency,
the Town Council shall have the power to invoke any or all of the following
provisions:
      (1)   Alcoholic beverages. No person shall consume any alcoholic
beverages in a public street or place which is publicly owned, or in any motor
vehicle driven or parked thereon, which is within a duly designated restricted
area;
      (2)   Weapons. No person shall carry or possess any rock, bottle, club,
brick or weapon, who uses or intends to use the same unlawfully against the
person or property of another;
      (3)   Incendiary missiles. No person shall make, carry, possess or use
any type of “Molotov Cocktail,” gasoline or petroleum base fire bomb or other
incendiary missile;
      (4)   Restricted areas. No person shall enter any area designated by the
Town Council as a restricted area unless in the performance of official duties
or with written permission from the Board of Trustees or their duly designated
representative, or such person shall prove residence therein.
(Ord. 59, passed 2-25-70)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 31: POLICE AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
Section
Police
   
31.01   Deputy Marshals
   
31.02   Police Reserves
Ambulance Service
   
31.15   Ambulance membership program
   POLICE
§ 31.01 DEPUTY MARSHALS.
   (A)   The Town Marshal is hereby given authority to appoint deputy marshals
for the town.
   (B)   The deputy marshals shall be subject to the orders of the Marshal, who
may discharge them at any time.
   (C)   The amount of bond, compensation and term of service of the deputies
shall be regulated by the Town Council, subject to the power of the Marshal as
set out in division (B) hereof to discharge the deputy marshals at any time.
(Ord. 111, passed 2-27-80)
   (D)   There shall be three paid deputy marshals.
(Ord. 273, passed 7-26-99)
§ 31.02 POLICE RESERVES.
   There is established for the Police Department a reserve police officer
program pursuant to and consistent with the provisions of I.C. 36-8-3-20, as
amended from time to time.
   AMBULANCE SERVICE
§ 31.15 AMBULANCE MEMBERSHIP PROGRAM.
   The Town Council hereby grants permission to Rural/Metro Ambulance of
Indiana, L.P. in Johnson County, Indiana to offer a membership program pursuant
to the provisions of I.C. 27-4-5-2.
(Ord. 244, passed 10-27-97)
CHAPTER 32: FINANCE; FUNDS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund
   
32.02   Designating depositories
   
32.03   Operation of vending machine outside Town Hall
   
32.04   Economic Development and Tourism account
   
32.05   Park and Recreation Department Fund
   
32.06   Rainy Day Fund
   
32.07   Wastewater Deprecation Fund
   
32.08   Water Department Improvement Fund
   
32.09   Cumulative Capital Development Fund
   
32.10   LOIT Special Distribution Fund
   
32.11   Allocated Motor Vehicle Highway Fund
   
32.12   ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Fund
Purchasing
   
32.15   Purchasing agency
   
32.16   Required purchasing rules
   
32.17   Small purchases rule
   
32.18   Special purchasing methods; purchase of services
   
32.19   Procedural rules
   
32.20   Credit card use by designated officials and employees of the town
   
32.21   Use of general funds to promote town
Accounting Standards
   
32.30   Uniform internal control standards
   
32.31   Policies for monitoring and reporting material losses
   
32.32   Capital asset policy
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   (A)   In accordance with the provisions of I.C. 6-7-1-31-1, there is
established a special fund known as the Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund of
the town into which the cigarette taxes allotted to the town by reason of I.C.
6-7-1-30.1 as amended shall be deposited. The fund shall be a cumulative fund
and all of the monies deposited into the fund shall be appropriated and used
solely for capital improvements as hereinafter defined and none of such monies
shall revert to the general fund or be used for any purpose other than capital
improvements.
   (B)   (1)   The term “capital improvements” means the construction or
improvement of any property owned by the town including but not limited to
streets, thoroughfares and sewers and the retirement of general obligation
bonds of town issued used for the purpose of constructing capital improvements
and, including but not limited to, the ability to:
         (a)   Purchase land, easements, or rights-of-way;
         (b)   Purchase buildings;
         (c)   Construct or improve town-owned property;
         (d)   Design, develop, purchase, lease, upgrade, maintain, or repair:
            1.   Computer hardware;
            2.   Computer software;
            3.   Wiring and computer networks; and
            4.   Communications access systems used to connect with computer
networks or electronic gateways;
         (e)   Pay for the services of full- or part-time computer maintenance
employees;
         (f)   Conduct nonrecurring in-service technology training of unit
employees;
         (g)   Undertake internet application development; or
         (h)   Retire general obligation bonds issued by the city or town for
one of the purposes stated in subsections (a),(b),(c),(d),(e), or (f).
      (2)   The term capital improvement shall not include salaries of any
public official or employees except those which are directly chargeable to a
capital improvement.
(I.C. 6-7-1-31.1) (Ord. 37, passed 6-23-65)
§ 32.02 DESIGNATING DEPOSITORIES.
   Fifth Third Bank and Mutual Savings Bank are hereby selected and designated
to be used by the town for the holding of the funds of the town.
(Ord. 252, passed 3-5-01)
§ 32.03 OPERATION OF VENDING MACHINE OUTSIDE TOWN HALL.
   (A)   The Walking Trail Committee is hereby authorized to arrange for and
oversee the operation of a vending machine to be located outside the Town Hall
for use by the public.
   (B)   All revenues generated and costs incurred in operating the vending
machine shall be receipted in and disbursed out of the Community Development -
Walking Trail Donation Fund.
   (C)   All revenues generated and costs incurred in operating the vending
machine shall be accounted for through the Clerk-Treasurer's office, and the
operation of the vending machine shall comply with the requirements of the
State Board of Accounts.
   (D)   The original stocking of the machine shall be paid for out of the
Community Development Walking Trail Donation Fund.
   (E)   Whenever the vending machine is open for restocking, inventory,
collection of revenue, or for any other reason, there shall be present at all
times at least one person from the Clerk-Treasurer's office and at least one
person from the Walking Trail Committee. Such persons shall document in detail
the vending machine activity being performed and shall sign off on such
documentation.
   (F)   All funds collected from the vending machine shall be immediately
counted in the presence of at least one person from the Clerk-Treasurer's
office and at least one person from the Walking Trail Committee, and
immediately prepared for deposit and deposited in accordance with the daily
deposit laws of the State of Indiana. Such persons collecting and counting the
vending machine funds shall sign off on the collection count.
   (G)   The key to the vending machine shall be stored in the Clerk-
Treasurer's office and a log shall be kept of all persons using the key. Such
log shall contain the date, time, purpose, printed name, and signature of all
persons using the key.
(Ord. 272, passed 7-12-99)
§ 32.04 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND TOURISM ACCOUNT.
   (A)   There is hereby created an Economic Development and Tourism Account to
be utilized for the purpose of promoting the best interests of the town.
   (B)   The funds in the account may be utilized to pay the expenses of or to
reimburse town officials and employees for expenses incurred in promoting the
best interests of the town.
   (C)   Expenses to be paid out of the account may include, but are not
necessarily limited to, rental of meeting places, meals, decorations,
memorabilia, awards, expense incurred in interviewing job applicants, expense
incurred in promoting industrial, commercial and residential development,
expense incurred in developing relations with other units of government and any
other expense of a town or governmental nature deemed to be in the best
interest of the town by the Town Council.
(Ord. 170, passed 12-27-89; Am. Ord. 297, passed 12-4-00)
§ 32.05 PARK AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT FUND.
   (A)   There is created a special non-reverting operating account for park
purposes from which expenditures may be made for special events and programs as
determined by the Park Board, the operation of softball leagues, matching funds
for grants, professional services and maintenance of up-keep of the park.
   (B)   All income generated from any and all park functions from whatever
source and whatever nature shall be deposited at least once a month with the
Clerk-Treasurer. The Clerk-Treasurer shall deposit all of the income into the
special non-reverting operating account.
   (C)   Payment of expenditures from the special non-reverting operating
account shall be made by appropriation by the Park Board of Directors.
(Ord. 234, passed 12-9-96; Am. Ord. 239-A, passed 5-11-98)
§ 32.06 RAINY DAY FUND.
   (A)   Creation of Rainy Day Fund. There is hereby established a “Rainy Day
Fund” to receive transfers of unused and unencumbered monies, and to receive
funds from other sources specified within this chapter, to be used for the
purposes specified within this chapter.
   (B)   Purposes of the Rainy Day Fund. The funds on deposit in the Rainy Day
Fund may be used for the operation of the town and its various departments,
when the town does not have sufficient levies or funds to pay such costs,
including, but not limited to, salaries and wages, costs of services, supplies,
equipment, capital improvements, repairs, and similar expenditures.
   (C)   Sources of funding. The sources of the funds of the Rainy Day Fund may
be any one or more of the following:
      (1)   A transfer of unused and unencumbered funds of dormant fund
balances pursuant to I.C. 36-1-8-5.
      (2)   A transfer to the Rainy Day Fund from a budgeted appropriation of
any fund of the town, except for any fund dedicated to the payment of a capital
lease or debt service.
      (3)   A transfer to the Rainy Day Fund from a duly approved additional
appropriation of any fund of the town, except for any fund dedicated to the
payment of a capital lease or debt service.
      (4)   A transfer to the Rainy Day Fund of funds received from the County
Adjusted Gross Income Tax (CAGIT), pursuant to state law, or the County Option
Income Tax (COIT), pursuant to state law.
      (5)    Earnings resulting from the investment of town funds pursuant to
I.C. 5-13.
      (6)   Funds gifted to the town and specified by the donor to be credited
to the Rainy Day Fund or for the purposes of the Rainy Day Fund or gifted funds
restricted by the donor and then specified by the town’s fiscal body to be
credited to the Rainy Day Fund.
   (D)   Transfer to Rainy Day Fund. During the period January 1 through
February 28 of each year, the Town Council shall determine the amount, if any,
of funds to be transferred to the Rainy Day Fund and take action to transfer
such funds. In any fiscal year, the town may transfer to the Rainy Day Fund not
more than 10% of the town’s annual budget for that fiscal year, as adopted
under I.C. 6-1.1-17.
   (E)   Appropriations. The Town Council of the town may authorize the
expenditure of funds from the Rainy Day Fund by appropriations made in the same
manner as other funds are appropriated that receive tax monies, upon making a
finding that the proposed use of the Rainy Day Fund is consistent with the
intent of the Rainy Day Fund.
(Ord. 325, passed 12-20-04)
§ 32.07 WASTEWATER DEPRECATION FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Wastewater Deprecation Fund for the
replacement and upkeep of the wastewater department grinder pumps that service
the homeowners of Prince's Lakes, the upkeep/dredging of the lagoons, and the
planning, construction, and upkeep of a new wastewater treatment plant.
   (B)   The Town Council has agreed to put aside $15,000 each month in the
Wastewater Deprecation Fund to ensure that the money will be available when
repairs or replacements are required. The money will be allocated as follows:
      (1)   Grinder pump repairs and replacement: $5,000.
      (2)   Lagoon cleaning and repairs: $5,000.
      (3)   Wastewater treatment plant planning and construction: $5,000.
   (C)   This section shall be in effect unless at any time the Wastewater
Department checking account falls to or below $100,000. If that happens, the
Clerk-Treasurer will not deposit any more money into these funds until the
account is sufficient to continue these amounts.
(Ord. 332, passed 7-16-07)
§ 32.08 WATER DEPARTMENT IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Water Department Improvement Fund for the
future building of a water tower to service the town Water Department.
   (B)   The Town Council has agreed to put aside $30,000 initially and $5,000
each month in the Water Improvement Fund to ensure that the money will be
available when the tower is to be built.
   (C)   This section shall be in effect unless at any time the Water
Department checking account falls to or below $100,000. At that time the Clerk-
Treasurer will cease to deposit any more money into these funds until the
account is sufficient to continue these amounts.
(Ord. 333, passed 7-16-07)
§ 32.09 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND.
   (A)   A need now exists for the establishing of a Cumulative Capital
Development Fund for all uses as set out in I.C. 36-9-15.5. The Town Council
will adhere to the provisions of I.C. 36-9-15.5. The proposed fund will not
exceed $.05 per $100 of assessed valuation.
   (B)   The town’s Cumulative Capital Development Fund shall be funded, each
year, by levying a tax, in compliance with I.C. 6-1.1-41, on the taxable
property in the town at the maximum property rate of $.05 per $100 of assessed
valuation as authorized by and pursuant to I.C. 36-9-15.5-6(b) beginning with
taxes assessed in 2022, payable in 2023.
(Ord. 339, passed 7-21-08; Am. Ord. 382, passed 3-21-16; Am. Ord. 405, passed
4-16-18; Am. Ord. 420 (2020-1), passed 6-29-20; Am. Ord. 2021-1, passed 3-15-
21; Am. Ord. 2022-2, passed 4-18-22)
§ 32.10 LOIT SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION FUND.
   (A)   Prince’s Lakes Town Fund 257, titled LOIT Special Distribution Fund is
hereby created. This fund is to be used exclusively for engineering, land
acquisition, construction, resurfacing, maintenance, restoration, or
rehabilitation of both local and arterial road and street systems.
   (B)   Seventy-five percent of the town’s 2016 special distribution from
Johnson County’s LOIT trust account will be transferred to and held in the LOIT
Special Distribution Fund.
(Ord. 383, passed 5-16-16)
§ 32.11 ALLOCATED MOTOR VEHICLE HIGHWAY FUND.
   (A)   A new Prince’s Lakes Town Fund, entitled the Allocated Motor Vehicle
Highway Fund, is hereby created.
   (B)   Fifty percent of the town’s MVH distributions will be deposited in the
town’s Allocated Motor Vehicle Highway Fund.
   (C)   Funds deposited in town’s Allocated Motor Vehicle Highway Fund may be
spent only for the construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance, oiling,
sprinkling, snow removal, weed and tree cutting and cleaning of town highways,
including also any curbs, and/or the town’s share of the cost of the separation
of the grades of crossing of public highways and railroads, the purchase or
lease of highway construction and maintenance equipment, the purchase,
erection, operation and maintenance of traffic signs and signals, and safety
zones and devices, and the painting of surfaces in highways for purposes of
safety and traffic regulation or as otherwise may be permitted by the Indiana
General Assembly.
   (D)   Funds deposited in town’s Allocated Motor Vehicle Highway Fund shall
be spent, administered, tracked, and accounted for pursuant to I.C. 8-14-1-5,
as may be amended, and as prescribed by the Indiana State Board of Accounts,
from time to time.
   (E)   The town’s existing Motor Vehicle Highway Fund is hereby designated
and retitled as the Unallocated Motor Vehicle Highway Fund, into which the
balance of the town’s MVH distribution, meaning those funds not deposited in
the town’s Allocated Motor Vehicle Highway Fund, will be deposited and
administered.
(Ord. 397, passed 6-19-17)
§ 32.12 ARP CORONAVIRUS LOCAL FISCAL RECOVERY FUND.
   (A)   Fund Number 176, entitled ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Fund
is hereby established, into which all allocations of Coronavirus State and
Local Fiscal Recovery Funds, under Section 603 of the Social Security Act,
shall be receipted and from which those funds may be appropriated and spent.
   (B)   Fund Number 176, and the allocations deposited therein, shall be used
for those purposes outlined in Section 603(c) Social Security Act.
   (C)   The Town Council will devise and adopt a plan that will provide
details for the use of the allocated ARP funds.
(Ord. 2021-4, passed 4-19-21)
   PURCHASING
§ 32.15 PURCHASING AGENCY.
   The Town Council is designated as the purchasing agency (the “Purchasing
Agency”) for the town.
   (A)   Powers. The Purchasing Agency shall have all the powers and duties
authorized under I.C. 5-22 as amended and as supplemented, and as may be
supplemented from time to time by ordinances adopted by the Town Council and
policies adopted by the Purchasing Agency.
   (B)   Agents.
      (1)   The Fiscal Officer and each department head shall be a purchasing
agent of the Purchasing Agency and as such is authorized to make purchases for
their own departments or operations not exceeding $2,000 per purchase, unless
and until the Purchasing Agency files a writing terminating such status with
the Fiscal Officer of the town.
      (2)   In addition, the Purchasing Agency may designate any employee of
the Agency or the town as one of its purchasing agents by filing a writing with
the Fiscal Officer. The writing shall delineate the purchasing agent's limits
of authority. The designation of such a purchasing agent may be terminated at
the discretion of the Purchasing Agency.
      (3)   Any purchasing agent may designate any of the agent's employees or
office holders as a purchasing agent under the terms and conditions it believes
appropriate. Any such designations may be terminated by either the purchasing
agent who designated such purchasing agent or by the Purchasing Agency by
filing a writing terminating such purchase agent status with the Fiscal Officer
of the town.
(Ord. 256, passed 6-22-98; Am. Ord. 2020-3, passed 9-21-20)
§ 32.16 REQUIRED PURCHASING RULES.
   The following are the required purchasing rules for the town.
   (A)   Purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States. Supplies
manufactured in the United States shall be specified and purchased unless the
Purchasing Agency determines that:
      (1)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in
reasonably available quantities;
      (2)   The price of the supplies manufactured in the United States exceeds
by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable supplies
manufactured elsewhere;
      (3)   The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United States is
substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available supplies
manufactured elsewhere; or
      (4)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is not
in the public interest.
      (5)   The Purchasing Agency shall be responsible for defining the term
“manufactured in the United States.”
      (6)   The items listed in Federal Acquisition Regulation 25.108 (48 CFR
25.108), as amended from time to time, are presumed to not be manufactured in
the United States in reasonably available quantities.
   (B)   (1)   Purchase of supplies from the Department of Correction. The town
shall purchase from the Department of Correction supplies and services produced
or manufactured by the department under I.C. 11-10-6 as listed in the
department's printed catalog unless the Purchasing Agency or its purchasing
agent has determined that:
         (a)   The supplies and services cannot be furnished in a timely
manner, or
         (b)   The supplies and services do not meet the specification and
needs of the town, or
         (c)   The supplies and services cannot be purchased at a fair market
price.
      (2)   The Purchasing Agency shall be responsible for interpreting the
terms in this subsection in order to carry out the intent.
   (C)   (1)   Purchase of supplies from the Rehabilitation Center under I.C.
12-12-3-1. The town shall purchase articles produced by the Rehabilitation
Center as listed in the Bureau's printed catalog unless the Purchasing Agency
or its purchasing agent has determined that:
         (a)   The supplies and services cannot be furnished in a timely manner
after having given the Bureau a reasonable time to produce or supply the
articles; or
         (b)   The supplies and services do not meet the specification and
needs of the town; or
         (c)   The supplies and services cannot be purchased at a fair market
price; or
         (d)   Similar articles are produced by the town.
      (2)   The Purchasing Agency shall be responsible for interpreting the
terms in this division in order to carry out the intent. However, once the
Purchasing Agent has obtained a written statement from the Bureau that the
article described in the catalog cannot be furnished, the agent may obtain the
article elsewhere.
(Ord. 256, passed 6-22-98)
§ 32.17 SMALL PURCHASES RULE.
   (A)   Subject to the limits of authority otherwise provided within this
chapter, whenever the Purchasing Agency or a purchasing agent of the town
expects a purchase or annual rental payment on a lease to be less than $25,000,
the Purchasing Agency or the purchasing agent may proceed to make the purchase
or lease under either division (B) or (C) hereof.
   (B)   The Purchasing Agency or the purchasing agent may invite quotes from
at least three persons known to deal in the lines or classes of personal
property to be purchased by mailing an invitation to quote to the persons at
least seven days before the time fixed for receiving quotes. If the Purchasing
Agency or the purchasing agent receives a satisfactory quote, the purchasing
agent shall award a contract to the lowest responsible and responsive offeror
for each line or class of personal property required. The Purchasing Agency or
the purchasing agent may reject all quotes and proceed to make the purchase
under division (C) hereof.
   (C)   The Purchasing Agency or the purchasing agent may purchase or lease
the personal property in the open market without inviting or receiving bids or
quotes.
(Ord. 256, passed 6-22-98)
§ 32.18 SPECIAL PURCHASING METHODS; PURCHASE OF SERVICES.
   (A)   Special purchasing methods. Any purchasing agency may use any special
purchasing method for which it can qualify under I.C. 5-22-10, as amended from
time to time.
   (B)   Purchase of services. The Town Council hereby determines that the
Purchasing Agency, the department heads, and the elected Fiscal Officer may
purchase services in whatever manner the purchaser determines to be reasonable,
to the extent provided by law.
(Ord. 256, passed 6-22-98)
§ 32.19 PROCEDURAL RULES.
   (A)   Procedural rules. The following are procedural purchasing rules
applicable to the town:
      (1)   Publication of notices. All notices of invitation for bids shall be
published in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 as amended. The purchasing agent shall
schedule the publication of notice to provide a reasonable amount of time for
preparation and submission of bids. The notice will be published two times, at
least one week apart. The second publication must occur at least ten days prior
to the date the bids will be opened.
      (2)   Receiving offers. Bids received in response to an invitation for
bids must be opened publicly in the presence of at least one or more witnesses
at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids.
   (B)   Other procedural rules. The Purchasing Agency may make additional
policies as it deems necessary to supplement these rules on either a purchase
by purchase basis or for all of its purchases.
(Ord. 256, passed 6-22-98)
§ 32.20 CREDIT CARD USE BY DESIGNATED OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE TOWN.
   (A)   The use of credit cards for town purchases not to exceed $2,000 is
hereby authorized subject to the relevant criteria of the State Board of
Accounts, this section, and all other applicable policies and procedures
adopted by the Town Council.
   (B)   Credit cards will be issued to the Clerk-Treasurer and town department
heads, who will maintain them in their possession, except when they are checked
out by a town employee for purchases preapproved by the Clerk-Treasurer or
department head, as the case may be.
   (C)   Credit cards may be used only for day-to-day purchases of necessary
supplies, materials, and equipment that are not subject to any statutory
bidding process or formal pre-purchase approval. Credit cards may also be used
to make online purchases, including enrollment fees, accommodations, and other
costs related to seminars, and instructional classes for town officials and
employees.
   (D)   When the purpose for which a credit card has been “checked out” has
been accomplished, the card, along with a receipt, invoice, or other proof of
the purchase(s) for which it was used, must be returned to the custody of the
Clerk-Treasurer or department head to whom it was issued and in whose
possession it is regularly kept.
   (E)   Credit cards shall not be used to bypass the accounting system. One
reason that purchase orders are issued is to provide the Clerk-Treasurer with
the means to encumber and track appropriations to provide the Town Council with
timely and accurate accounting information and monitoring of the accounting
system. Payment may not be made on the basis of the account statement or a
credit card slip only. Procedures for payments should be no different than for
any other claim. Department heads shall provide the Clerk-Treasurer with
supporting documents, such as purchase orders, paid bills, and receipts, in the
same manner as any other claim is supported.
   (F)   Annual fees for credit card use may be paid.
(Ord. 353, passed 3-19-12; Am. Ord. 2020-2, passed 9-21-20)
§ 32.21 USE OF GENERAL FUNDS TO PROMOTE TOWN.
   (A)   The town budget shall include an appropriation for town promotion,
which shall be a part of and funded from the town’s General Fund in amounts to
be determined and approved by the Town Council as part of its annual budget
adoption.
   (B)   Funds appropriated for town promotion may be spent to pay or reimburse
expenses incurred to promote the best interests of the town, including, without
limitation: rental of meeting places, meals, decorations, memorabilia, awards,
expenses incurred in promotion industrial, commercial, or residential
development and investment; expenses incurred in developing relations with
other agencies and units of government; gifts and awards to employees or
elected officials (or their families) in appreciation for service and loyalty
to the town; and any other expenses of a civic or governmental nature deemed by
the Town Council to be in the best interest of the town.
(Ord. 2020-4, passed 11-16-20)
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
§ 32.30 UNIFORM INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS.
   The Town Council hereby adopts the internal control standards developed by
the Indiana State Board of Accounts and published as the Uniform Internal
Control Standards for Indiana Political Subdivisions as the minimum level of
internal control standards for the town, effective as of August 1, 2016.
(Ord. 385, passed 7-18-16)
§ 32.31 POLICIES FOR MONITORING AND REPORTING MATERIAL LOSSES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section:
      IRREGULAR VARIANCE. A reduction in a cash or fund balance or actual cash
on hand that cannot be accounted for or explained in the normal course of
business.
      MATERIAL. The reporting requirements imposed by I.C. 5-11-1-27, shall
mean;
         (a)   A variance, loss, or shortage of cash exceeding $100;
         (b)   Two or more variances, losses, or shortages of cash, from the
same fund or account, or related to the same person or department, occurring
within a 60 day period, and exceeding, in the aggregate, $100;
         (c)   A loss of town property valued in excess of $100; or
         (d)   The theft or suspected theft, by town personnel, of cash or any
other town property, irrespective of the value or amount.
      PUBLIC OFFICER. Shall be defined as it is in I.C. 5-13-4-2, as any person
elected or appointed to any office of the state or any political subdivision
and includes an officer of all boards, commissions, departments, institutions,
and other bodies established by law to function as a part of the government of
the state or political subdivision that are supported wholly or partly by
appropriations of money made from the treasury of the state or political
subdivision or that are supported wholly or partly by taxes or fees.
      TOWN PERSONNEL. All elected and appointed officials and all employees of
the town of Prince's Lakes.
      THEFT. Shall be the same as it is defined under I.C. 35-43-4-2.
   (B)   Duty to report. 
      (1)   The town, in addition to all other reporting requirements that it
or town personnel may have pursuant to relevant provisions of I.C. 5-11-1-27,
or otherwise, shall immediately report to the Indiana State Board of Accounts
all irregular variances, losses, or shortages, deemed to be material as defined
herein, and all incidents of theft.
      (2)   Additionally, I.C. 5-11-1-27(1) requires public officers who have
actual knowledge of or reasonable cause to believe that there has been a
misappropriation of public funds or assets of the public office, including: (1)
information obtained as a result of a police report; (2) an internal audit
finding; or (3) another source indicating that a misappropriation has occurred;
to immediately send written notice of the misappropriation to the Indiana State
Board of Accounts and the prosecuting attorney serving in the area governed by
the political subdivision.
   (C)   Applicability and responsibility. The Town Council and the town's
various department heads shall implement and oversee the policies and
procedures as set forth in this section. This section and its separate rules,
policies, and duties, as imposed, shall apply to and be enforced by and against
all town personnel in strict compliance with its terms.
(Ord. 386, passed 7-18-16)
§ 32.32 CAPITAL ASSET POLICY.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      CAPITAL ASSETS.
         (a)   Land and/or land improvements, including monuments, buildings,
building improvements, construction in progress, machinery and equipment,
vehicles and infrastructure. All land will be capitalized but not depreciated.
All items with a useful life of more than one year, and having a unit cost of
$5,000 or more shall be capitalized (including acquisitions by lease-purchase
agreements or donated items). A capital asset meeting the criteria will be
reported and depreciated in the government-wide financial statements.
         (b)   Assets that are not capitalized (items having a unit cost of
less than $5,000) are expensed in the year of acquisition. An inventory will be
kept on all computers and other equipment with a capitalized cost of less than
$5,000. Exceptions are:
            1.   Items costing less than the above-described limits which are
permanently installed as a part of the cost of original construction or
installation of a larger building or equipment unit will be included in the
cost of the larger unit;
            2.   Modular equipment added subsequent to original equipment
construction of a larger building or equipment unit which may be put together
to form larger units costing more than the prescribed limits will be charged to
capital assets even though the cost of individual items is less than such
limits; and
            3.   Cabinets, shelving bookcases, and similar items added
subsequent to original construction, which are custom-made for a specific place
and adaptable elsewhere will be capitalized.
      CAPITAL OUTLAYS. Expenditures which benefit both the current and future
fiscal periods. This includes costs of acquiring land or structures,
construction or improvement of buildings, structures or other fixed assets and
equipment purchases having an appreciable and calculable period of usefulness.
These are expenditures resulting in the acquisition of or addition to the
town's general fixed assets.
      FIXED ASSETS. Tangible assets of a durable nature employed in the
operating of activities of the town and that are relatively permanent and are
needed for the production and sale of goods or services are termed property,
plant and equipment or fixed assets.
      HISTORICAL COST. The cash equivalent price exchanged for goods or
services at the date of acquisition. Land, buildings, equipment and most
inventories are common examples of items recognized under the historical cost
attribute.
      LAND. Specified land, lots, parcels, or acreage.
      MACHINERY and EQUIPMENT. An apparatus, tool or conglomeration of pieces
to form a tool. The tool will stand alone and not become part of a basic
structure or building. This category also includes any other asset or type of
physical property not otherwise classified in this section.
      TANGIBLE ASSETS. Assets that can be observed by one or more of the
physical senses. These assets may be seen and touched and, in some
environments, heard and smelled.
   (B)   Specific capitalization provisions.
      (1)   Land.
         (a)   The town will capitalize all land purchases, regardless of cost.
Exceptions to land capitalization are land purchased outright, as easements, or
right-of-way for infrastructure. Examples of infrastructure include roads and
streets, street lighting systems, curbs, parking meters, street signs,
viaducts, wharfs and storm water collection.
         (b)   Original cost of land will include the full value given to the
seller, including relocation, legal services incidental to the purchase
(including title work and legal opinion), appraisal and negotiation fees,
surveying and costs for preparing the land for its intended purpose (including
contractors and/or town employees (salary and benefits)), such as demolishing
buildings, excavating, clean up and/or inspection. Land is not depreciated
under generally accepted accounting principles.
      (2)   Machinery and equipment.
         (a)   The town will capitalize items with an individual value equal to
or greater than $5,000. Machinery combined with other machinery to form one
unit with a total value greater than the above-mentioned limit will be one
unit.
         (b)   Improvement or renovations to existing machinery and equipment
will be capitalized only if the result of the change meets all of the following
conditions:
            1.   The total costs exceed $5,000;
            2.   The useful life is extended two or more years; and
            3.   The total cost will be greater than the current book value and
less than the fair market value.
         (c)   Salvage value of machinery or equipment will be determined on an
asset-by-asset basis. Depreciation will be calculated at year-end.
      (3)   Buildings.
         (a)   The town will capitalize buildings at full cost with no
subcategories for tracking the cost of attachments. Examples of attachments are
roofs, heating, cooling, lighting or sprinkler systems, or any part of the
basic building. The department will include the cost of items designed or
purchased exclusively for the building.
         (b)   A new building will be capitalized only if it meets the
following conditions:
            1.   The total cost exceeds $5,000; and
            2.   The useful life is greater than two years.
         (c)   Improvements to an existing building will be capitalized only if
the result meets all of the following conditions:
            1.   The total cost exceeds $5,000;
            2.   The useful life is extended two years or more; and
            3.   The total cost will be greater than the current book value and
less than the fair market value.
         (d)   Any land, building, improvements, or equipment that has been
donated will be recorded at fair market value on the date of transfer.
      (4)   Improvements other than buildings. These assets are defined as
improvements to land for better enjoyment, attached or not easily removed, and
which will have a life expectancy of greater than two years. Examples are
walkways, parking areas and drives, golf cart paths, fencing, retaining walls,
pools, outside fountains, planters, underground sprinkler systems, water supply
mains, collection sewers, wells, dams, intake pipes, manholes, fire hydrants,
and other similar items. Improvements do not include roads, streets, or assets
that are of value only to the public. Roads or drives upon town-owned land that
provide support to town facilities are assets. A sidewalk down the road for
public enjoyment is an infrastructure improvement and is not capitalized.
However, sidewalks installed upon the town-owned land for use by the public and
for the support of town facilities are capital assets.
      (5)   Recording and accounting. The town shall classify capital
expenditures as capital outlays within the fund from which the expenditure was
made in accordance with the Chart of Accounts of the Cities and Towns
Accounting Manual. The cost of the property, plant and equipment includes all
expenditures necessary to put the asset into position and ready for use. For
purposes of recording fixed assets of the town, the valuation of assets shall
be based on historical costs, or where the historical cost is indeterminable,
by estimation for those assets in existence.
      (6)   Composite/group network. A network of assets is composed of all
assets that provide a particular type of service for government. A subsystem of
a network of assets is composed of all assets that make a similar portion or
segment of a network of assets.
            (a)   "Composite depreciation" refers to calculation of
depreciation for a collection of similar assets. A single composite rate is
applied annually to the acquisition cost of the collection as a whole. At year-
end, an adjustment will be made to the total cost to account for any additions/
disposals throughout the year. The accumulated depreciation associated with it
will also be adjusted. A gain or loss will never be reported on the asset when
using the composite method. A full year's depreciation will be taken when the
asset is placed in service and no depreciation will be recorded in the year it
is sold or disposed of. Dissimilar assets will be grouped by useful lives.
            (b)   To determine the appropriate depreciation rate for the
composite rate, divide one by the number of years the assets are depreciated.
For instance, a group of assets with a 25 year life will be depreciated at 4%
each year (1/25).
      (7)   Useful life schedule. The "useful life" of an asset, as set by the
Indiana State Board of Accounts ("SBOA"), shall be the "useful life" applied by
the town. For assets with regard to which the SBOA has not set a useful life,
the town shall assign its own. As the date of adoption of this section, and for
purpose of illustration, the current useful lives for various fixed asset are
as follows:
 
Asset Class Useful Life Source
Asset Class                                      Useful Life Source
Land:                                            NA          NA
   Land                                       NA          NA
   Land improvements                          NA          NA
   Right of way                               NA          NA
   Easement                                   NA          NA
Buildings:
   Permanent structures                       50          SBOA
   Wood frame structures                      25          Internal
   Foundation, frame, floor structure         50          SBOA
   Interior construction                      15          SBOA
   HVAC systems/fire alarms                   20          SBOA
   Floor covering                             15          SBOA
   Carpet                                     5           SBOA
   Electrical                                 20          SBOA
   Plumbing                                   20          SBOA
   Elevators                                  20          SBOA
   Masonry interior/exterior construction     10          Internal
   Wood frame open structure (i.e. park shelte30          Internal
   Wood frame open structure                  50          Internal
   Roof                                       10          SBOA
Improvements other than buildings:
   Parking lots                               50          SBOA
   Street lights/traffic lights/flag pole     25          SBOA
   Fencing                                    20          SBOA
   Swimming pools                             20          SBOA
   Pedestrian bridges                         30          SBOA
   Major bridges                              50          SBOA
   Alleys                                     50          SBOA
   Outside irrigation systems                 25          SBOA
   Fountains                                  20          SBOA
   Tennis/basketball courts                   20          SBOA
   Tunnel                                     50          SBOA
   Roads                                      50          SBOA
   Signs                                      10          SBOA
Infrastructure:
   Sewers (including manholes and pipes)      100         SBOA
   Lift stations/gas station                  50          SBOA
   Treatment plants                           50          SBOA
   Pumps                                      20          SBOA
   Storm drains                               50          SBOA
   Storm infrastructure                       50          Internal
Machinery and equipment:
   Heavy mobile equipment                     12          SBOA
   Fire apparatus                             12          SBOA
   Fire equipment                             10          Internal
   General equipment                          12          SBOA
   Athletic/exercise equipment                10          SBOA
   Indoor recreation equipment                10
   AV equipment                               7           SBOA
   Computer hardware                          5           SBOA
   Copiers                                    5           SBOA
   Communication equipment                    10          SBOA
   Servers                                    7           IRS
   Furniture                                  15          SBOA
   Appliances/food service equipment          10          SBOA
   General shop equipment                     20          SBOA
   General tools                              10          SBOA
   Outdoor recreation equipment               15          SBOA
   Trailers                                   12          SBOA
   Mowers                                     7           Internal
   Storm sirens                               20          Internal
Vehicles (licensed):
   Automobile                                 6           SBOA
   Golf cart                                  6           SBOA
   ATV                                        6           SBOA
   Truck                                      6           SBOA
   Van                                        6           SBOA
   SUV                                        6           SBOA
 
(Ord. 2021-2, passed 3-15-21)
CHAPTER 33: PERSONNEL AND OTHER TOWN POLICIES
Section
   
33.01   Employment Policy Manual adopted by reference
   
33.02   Town employees performing volunteer services
   
33.03   Drug-free workplace
   
33.04   Nepotism
   
33.05   Contracting with a unit
   
33.06   Credit card and debit card transactions
   
33.07   National Incident Management System
§ 33.01 EMPLOYMENT POLICY MANUAL ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Employment Policy Manual, effective November 1, 2011, is hereby adopted
by reference and made a part of this code the same as if set forth in full
herein.
(Ord. 302, passed 5-21-01; Am. Ord. 309, passed 8-19-02; Am. Res. 2011-2,
passed 10-17-11; Am. Res. 2012-1, passed 4-12-12; Am. Res. 2012-4, passed 6-18-
12; Am. Res. 2012-5, passed 10-15-12)
§ 33.02 TOWN EMPLOYEES PERFORMING VOLUNTEER SERVICES.
   An employee may perform volunteer services in compliance with the guidelines
of I.C. 35-44-2-4,* if the employee's supervisor approves and the employee does
not spend more than 500 hours in a calendar year performing the volunteer
services.
(Ord. 264, passed 12-28-98)
* Editor’s note:
   The statute cited in this section, I.C. 35-44-2-4, has been repealed.
§ 33.03 DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE.
   (A)   Overview. The town makes a commitment to provide employees a safe
working environment, to ensure that employees, equipment, and operating
practices comply with health and safety standards, and to maintain public
confidence in the town and its employees. Since the town values each employee,
the town offers employees assistance in dealing with alcohol and drug abuse
problems.
   (B)   Policy.
      (1)   The town requires all employees to report for work in a condition
that allows them to perform their duties in a safe and efficient manner.
Employees will not be permitted to work under the influence of alcohol or with
prohibited drugs in their systems thereby affecting job performance.
      (2)   Violation of any provision of this section will be considered just
cause for disciplinary action up to and including discharge, even for a first
offense. In addition, refusal to adhere to any part of the policy may be
considered an act of insubordination and also may lead to disciplinary action
up to and including discharge.
      (3)   This section and related procedures may be modified by the town at
any time in order to comply with any applicable federal, state, or local laws
or to better serve the needs of the town.
   (C)   Prohibited drugs.
      (1)   Prohibited drugs are defined as illegal substances, including
controlled substances as defined in the Controlled Substance Act (21 U.S.C. §
812) and the Code of Federal Regulations (21 C.F.R. § 1308.11-1308.15) and
prescription controlled substances which have not been prescribed by a licensed
physician or dentist for specific treatment purposes for the employee. Abuse of
prescription or over-the-counter drugs will also be treated as a substance
abuse problem under this section.
      (2)   This section prohibits the illegal use, sale, transfer,
distribution, possession, or unlawful manufacture of narcotics, drugs, or other
controlled substances while on the job or on town premises (including vehicles
used for town business). These include but are not limited to marijuana,
cocaine, crack, PCP, heroin, LSD, amphetamines, hallucinogens, and
barbiturates. Any illegal substances found on such premises will be turned over
to the state police and may lead to criminal prosecution.
   (D)   Alcohol.
      (1)   The use of alcohol on the job or on town premises is prohibited,
unless such use is non-abusive and is part of an authorized official event held
off town premises. The use of alcohol in vehicles used for town business is
strictly prohibited.
      (2)   Alcohol possession applies to all open or unsealed alcoholic
beverage containers. Such containers are not allowed on the job or on town
premises, unless their possession is part of an authorized official event.
Possession of such containers in vehicles used for town business is never
authorized.
   (E)   Reporting violations.
      (1)   Employees must as a condition of employment abide by the terms of
this section and report any conviction to the town under a criminal drug
statute for violations occurring on or off town premises when conducting Town
business. Report of a conviction must be made to the town within five business
days after the conviction. The town will then notify the appropriate
contracting officer within ten days after receiving notice from either the
employee or from another source. (These requirements are mandated by the Drug-
Free Workplace Act of 1988.)
      (2)   An employee who is involved with off-the-job illegal drug activity
may be considered in violation of this section. In determining whether
disciplinary action will be imposed for this activity, the town will consider
the circumstance of each incident, including but not limited to any adverse
effect the employee's actions may have on its customers, other employees, the
public, or the town's reputation and image.
      (3)   Any questions regarding the reporting of violations should be
directed to the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (F)   Employee rehabilitation.
      (1)   Health maintenance is primarily a personal responsibility and it is
the individual's responsibility to correct unsatisfactory job performance or
behavioral problems caused by alcohol or drug abuse. In an effort to assist
employees, the town will provide various means for employees and their family
members to remain aware of the dangers of substance abuse in the workplace and
to overcome drug and alcohol related problems.
      (2)   Employees with a personal alcohol or drug-related problem are
encouraged to volunteer to participate in an approved rehabilitation program
upon referral from the Employee and Family Assistance Program before work
performance becomes affected.
      (3)   Participation in a rehabilitation program will not be considered a
barrier to employment nor a cause for disciplinary action. Employees will not
be disciplined merely because of participation in a rehabilitation program or
excused from the disciplinary consequences of conduct which is in violation of
this section or any other town policies or job requirements.
      (4)   Any employee identified through a town investigation as having a
substance abuse problem also may not avoid disciplinary action by requesting to
participate in an approved rehabilitation program.
      (5)   Circumstances in each case will be evaluated to determine the
course of action to be taken (that is, whether the employee will be offered the
opportunity to participate in a rehabilitation program and/or will be subject
to discipline.)
   (G)   Testing.
      (1)   The town will ask employees to submit to random alcohol or drug
tests.
      (2)   Alcohol or drug tests may be required for employees in the
following circumstances:
         (a)   When unsatisfactory job performance or other employee behavior
is reasonably indicative of substance abuse.
         (b)   During and after participation in a drug or alcohol
rehabilitation program for a reasonable period of time as determined by the
town.
         (c)   When required by law.
      (3)   If a supervisor identifies an employee with a behavior pattern and/
or job performance reasonably indicative of substance abuse, the supervisor
(with the concurrence of the next level of supervision) may recommend that the
employee have a fitness for duty examination by a physician designated by the
town. The physician will determine whether a fitness for duty examination is
necessary and whether alcohol or drug tests will be required.
      (4)   Pre-employment drug testing is part of the pre-employment physical.
The method of testing will be determined by the town. Applicants who test
positive for prohibited drugs in their systems will not be offered employment.
Any questions regarding reapplication opportunities should be directed to the
Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 366, passed 1-22-13)
§ 33.04 NEPOTISM.
   All of the requirements set forth in I.C. 36-1-20.2 are hereby adopted and
implemented as local policy of the town, effective as of July 1, 2012.
(Res. 2012-2, passed 5-21-12)
§ 33.05 CONTRACTING WITH A UNIT.
   All of the requirements set forth in I.C. 36-1-21 are hereby adopted and
implemented as local policy of the town, effective as of July 1, 2012.
(Res. 2012-3, passed 5-21-12)
§ 33.06 CREDIT CARD AND DEBIT CARD TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   Payments to the town may be made and the town's Clerk-Treasurer is
hereby authorized to accept payments made by credit card, bank card, or
electronic funds transfer, in addition to payments made by cash, check, money
order, or bank draft;
   (B)   The town, through the office of the town's Clerk-Treasurer, shall
charge and collect fees from the payee equal to the amount charged to the town
on payments made by credit card, bank card, or electronic fund transfer.
(Ord. 338, passed 8-18-08)
§ 33.07 NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.
   The National Incident Management System, dated March 1, 2004, revised and
expanded as of December 18, 2008, is hereby adopted as the standard for
incident management by the town.
(Ord. 352, passed 3-19-12)
CHAPTER 34: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Section
   
34.01   Creation
   
34.02   Violations Clerk and duties
   
34.03   Schedule of violations and penalties
   
34.04   Rights of person charged
   
34.05   Prosecution
   
34.06   Admission does not constitute judgment
   
34.07   Sums collected
§ 34.01 CREATION.
   An Ordinance Violations Bureau is hereby established for the town pursuant
to I.C. 33-36-2-1.
(Ord. 223, passed 2-26-95; Am. Ord. 358, passed 8-20-12)
§ 34.02 VIOLATIONS CLERK AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town is hereby designated as the Violations
Clerk of the Ordinance Violations Bureau pursuant to I.C. 33-36-2-1.
   (B)   As the Violations Clerk, the town's Clerk-Treasurer may accept:
written appearances; waivers of trial; admissions of violations; and payments
of civil penalties, not to exceed $250, in ordinance violation cases, pursuant
to the schedule of violations and penalties appearing in §
34.03 of this chapter.
(Ord. 223, passed 2-26-95; Am. Ord. 358, passed 8-20-12)
§ 34.03 SCHEDULE OF VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   The Town Council hereby designates, as violations subject to admission
before and payment of assessed penalties to the Violations Clerk, the town code
sections and penalties scheduled below:
 
70.03  Prohibited parking
91.02  Domestic animals to be confined
91.01  Animals causing nuisance
92.02  Permitting or maintaining weeds and rank vegetation
130.03 Disturbing places of worship
   (B)   Persons cited for violations of the above scheduled town code sections
shall be subject to penalties, with regard to each separate section, to be paid
to the Violations Clerk, as follows:
      (1)   First violation: $30.
      (2)   Second violation: $60.
      (3)   Third violation: $90.
      (4)   Subsequent violations of the same town code section are not
eligible for disposition through the town's Ordinance Violations Bureau.
(Ord. 358, passed 8-20-12)
§ 34.04 RIGHTS OF PERSON CHARGED.
   (A)   A person charged with an ordinance or a code violation is entitled to
a trial before a court unless that person waives the right to trial and enters
an admission of the violation with the Violations Clerk. Upon an admission, the
Clerk shall assess and collect the penalty prescribed in the Schedule of Civil
Penalties.
   (B)   A person charged with a violation may exercise the right to trial by
appearing before the Violations Clerk and denying the violation or by entering
a written denial with the Violations Clerk.
(Ord. 358, passed 8-20-12)
§ 34.05 PROSECUTION.
   If a person: denies a violation under this chapter; fails to satisfy civil
penalty assessed by the Violations Clerk after having entered an admission of
violation; or fails to deny or admit a violation, the Clerk shall report this
fact to the person responsible for prosecuting ordinance and code violations
for the town, and proceedings in court against the violator shall then be
initiated for the alleged ordinance or code violation.
(Ord. 358, passed 8-20-12)
§ 34.06 ADMISSION DOES NOT CONSTITUTE JUDGMENT.
   (A)   The admission of an ordinance violation under this chapter does not
constitute a judgment for the purposes of I.C. 33-37, and ordinance violation
costs may not be collected from a defendant under I.C. 33-37-4.
   (B)   An ordinance violation processed under this chapter may not be
considered for the purposes of I.C. 33-37-7-5 or 33-7-7-6 in determining the
percentage of ordinance violations prosecuted in certain courts.
(Ord. 358, passed 8-20-12)
§ 34.07 SUMS COLLECTED.
   All sums collected by the Violations Clerk as civil penalties for ordinance
violations shall be accounted for and paid to the municipal corporation as
provided by law.
(Ord. 358, passed 8-20-12)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SEWERS
      
51.   WATER
CHAPTER 50: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Public sewer use required
   
50.03   Private wastewater disposal
   
50.04   Tampering with wastewater facilities
   
50.05   Removal of town from the jurisdiction of the state Utility Regulatory
Commission
   
50.06   Utility policy and procedure relating to customer social security
numbers
Building Sewers and Connections
   
50.15   Permit required for connection
   
50.16   Costs to be borne by owner
   
50.17   Separate building sewer for each building
   
50.18   Construction specifications
   
50.19   Lifting of building drains
   
50.20   Connections of surface runoff or groundwater; connection to private
sewage disposal system
   
50.21   Connections to be gaslight and watertight
   
50.22   Superintendent to be notified when building sewer ready for inspection
   
50.23   Excavations to be guarded
Use of Public Sewers
   
50.35   Discharge of unpolluted waters
   
50.36   Prohibited discharges
   
50.37   Limitations on substances, waters and wastes
   
50.38   Actions by Superintendent
   
50.39   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
50.40   Structure for observation, sampling and measurement of wastes
   
50.41   Information that may be required of user
   
50.42   Measurements, tests and analyses
   
50.43   Special agreements
Rates and Charges
   
50.55   Purpose
   
50.56   Definitions
   
50.57   Operation, maintenance and replacement fund
   
50.58   Rates schedule
   
50.59   Billing procedures; delinquency
   
50.60   Report of wastewater characteristics; revision of rates
   
50.61   Dispute of charges
   
50.62   Annual review of charges
Administration and Enforcement
   
50.75   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
50.76   Notice of violation
   
50.77   Liability for expense, loss or damage
 
   
50.99   Penalty
   GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20ºC, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BOARD OF WORKS. The Town Council or its authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others, including but not limited to right of access to the property's sewer
line.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater from industrial processes, trade, or
business as distinct from domestic sanitary wastes.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse,
pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTES. Sanitary wastes which do not exceed 250 mg/1 BOD or
250 mg/1 SS or 40 mg/1 Ammonia in strength.
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit obtained from the State of Indiana by the Sewage
Works to discharge treated wastewaters of the Sewage Works into a watercourse.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen-ion
concentration of 10-7.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than ½ inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer or other wastewater facility controlled by a
governmental agency or public utility.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together
with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not
admitted intentionally.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is “wastewater.”
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SLUDGE. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection
system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   STORM DRAIN. A drain for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or
unpolluted water from any source.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment Works of the
town, the certified operator, or the authorized deputy, agent, or
representative of either.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface
of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in “Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater” and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
   TOXIC SUBSTANCES. Concentrations of a pollutant or combination of pollutants
defined in standards issued pursuant to Section 307 of the Clean Water Act,
being 33 USC 1317.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment, and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of
the effluent.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with “waste treatment plant” or “wastewater treatment plant” or
“water pollution control plant.”
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
§ 50.02 PUBLIC SEWER USE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property with the town,
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any wastewater or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
   (D)   The town hereby requires all properties located within the town with
improvements containing facilities that produce or are able to produce sewage,
wastewater, or similar wastes, to be connected to the town’s sanitary sewer
system, provided an available sanitary sewer is located within 300 feet of the
property line. The property owner(s) of all such properties shall connect such
property to the town's public sanitary sewer system. The town shall issue a
notice to connect by certified mail to the property owner at the address of the
property, at least 90 days before the date specified for connection in the
notice. This section shall not apply to any properties that produce sewage,
wastewater, or similar waste through facilities located more than 800 feet from
an available sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98; Am. Ord. 275, passed 2-15-00; Am. Ord. 278, passed
3-13-00; Am. Ord. 281, passed 5-8-00)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.03 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 50.02(D), the building sewer shall be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the Sewage Works, which the applicant shall supplement with any
plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the
superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of $100 shall be paid to the Sewage
Works at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. The Superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within 120 hours of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all provisions of the State of Indiana. No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet
directly or indirectly via field tile, storm drain or any other conveyance
other than a public sanitary sewer.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in § 50.02(D), a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer within 90 days in compliance with
this chapter. At such time, the private wastewater disposal system shall be
abandoned, which in the case of aseptic system means that the septic tank must
be disconnected from the building sewer and rendered inoperable by being filled
with sand.
   (F)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the town.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98; Am. Ord. 275, passed 2-15-00)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.04 TAMPERING WITH WASTEWATER FACILITIES.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct, criminal mischief, and theft. Any person violating this provision
shall also be subject to a fine as provided in § 50.99(A).
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.05 REMOVAL OF TOWN FROM THE JURISDICTION OF THE STATE UTILITY REGULATORY
COMMISSION.
   Pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-3-9.1, the municipally- owned water utility of the
town is hereby removed from the jurisdiction of the state Utility Regulatory
Commission for the approval of rates and charges and of the issuance of stocks,
bonds, notes, or other evidence of indebtedness. The Clerk-Treasurer shall mail
written notice of the withdrawal from state Utility Regulatory Commission
jurisdiction to the Commission within 30 days after this ordinance becomes
effective.
(Ord. 341. passed 9-21-09)
§ 50.06 UTILITY POLICY AND PROCEDURE RELATING TO CUSTOMER SOCIAL SECURITY
NUMBERS.
   (A)   Applicants for utility services, to be provided by the town’s water
utility and/or sewage works, will be asked and expected to provide, on their
application, their complete social security number, along with valid contact
information and other information needed by the town in order to identify the
applicant and the property for which they are requesting service.
   (B)   An applicant for utility services, to be provided by the town’s water
utility and/or sewage works, as an alternative to providing their social
security number, may instead: 1) provide their driver’s license number; and 2)
pay a deposit in the amount of $125 for sewer service and $125 for water
service. Those deposits shall be in addition to all other deposits required by
the town. Those deposits shall be held by the town for as long as the applicant
remains a customer of the town’s water utility and/or sewage works and will be
returned when service is terminated and all utility charges paid in full. If a
customer fails to pay to the town, on time, any recurring or nonrecurring
utility charges, the town may apply the amounts on deposit against the
customer’s past due balance and that customer will be required to replenish
(deposit again) the amount applied as a condition of continued service.
(Ord. 407, passed 11-19-18)
Cross reference:
   Town’s responsibility regarding utility customer social security numbers, §
51.11
   BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 50.15 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONNECTION.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections or disturb
any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the Superintendent. Permission shall be subject to the existence of
sufficient hydraulic and/or treatment capacities of the sewerage and/or waste
water treatment facilities as determined by the Sewage Works.
   (B)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (1) for
residential and commercial service, and (2) for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner(s) or his or her agent
shall make application on a special form furnished by the sewage works. The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in judgment of the Superintendent. A permit
and inspection fee of $50 for residential or commercial building sewer permit
shall be paid to the sewage works at the time the application is filed. If more
than one inspection visit is required for the same residential or commercial
building sewer permit, the owner shall pay $25 for each additional inspection
visit. The owner applying for an industrial building sewer permit shall pay a
permit and inspection fee equal to the actual cost of reviewing the wastewater
related construction plans and inspecting the wastewater facilities during
construction. The owner shall submit, at the time the application is filed, a
permit and inspection fee deposit of $500 for an industrial building sewer
permit.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98; Am. Ord. 287, passed 11-13-00)
§ 50.16 COSTS TO BE BORNE BY OWNER.
   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
Sewage Works from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
§ 50.17 SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER FOR EACH BUILDING.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front
building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one
building sewer, but the sewage works does not and will not assume any
obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such
single connection aforementioned. Except for the grinder pumps installed as
part of the initial installation of the town's sewer collection system, grinder
pumps shall be limited to serving only a single property.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98; Am. Ord. 287, passed 11-13-00)
§ 50.18 CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   Each new user connecting to the town's wastewater treatment works shall be
responsible for installing and connecting their own building sewer to the
public sewer at the connection point provided by the town in accordance with
the specifications of the town. A public sewer may only be tapped by an
employee or contractor of the town. The size, slope, alignment, materials of
construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all
conform to the materials and procedures set forth below. The appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9, and all Indiana
statutes and regulations pertaining to such construction matters shall apply to
matters not specified below.
   (A)   Gravity piping specifications.
      (1)   All house sewers shall be 4 inch schedule 40 or SDR 35 PVC pipe
conforming to ASTM D-3034. Joints shall be bell and spigot with elastomeric
rubber gasket as recommended and supplied by the pipe manufacturer and in
accordance with ASTM D-3212.
      (2)   The point of commencement for laying of sewer pipe shall be from
the grinder pump station. Lay the pipe with the bell of the pipe pointing
upgrade. Lay each pipe on an even firm bed as specified so that no uneven
strain will come to any part of the pipe. Particular care shall be exercised to
prevent the pipes from bearing on the sockets.
      (3)   This section shall apply to new construction only. If the
installation of the gravity line to the grinder pump is for a dual service of
two homes, the second new service placed shall place a “Y” connection fitting
within 10 feet of the grinder pump station to allow the second home access to
the utility. The “Y” shall be of bell and spigot design. The connection to the
existing lateral of a home shall be made with a fernco coupling.
      (4)   Completely shove home all pipe to the assembly mark.
      (5)   The width of the trench at and below the top of the sanitary sewer
shall be only as wide as necessary for proper installation and backfilling.
      (6)   Bell holes shall be excavated for bell and spigot pipe so that the
entire barrel of the pipe rests on the bedding.
      (7)   Whenever pipe trenches are excavated below the designed bedding
bottom, the contractor shall fill the over-excavation with mechanically
compacted No. 8 (¼ inch to ¾ inch) crushed stone.
      (8)   All rock, boulders and stones four inches in diameter and larger
encountered in trenches shall be removed. Boulders or rocks are not to be used
for trench backfill.
      (9)   The following materials shall be used to backfill the trenches:
Course sands and gravel with maximum particle size of 1½ inch, including
variously graded sand and gravel containing small percentages of fines,
generally granular and noncohesive, either wet or dry.
      (10)   A minimum four-inch diameter pipe cleanout shall be installed
within three feet of the outside building wall. A plug specified by the pipe
manufacturer shall be used to ensure 100% water-tightness.
      (11)   Minimum slope of the pipe shall be inch per foot; normal slope
shall be ¼ inch per foot.
      (12)   Building lateral minimum size shall be four inches.
      (13)   Minimum cover over the pipe shall be four feet.
   (B)   Pressure piping specifications.
      (1)   High Density Polyethylene Pipe (HDPE). HDPE pipe shall be made from
virgin resins exhibiting a cell classification of 3454440 as defined in ASTM D
3350. The pipe supplied under this specification shall have a nominal IPS (Iron
Pipe Size) OD unless otherwise indicated. The Dimension Ratio (DR) of all pipe
shall be DR 11 unless otherwise noted.
      (2)   HDPE pipe shall be joined by the butt fusion process into
continuous lengths or shall be supplied to the project site in a roll. If field
joints are require the joining method shall be the heat fusion method and shall
be performed in strict accordance with the pipe manufacturer's recommendations.
      (3)   Properly executed electrofusion fittings may be used. Extrusion
welding or hot gas welding of HDPE pipe shall not be used for pressure pipe
applications. Mechanical joint adaptors, flanges, unions, grooved couplers,
transition fittings, and some mechanical couplings may be used to mechanically
connect HDPE pipe. Contractor shall refer to the manufacturer's recommendations
in regards to mechanical connections.
      (4)   HDPE fittings shall be made in accordance with ASTM D 3261. The
fittings shall be fully pressure rated and provide a working pressure equal to
that of the pipe with an included 2:1 safety factor. The fittings shall be
manufactured from the same resin type and cell classification as the pipe
itself. The fittings shall be homogeneous throughout and free from cracks,
holes, foreign inclusions, voids, or other injurious defects.
      (5)   The installation of the piping shall be as outlined under the
gravity piping specification.
      (6)   A tracer cable shall be installed for all nonferrous forcemain that
is installed. The cable shall be brought to the surface and attached to a sign
noting “Sanitary Forcemain” at all permanent structures or every 1000 lf of
running pipe, including services. On directionally drilled forcemain, three
tracer cables shall be pulled back with the pipe and tested for conductivity.
The tracer cable requirement shall apply to service lines to small grinder pump
stations, but no signage will be required for the service lines to the small
grinder pump stations. However, the tracer cable shall be accessible at the
grinder pump station covers.
   (C)   Grinder pump stations. The grinder pumps that will be allowed are as
manufactured by Barnes Crane, Barnes Pressure Sewer Systems, 1485 Lexington
Ave., Mansfield, Ohio 44907-2674, (419) 774-1524. No other pumping system will
be allowed to be installed. The Clerk-Treasurer and the Public Works
Superintendent shall maintain the ordering information for the following
required grinder pump equipment:
 
Barnes Part No.    Description
102776          Grinder Pump, model SGPC 1024L, 15' M CVP
107226          ULTRACAV Station, 24X90SSRS with 36" ballast support flange and
                float tree level control
                Simplex control panel, NEMA 4X fiberglass with alarm light and
102627A         horn, silence switch, control circuit breaker and redundant
                start
 
   (D)   Electrical service.
      (1)   The electrical service for the grinder pump shall be independent of
the power supply for the lot and shall have the control panel mounted on a 6x6
10-foot long pressure treated pole. The control panel shall be connected to the
grinder pump station with the wiring that is provided by the manufacturer of
the grinder pump unit. The length of the wire that will be required shall be
identified by the lot owner prior to ordering of the grinder station. The wire
shall be placed in a 1-inch diameter PVC conduit. The control panel shall be
connected to a 60 amp, 240 volt, 1 phase, 3 wire, with ground lugs, Nema 3R
fused disconnect switch, fused at 20A-LPN, that shall be placed on a REMC power
pole with a weather head extending up the pole. A 1-inch by 10-foot long
copperweld ground rod shall be installed at the base of the disconnect switch
location, with a #8 copper ground wire connected to the ground bus/neutral of
the main disconnect switch. The ground wire shall be placed in a 1-inch PVC
conduit to below grade. The wiring shall be three #8 in 1-inch schedule 40 PVC
conduit to the weather head with four-foot leads. The REMC shall make the final
power connection. The wire between the control panel and the disconnect switch
shall be three #12 in a 1-inch PVC conduit up to 220 feet from control panel to
power pole or three #10 in a 1-inch PVC conduit up to 400 feet from control
panel to power pole. All penetrations into the control panel and the fused
disconnect switch will be sealed for vapor and moisture penetration.
      (2)   Exterior buried cable and conduit shall be identified by a
continuous brightly colored plastic tape approximately 6" wide and 4 mils
thick. Tape shall be printed to most accurately describe type of service. Allen
“Detect/Tape”, Reef “Terra Tape”, Thomas & Betts “Protect-A-Line,” or approved
equal. During back-filling/top-soiling of each exterior underground electrical
cable, a continuous underground-type plastic line marker shall be installed,
located directly over the buried line at 6" to 8" below finished grade. Where
multiple small lines are buried in a common trench and do not exceed an overall
width of 16", a single line marker shall be installed. A line marker shall be
installed for every buried cable, regardless of whether direct buried or
protected in conduit.
   (E)   Drains. All drains, except storm drains, shall be connected to the
sanitary sewer from the house.
   (F)   Inspections. All sewer connections shall be inspected by an official
of the town before final connection to the main sewer. Such inspections shall
be performed by the personnel specified within this chapter.
   (G)   Easement. If the property to be served requires the installation of a
grinder pump, upon completion, inspection, and approval of the installation of
the grinder pump and related facilities, the town shall accept dedication of an
easement from the property owner and assume ownership and maintenance
responsibility for the grinder pump station and the sewer line running from the
grinder pump to the public sewer, and such dedicated wastewater facilities
shall become public sewers oft he town. The town shall not be responsible for
the grinder pump and related facilities unless the property owner has provided
a recordable easement in a form acceptable by the town.
   (H)   Septic system. Upon connection to the public sewer, if a septic system
was previously used on the property, the property owner shall comply with the
Indiana Department of Environment Management requirements that all septic tanks
be pumped out by an Indiana State Department of Health licensed waste hauler.
If the septic tank is left in the ground, it shall be filled with pea gravel,
sand, or other similar inert material, which may require the crushing or
removal of the lid. The abandonment of the existing septic tank system shall be
completed within 90 days of the approval of the connection to the municipal
system.
   (I)   Adjustments to technical requirements. The inspecting official for the
town shall have the latitude to make minor adjustments in the technical
requirements of the ordinance for cases of existing conditions that are beyond
the control of the property owner. The minimum level of construction practices
will be the standard set by the BOCA pumping code, current edition. The
inspecting official shall have no latitude regarding the technical requirements
for connections to new structures. In cases where the minimum standards are not
going to be met, the permit shall identify the reasons and the construction
variances that will occur due to existing condition issues. All changes in the
above mentioned technical requirements shall be approved by the town inspecting
official prior to commencement of construction.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98; Am. Ord. 275, passed 2-15-00; Am. Ord. 283, passed
5-22-00; Am. Ord. 287, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 301, passed 2-20-01)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.19 LIFTING OF BUILDING DRAINS.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In any buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
§ 50.20 CONNECTIONS OF SURFACE RUNOFF OR GROUNDWATER; CONNECTION TO PRIVATE
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
   (A)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains, sump pumps, basement or yard drains, or other sources of
surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Any such connection to a private sewage disposal system which existed
prior to the availability of public sewers shall be removed from the building
sewer prior to connection with the public sewer.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.21 CONNECTIONS TO BE GASTIGHT AND WATERTIGHT.
   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules
and regulations of the town, or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper
testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Superintendent before installation.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.22 SUPERINTENDENT TO BE NOTIFIED WHEN BUILDING SEWER READY FOR INSPECTION.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent or his or her representative. The applicant shall provide access
to all structures (and areas of structures) to the Superintendent for the
purpose of establishing compliance with
§ 50.20.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.23 EXCAVATIONS TO BE GUARDED.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
Penalty, see § 50.99
   USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 50.35 DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WATERS.
   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters
such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, sump pumps,
basement or yard drain, or cooling water to any sewer, except stormwater runoff
from limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times, may be
discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the Superintendent.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
§ 50.36 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
   (B)   Any waters containing toxic substances or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes
to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process including but not
limited to causing the Sewage Works to violate its N.P.D.E.S. permit,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant.
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than six or higher than nine or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works.
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to,
ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.37 LIMITATIONS ON SUBSTANCES, WATERS AND WASTES.
   The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be
limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or
equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not
otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The
Superintendent may set limitations lower than the limitations established in
the regulations below if in his or her opinion such more severe limitations are
necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his or her opinion as to the
acceptability, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as
the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater
treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions
on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the
sanitary sewer, which shall not be violated without approval of the
Superintendent, are as follows:
   (A)   Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150º F. (65º C.);
   (B)   Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum
oil, non biodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin;
   (C)   Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fats, or
grease;
   (D)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see § 50.01). Garbage
grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where
garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of
consumption on the premises or when served by caterers;
   (E)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material
received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials;
   (F)   Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding
limits which may be established by the Superintendent;
   (G)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
   (H)   Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a
“sludge” as defined herein;
   (I)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters;
   (J)   Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes
in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids
which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious
to structures and treatment processes;
   (K)   Any water or wastes subject to the categorical pretreatment standards
pursuant to 40 CFR 403 (etc.);
   (L)   Any water or wastes exceed the following parameters:
      (1)   BOD5         250 mg/1
      (2)   SS         250 mg/1
      (3)   Ammonia      40 mg/1
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.38 ACTIONS BY SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in
§ 50.37 of this chapter, and which in the judgment of the Superintendent, may
have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment,
or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge and/or;
      (4)   Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing sewer charges under the provisions of §§ 50.55
through 50.62.
   (B)   When considering the above alternatives, the Superintendent shall give
consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger. If
the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Superintendent.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
§ 50.39 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in
§ 50.37(C), or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except
that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the Superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the
owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by
appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the
dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the Superintendent.
Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner(s)
personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
   (B)   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at his expense.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
§ 50.40 STRUCTURE FOR OBSERVATION, SAMPLING AND MEASUREMENT OF WASTES.
   (A)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances
in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of
the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.41 INFORMATION THAT MAY BE REQUIRED OF USER.
   The Superintendent may require a user of sewer services to provide
information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. These
requirements may include:
   (A)   Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period;
   (B)   Chemical analyses of wastewaters;
   (C)   Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality;
   (D)   Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or
other materials important to sewer use control;
   (E)   A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location;
   (F)   Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities;
   (G)   Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewers.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
§ 50.42 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES.
   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater published by the American Public Health Association.
Sampling methods, location, times, durations, and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Superintendent.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
§ 50.43 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Sewage Works and
any user whereby a waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the Sewage Works for treatment.
   (B)   Any wastes described in § 50.36(A) and (B) of this chapter are
precluded from such agreements.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
   RATES AND CHARGES
§ 50.55 PURPOSE.
    It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the town to
collect charges from all users who contribute wastewater, or will contribute
wastewater, to the treatment works. The proceeds of such charges so derived
will be used for the purpose of operating and maintaining the treatment works.
(Ord. 249, passed 5-11-98)
§ 50.56 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation or organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20ºC, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/1).
   COMMERCIAL USER. All retail stores, restaurants, office buildings,
laundries, and other private business and service establishments.
   CONNECTIONS OF INITIAL CUSTOMERS. Each lot, parcel of real property, or
building included in the design and construction of the original collection
system of the town as a property to be connected to the original collection
system of the town immediately upon completion of construction of the original
collection system of the town. CONNECTIONS OF INITIAL CUSTOMERS shall also mean
each lot, parcel of real property, or building connected to a grinder pump
station installed as part of the initial installation of the town’s sewer
collection system.
   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Includes legislative, judicial, administrative, and
regulatory activities of federal, state and local governments.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any non-governmental, non-residential user of publicly
owned treatment works which is identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and
supplemented, under the following divisions; Division A-Agriculture, Forestry,
and Fishing; Division B-Mining; Division D-Manufacturing; Division E-
Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary; and Division I-
Services.
   INITIAL CUSTOMER. The owner or owners of each lot, parcel of real property,
or building included in the design and construction of the original collection
system of the town as a property to be connected to the original collection
system of the town immediately upon completion of construction of the original
collection system of the town.
   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Includes social, charitable, religious, and educational
activities such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes, penal
institutions and similar institutional users.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. Wastewater that has a BOD concentration of not
more than 25 mg/1 and a suspended solids concentration of not more than 3.0 mg/
1 and an ammonia concentration of not more than 3.0 mg/1.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Those functions that result in expenditures
during the useful life of the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities
and other items which are necessary for managing and which such works were
designed and constructed. The term includes “replacement” as defined below in
this section.
   ORIGINAL COLLECTION SYSTEM OF THE TOWN. The sewage works collection system
constructed to serve the households and businesses inside the corporate limits
of the town and substantially completed in the year 2000.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. Any contributor to the treatment works whose lot, parcel
of real estate, or building is used for domestic dwelling purposes only.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SS (denoting SUSPENDED SOLIDS). Solids that either float on the surface of
or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable
by laboratory filtering.
   TREATMENT WORKS. Any devices and systems for the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or liquid
industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage
collection systems, pumping, power, and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extensions improvement, remodeling, additions and alterations
thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as
standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works, including
site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment
process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such
treatment (including land for composting sludge, temporary storage of such
compost and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment
systems before land application); or any other method or system for preventing,
abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of municipal
waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined storm water and sanitary
sewer systems.
   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which a treatment works will be
operated.
   USER. Any and all persons (natural or artificial), including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity user that uses the
town's treatment works.
   USER CHARGE. That portion of the total wastewater service charge which is
levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement of the treatment works and for the repayment of its
debt.
   WATER METER. A water volume measuring and recording device, furnished and/or
installed by a user and approved by the town.
(Ord. 249, passed 5-11-98; Am. Ord. 286, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 287, passed
11-13-00; Am. Ord. 299, passed 3-5-01)
§ 50.57 OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT FUND.
   (A)   The revenues collected, as a result of the user charges levied, shall
be deposited in a separate nonreverting fund know as the Operation, Maintenance
and Replacement Fund.
   (B)   Fiscal year-end balances in the operation, maintenance, and
replacement fund shall be used for no other purposes than those designated.
Monies which have been transferred from other sources to meet temporary
shortages in the operation, maintenance and replacement fund shall be returned
to their respective accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the user charge
rates for operation, maintenance and replacement. The user charge rate(s) shall
be adjusted such that the transferred monies will be returned to their
respective accounts within six months of the fiscal year in which the monies
were borrowed.
(Ord. 249, passed 5-11-98)
§ 50.58 RATES SCHEDULE.
   (A)   For the use of, and for the service rendered by the treatment works,
rates and charges shall be collected from the owner or occupier of each and
every lot whose premises are served by the treatment works, or connected or to
be connected with the treatment works, or otherwise discharges sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes, water or other liquids, either directly or indirectly, into
the treatment works of the town. If a lot, parcel of land, or building is
occupied by someone other than the owner, the owner shall be jointly and
severally liable for the charges incurred by the occupant. Such rates and
charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in an amount
determined as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Except as herein otherwise provided, each user shall pay for the
services provided by the treatment works based on the amount of water used on
the property as determined by water meter readings (or other appropriate
methods) acceptable to the Town Council, plus a user and debt service charge as
hereinafter set forth.
   (C)   For industrial, institutional and commercial users, monthly user
charges will be based on either actual water usage or a flat monthly charge, or
a combination thereof. If a commercial, institutional, or industrial user has
an unusually high amount of consumptive use of water, or, in some other manner,
uses an unusually high amount of water which is not discharged into the
wastewater collection system, the user may request that the Town Council
authorize the user charge for that user to be based on readings of a wastewater
meter(s) or separate water meter(s) installed and maintained at the user's
expense.
   (D)   (1)   Each user shall pay a user charge rate for operation and
maintenance, replacement and debt service, according to schedule that follows.
The monthly volume charge shall be based upon the quantity of water used per
month, as measured by the water meter there in use and as applied in 1,000
gallon increments. For users inside the town limits, charges shall be effective
upon connection of the property to the treatment works or expiration of the
time period provided in the notice to connect, whichever first occurs.
      (2)   The rates and charges shown on the schedule set forth in
subdivision (D)(3) of this section are just and equitable fees as required to
maintain the sewage works in the sound physical and financial condition
necessary to render adequate and efficient service and sufficient to:
         (a)   Pay all expenses incidental to the operation of the works,
including legal expenses, maintenance costs, operating charges, repairs, lease
rentals, and interest charges on bonds or other obligations;
         (b)   Provide the sinking fund required by I.C. 39-9-23-21;
         (c)   Provide adequate money to be used as working capital; and
         (d)   Provide adequate money for improving and replacing the works.
      (3)   The following schedule of rates and charges is hereby approved and
adopted.
SEWAGE WORKS
                                                         Schedule of Rates and Charges
                                                                                                   Rates
                                                         Initial customers
                                                            Monthly service charge – per user $69.32
                                                            Monthly volume charge – per 1,000 $5.75
Metered rates – Inside /town limits                    gallons
                                                         Non-initial customers
                                                            Monthly service charge – per user $36.50
                                                            Monthly volume charge – per 1,000 $5.75
                                                         gallons
Nineveh Conservancy District (wholesale rate)            Nineveh rate – per 1,000 gallons        $5.32
Metered rates – Outside town limits (excluding Nineveh First 3,000 gallons – per 1,000 gallons $5.75
Conservancy)                                             Over 3,000 gallons – per 1,000 gallons  $5.75
 
                                                                        Rates
                                                                5/
                                                                8 inch  $60.42
                                                                meter
                                                                3/
                                                                4 inch  $86.23
                                                                meter
                                                                1 inch  $172.47
                                                                meter
                                                                1-1/
                                                                4 inch  $215.61
                                                                meter
                                                                1-1/
                                                          Size  2 inch  $301.85
Minimum charge – outside town limits (excluding Nineveh of    meter
Conservancy)                                              meter 2 inch  $517.47
                                                                meter
                                                                3 inch  $905.55
                                                                meter
                                                                4 inch  $1,379.88
                                                                meter
                                                                6 inch  $2,716.57
                                                                meter
                                                                8 inch  $4,527.67
                                                                meter
                                                                10 inch $6,942.39
                                                                meter
                                                                12 inch $9,831.47
                                                                meter
Returned check charge: A charge of $20, plus the amount charged by the town’s
bank, shall be assessed to all customers who pay their account with a check that
is not honored by the bank
The percentage differences in rates for users whose property served is inside v.
outside the town corporate boundaries:
Volume charge for users inside town limits                       $5.75
Volume charge for users outside town limits                      $5.75  0%
Volume charge for users in Nineveh Conservancy                   $5.32  (7.47%)
Minimum service charge for users inside town limits              $69.32
Minimum service charge for users outside town limits             $60.42 (12.83%)
 
      (4)   Credits. Water that is used to irrigate or sprinkle yards or to
fill swimming pools is not discharged into the town's sanitary sewer system.
Accordingly, the town makes available to customers of its sewage works the
flowing credits:
         (a)   Yard sprinkling credit.
            1.   The current owner or occupant of real estate served by the
town's sewage works must apply for a sprinkling credit prior to May 1 of the
calendar year for which the credit is sought. If application for the sprinkling
credit is not made prior to May 1st, the credit will not apply until the
following calendar year. Applications for subsequent years will not be required
unless ownership or possession of the property changes.
            2.   For those customers who apply for a sprinkling credit
(eligible customers), the monthly water usage recorded for their property for
the prior months of October through April will be averaged (the winter
average). For eligible customers who have not owned or occupied their property
beginning with the prior October 1, the winter average shall be deemed to be
6,000 gallons for the following year.
            3.   Then, for the months of May through September (bills for which
are printed and mailed in June through October), eligible customers will be
billed for water usage equal to their winter average plus 2,000 gallons. This
amendment shall be effective as of May 1, 2008.
            4.   New or existing sewage works customers may apply for a “sod
credit” against their monthly sewer charge. The sod credit shall be for a
maximum of 60 days or two billing cycles. To be eligible for the sod credit,
customers must apply in writing, and the customer must state they are
installing new sod for a new home or are replacing their entire yard with new
sod. Credit can be made for usage in excess of 9,000 gallons during a 60-day
period or two billing cycles, unless customer history supports a normal usage
greater than 9,000 gallons during such billing cycle, in which event, no credit
shall be given.
         (b)   Pool credit. Customers shall make yearly written application for
a “pool credit.” Such application shall include the dimensions of the pool to
be filled and the month in which the pool will be filled. The customer's
average usage shall be checked to verify that the pool was actually filled and
the calculated amount of water was used. If not, the pool credit is disallowed.
      (5)   Effective immediately after a contract for the construction of
sewage works has been let and actual work has commenced, each user inside the
corporate limits shall pay an interim charge for interest on the revenue bonds
and other expenses payable before the completion of the work on a flat fee
basis, according to the following schedule:
 
Interim Charge                Monthly Charge
Users inside corporate limits $3.50
 
      (6)   Connection fee. Based on the town’s utility superintendent’s
estimates of costs incurred by the town to make a physical connection to the
town’s sewage works collection system, the Council hereby sets the new
connection fee for all future sewage works connections, made after December 31,
2022, at $1,800.
   (E)   For those users whose wastewater has a greater strength than normal
domestic sewage, a surcharge in addition to the normal user charge, will be
collected. The surcharge for operation and maintenance including replacement
is:
      $ 0.20 per pound BOD, in excess of 250 mg/l
      $ 0.20 per pound SS, in excess of 250 mg/l
      $ 0.60 per pound Ammonia, in excess of 40 mg/l
   (F)   Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants (as defined in the
Sewer Use Ordinance) which cause an increase in the cost of managing the
effluent of the sludge from the treatment works, or any user which discharges
any substance which singly or by interaction with other substances causes
identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance or replacement of
the treatment works, shall pay for such increased costs. The charge to each
such user shall be as determined by the appropriate financial personnel and
approved by the Town Council.
   (G)   The user charge rates established in this section apply to all users
of the treatment works.
   (H)   In the event a property served by the town's treatment works is
transferred to a new owner between meter readings, the user charges shall be
pro-rated to the date of transfer as shown in the records of the County
Auditor.
   (I)   New service deposits.
      (1)   As a condition of establishing new service, after December 31,
2022, the user of property to be served by the town’s sewage works shall be
required to deposit $75. The deposit, less any outstanding penalties and
service fees, shall be refunded to the depositor after a notarized statement
from the depositor that as of a certain date the property being served:
         (a)   Has been conveyed or transferred to another person; or
         (b)   No longer uses or is connected with any part of the town’s
sewage works.
      (2)   Any such statement must include the name and address of the person
to whom the property is conveyed or transferred.
      (3)   If a depositor, within 60 days after the termination of the
depositor’s use or ownership of the property served, fails to pay to the town’s
sewage works all costs and fees owed, the depositor forfeits the depositor’s
deposit and all accrued interest. The forfeited amount shall be applied to the
depositor’s outstanding fees. Any excess that remains due after application of
the forfeiture may be collected by the town as permitted by I.C. 36-9-23-31 and
I.C. 36-9-23-32. A deposit may be used to satisfy all or part of any judgment
awarded the municipality. As a condition of maintaining service, any customer
whose deposit is applied by the town toward any past due amounts owed, shall,
immediately, replenish their deposit.
(Ord. 249, passed 5-11-98; Am. Ord. 286, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 287, passed
11-13-00; Am. Ord. 299, passed 3-5-01; Am. Ord. 355, passed 7-16-12; Am. Ord.
390, passed 3-20-17; Am. Ord. 410, passed 11-19-18; Am. Ord. 2022-10, passed
12-19-22)
§ 50.59 BILLING PROCEDURES; DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   All users shall be billed monthly. Billings for any particular month
shall be made within five days after the end of the month. Payments are due
within 15 days after the end of the month. Any payment not received within 15
days after the end of the month shall be delinquent. If the last day of the 15-
day period is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday under state statute, or a
day the billing office is closed during regular business hours, the period runs
until the end of the next day that is not a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the billing office is closed.
   (B)   The town will assess a late payment penalty of 10% of the amount of
the delinquent rates and charges. Rates and charges not received by the town
within 15 days after they become due are delinquent. The amount of the fee, the
penalty, and a reasonable attorney's fee may be recovered by the town in a
civil action in the name of the town.
   (C)   If a fee is not paid within one monthly billing cycle after it is due,
the utility shall send notice to the delinquent user stating:
      (1)   The delinquent amount due, together with any penalty;
      (2)   That water service may be disconnected if the user continues not to
pay the delinquency and any penalty; and
      (3)   The procedure for resolving disputed bills.
   (D)   Sewer fees assessed against real property, under I.C. 36-9-23,
constitute a lien against the property assessed. A lien attaches against real
property occupied by someone other than the owner only if the town notifies the
owner not later than 20 days after the time the utility fees become 60 days
delinquent. A notice sent to the owner must be sent by first class mail or by
certified mail, return receipt requested (or an equivalent service permitted
under I.C. 1-1-7-1) to: (1) the owner of record of real property with a single
owner; or (2) at least one of the owners of real property with multiple owners;
at the last address of the owner for the property as indicated in the records
of the County Auditor on the date of the notice of the delinquency, or to
another address specified by the owner, in a written notice to the utility, at
which the owner requests to receive a notice of delinquency under this
division. The cost of sending notice under this division is an administrative
cost that may be billed to the owner.
   (E)   Payment of a disputed bill and penalties by a user does not constitute
a waiver of rights to subsequently claim and recover from the town sums
improperly charged to the user.
   (F)   If the user fails to pay the delinquent amount or otherwise resolve
the charges, the utility of the town shall give written notice to the water
utility serving the user to discontinue water service to the premises
designated in the notice until notified otherwise. The notice shall identify
the delinquent sewer user in enough detail to enable the water utility to
identify the water service connection that is to be terminated. Upon receipt of
the notice, the water utility shall disconnect water service to the user.
   (G)   Water service may not be shut off under this section if a local board
of health has found and certified to the town that the termination of water
service will endanger the health of the user and others in the town.
   (H)   Except as provided in the following divisions (1) and (2) hereof, the
utility shall enforce the payment of the charges and penalties assessed under
this chapter.
      (1)   The utility may defer enforcing the collection of unpaid fees and
penalties assessed under this chapter until the unpaid fees and penalties have
been due and unpaid for at least 90 days;
      (2)   The Town Council may write off a fee or penalty that is for less
than $40.
   (I)   Fees and charges for sewer services assessed against real property
constitute a lien against the property assessed.
   (J)   The utility shall at least once each calendar year prepare a lien list
of the delinquent charges and penalties that are enforceable under this
section, which must include:
      (1)   The name or names of the owner or owners of each lot or parcel of
real property on which fees are delinquent;
      (2)   The description of the premises, as shown by the records of the
County Auditor; and
      (3)   The amount of the delinquent fees, together with the previously
assessed penalty, a service charge of $5, the applicable recording fee, and the
applicable release fee.
   (K)   The utility shall record a copy of each lien list with the County
Recorder and shall pay the applicable recording fee. The utility shall then
mail to each property owner on the lien list a notice stating that a lien
against the owner's property has been recorded.
   (L)   Using the lien lists prepared under division (J) and recorded under
division (K), after September 1 of the preceding calendar year and before
September 1 of the current calendar year, the utility shall before December 15
of each year certify to the County Auditor a list of the liens that remain
unpaid for collection in the next May.
   (M)   The utility shall release any recorded lien when the delinquent fees,
penalties, service charges, and recording and release fees have been fully
paid.
   (N)   After the date of certification in each year, the utility shall not
collect or accept delinquent fees, penalties, service charges, recording fees,
or certification fees from property owners whose property has been certified to
the County Auditor.
   (O)   If the property is conveyed before the lien can be filed, the utility
shall notify the person who owned the property at the time the fee became
payable. The notice must inform the person that payment, including penalty fees
for delinquencies, is due not less than 15 days after the date of the notice.
   (P)   The utility shall release:
      (1)   Liens filed with the County Recorder after the recorded date of
conveyance of the property; and
      (2)   Delinquent fees incurred by the seller;
upon receipt of a verified demand in writing from the purchaser stating that
the delinquent fees were not incurred by the purchaser as a user, lessee, or
previous owner, and that the purchaser has not been paid by the seller for the
delinquent fees.
(Ord. 249, passed 5-11-98; Am. Ord. 286, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 345, passed
4-19-12; Am. Ord. 355, passed 7-16-12; Am. Ord. 2022-10, passed 12-19-22)
§ 50.60 REPORT OF WASTEWATER CHARACTERISTICS; REVISION OF RATES.
   All users contributing more than 20,000 gallons per month and whose waste
strength is greater than 250 mg BOD/1 or 250 mg SS/1 shall prepare and file
with the Town Council a report that shall include pertinent data relating to
the wastewater characteristics, including the methods of sampling and
measurement to obtain these data, and these data shall be used to calculate the
user charge for that user. The Town Council shall have the right to gain access
to the waste stream and take its own samples. Should the Town Council do so and
should the results be substantially different as determined by Town Council
from the data submitted by the user, the user charge for that user shall be
revised for the next billing cycle/period.
(Ord. 249, passed 5-11-98)
§ 50.61 DISPUTE OF CHARGES.
   (A)   If a user disputes charges contained in a bill, the user may present
such dispute in writing to the utility which is authorized to correct incorrect
charges. In order to be eligible for a correction under this section a user
must present supporting written information indicating that the charges
contained on the bill do not fairly reflect the amount of water used on the
property. A verified leak of water that does not enter the town's treatment
works is considered good cause for an adjustment if the user has otherwise
satisfied the requirements for an adjustment or correction of their bill,
including satisfying minimum water volume requirements. If a request for
correction is rejected by the utility, the user may make written application to
the Town Council requesting a review of his or her user charge pursuant to
divisions (B) and (C) of this section. In order to be eligible for
consideration under this section, billing disputes must be presented to the
utility within 12 months of the date the disputed bill was issued by the town.
   (B)   Any user who believes the volume portion of their user charge is
unjust and inequitable may make written application to the Town Council
requesting a review of the volume portion of their user charge. The written
request shall, where necessary, show the actual or estimated average flow of
water used on the property and/or strength of the user’s wastewater in
comparison with the values upon which the charge is based, including how the
measurements or estimates were made.
   (C)   Review of the request shall be made by the Town Council and if the
Town Council determines that the charges appealed by the user are unjust and
inequitable, the user charges for that user shall be recomputed based on the
revised flow and/or strength data as determined by the Town Council, and the
new charges shall be reflected in the bill for the next billing cycle/period.
(Ord. 249, passed 5-11-98; Am. Ord. 286, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 345, passed
4-19-12; Am. Ord. 360, passed 11-19-12)
§ 50.62 ANNUAL REVIEW OF CHARGES.
   (A)   The Town Council shall review the user charges at least annually and
revise the rates as necessary to ensure that adequate revenues are generated to
pay the costs of operation and maintenance including replacement and that the
system continues to provide for the proportional distribution of operation and
maintenance including replacement costs among users and user classes.
   (B)   In order to comply with the requirements contained in Federal
Regulation number 40 CFR 35.2140(c) “User Charge System,” the Town Council will
notify each user annually of the rate or the portion of the total charge for
wastewater treatment that is attributable to operation, maintenance and
replacement.
(Ord. 249, passed 5-11-98)
   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 50.75 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the sewage
works bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the town's sanitary sewer
system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized
to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection
system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The
industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in
question might result in an advantage to competitors.
   (C)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the
sewage works shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury
or death to the sewage works' employees, and the sewage works shall indemnify
the company against loss or damage to its property by sewage works employees
and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company
to maintain safe conditions as required in
§ 50.40.
   (D)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the sewage
works bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all private properties through which the sewage works holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater
facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any on
the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
   (E)   The town may apply to the circuit or superior court for Johnson County
for an order to require a connection under this section. As authorized by I.C.
36-9-23-30(d), the court shall assess the cost of the action and reasonable
attorney's fees of the town against the property owner in such an action.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98; Am. Ord. 284, passed 6-26-00)
§ 50.76 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except §
50.04 shall be served by the sewage works with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory corrections thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
§ 50.77 LIABILITY FOR EXPENSE, LOSS OR DAMAGE.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the sewage works for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the
sewage works by reason of such violation.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall continue any violation (other than a violation of
§ 50.35) beyond the time limit provided for in
§ 50.76, shall be guilty of an offense, and on conviction thereof shall be
fined in an amount no less than $50 and not exceeding $2,500 for each
violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed
a separate offense.
   (B)   Violations of
§ 50.20 will result in a $50 dollar per day penalty commencing with
notification.
   (C)   (1)   Any person violating or suspected of violating
§ 50.35 shall be subjected to a penalty of $50 per day (or fraction thereof in
which the violation occurs).
      (2)   A person may avoid payment of the penalty by consenting to an
inspection described in
§ 50.22 for the purpose of establishing compliance with
§ 50.35.
      (3)   A person consenting to such an inspection and found in violation
shall be given 90 days to comply with
§ 50.35 without being subject to penalty.
(Ord. 248, passed 10-28-98; Am. Ord. 290, passed 8-28-00)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
   
51.01   Schedule of water utility rates
   
51.02   Hydrant rentals
   
51.03   New service connection charge
   
51.04   Fire protection service
   
51.05   Collection and deferred payment charges
   
51.06   Temporary users
   
51.07   Disconnect; reconnect charge
   
51.08   Returned check charge
   
51.09   Non-owner occupied properties
   
51.10   Protection of public water system from contamination due to backflow
   
51.11   Town’s responsibility regarding utility customer social security
numbers
   
51.12   New service deposits
§ 51.01 SCHEDULE OF WATER UTILITY RATES.
   (A)   The rates and charges set forth in division (B) of this section are
nondiscriminatory, reasonable, equitable, and just, and are necessary to
produce sufficient revenue to:
      (1)   Pay all the legal and other necessary expenses incident to the
operation of the utility, including:
         (a)   Maintenance costs;
         (b)   Operating charges;
         (c)   Upkeep;
         (d)   Repairs;
         (e)   Depreciation;
         (f)   Interest charges on bonds or other obligations, including
leases; and
         (g)   Costs associated with the acquisition of utility property under
I.C. 8-1.5-2;
      (2)   Provide a sinking fund for the liquidation of bonds or other
obligations, including leases;
      (3)   Provide a debt service reserve for bonds or other obligations,
including leases, in an amount established by the municipality, not to exceed
the maximum annual debt service on the bonds or obligations or the maximum
annual lease rentals;
      (4)   Provide adequate money for working capital;
      (5)   Provide adequate money for making extensions and replacements to
the extent not provided for through depreciation. (I.C. 8-1.5-3-8).
   (B)   The following schedule of rates and charges is hereby approved and
adopted. Town Council hereby approves the schedule of rates and charges for the
services rendered by the water utility set forth below.
Schedule of Rates and Charges
Schedule of Rates and Charges
Metered Rates - inside town limits     
   Per 1,000 gallons of use per month
First 3,000 gallons                   $7.44
Next 12,000 gallons                   6.37
Next 15,000 gallons                   5.42
Next 20,000 gallons                   4.46
Over 50,000 gallons                   3.19
Minimum Charge Per Month               
   Size of meter                    
5/8 inch meter                        22.30
3/4 inch meter                        31.84
1 inch meter                          63.68
1-1/4 inch meter                      79.59
1-1/2 inch meter                      111.45
2 inch meter                          227.64
3 inch meter                          398.38
4 inch meter                          607.03
6 inch meter                          1,195.09
8 inch meter                          1,991.83
10 inch meter                         3,054.13
12 inch meter                         4,325.13
Wholesale Water Rates
   Per 1,000 gallons
Treated                               $4.31
Untreated (raw)                       2.57
Unmetered Water Rates                  
Minimum charge per month              $42.42
Metered rate per 1000 gallons         25.46
 
   (C)   The town will assess a late payment penalty of 10% of the amount of
delinquent rates and charges. Rates and charges not received by the town within
15 days after they become due are delinquent. The amount of the fee, the
penalty, and a reasonable attorney's fee may be recovered by the town in a
civil action in the name of the town. Minimum monthly charges will not be
abated or adjusted for seasonal or temporary vacancy of the property served.
   (D)   The town's proposed water utility rates and charges are the same for
service to properties located inside and outside of the town's corporate
boundaries.
(Ord. 241, passed 9-3-97; Am. Ord. 356, passed 7-16-12; Am. Ord. 389, passed 3-
20-17; Am. Ord. 418, passed 1-7-20; Am. Ord. 2022-3, passed 6-20-22)
§ 51.02 HYDRANT RENTALS.
   (A)   Indiana law permits the town water and sewer utility to collect
hydrant rentals from its customers instead of from the town.
   (B)   The town accepts and approves the billing and collection of the
hydrant rentals by the water and sewer utility to and from its customers as
follows: the monthly rental charge per meter for residential customers shall be
$2.85, and for nonresidential customers shall be as follows:
   Meter Si   Na   Monthly Fee
   Meter Si   Name                        Monthly Fee
.75           Natural Resources-Enf. Div.    $3.71
.75           Johnson County Park            3.71
.75           Park Garage                    3.71
.75           His and Her Style Shop         3.71
.75           Nineveh Insurance Agency       3.71
1.00          Atterbury Fish & Wildlife      4.56
1.50          Hoosier Horse Park             13.97
2.00          Capital District               16.82
2.00          FFA Center                     16.82
2.00          Prince's Lakes Water           16.82
2.00          McFarland Guy and Sons         16.82
2.00          Indiana Department of Cor.     16.82
2.00          Hoosier Horse Park             16.82
2.00          Arcom                          16.82
3.00          Military Department of Indiana 42.75
4.00          Cordry-Sweetwater              68.40
6.00          Camp Atterbury                 108.30
6.00          Camp Atterbury                 108.30
10.00         Atterbury Job Corp             148.20
 
(Ord. 210, passed 11-14-94)
§ 51.03 NEW SERVICE CONNECTION CHARGE.
   (A)   Connection fee. Based on the town’s utility superintendent’s estimates
of costs incurred by the town to make a physical connection to the town’s water
utility collection system, the Council hereby sets the new connection fee for
all future water utility connections up to three-fourths of an inch, made after
December 31, 2022, at $1,800.
   (B)   The water connection fee for service larger than three-fourths of an
inch, made after December 31, 2022, shall be the greater of:
      (1)   One thousand eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00); or
      (2)   The sum of the town’s actual costs of making the connection.
(Am. Ord. 356, passed 7-16-12; Am. Ord. 389, passed 3-20-17; Am. Ord. 418,
passed 1-7-20; Am. Ord. 2022-11, passed 12-19-22)
§ 51.04 FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE.
Per meter per customer  
Meter size              
Per meter per customer  
Meter size              
5/8 inch meter         $5.12
3/4 inch meter         6.65
1 inch meter           8.18
1-1/2 inch meter       25.05
2 inch meter           30.15
3 inch meter           76.68
4 inch meter           122.05
6 inch meter           194.23
10 inch meter          165.80
 
 
Fire protection - private sprinklers
Private hydrants            $ 1,102.88
   per hydrant per annum
 
(Am. Ord. 356, passed 7-16-12; Am. Ord. 389, passed 3-20-17; Am. Ord. 418,
passed 1-7-20; Am. Ord. 2022-3, passed 6-20-22)
§ 51.05 COLLECTION AND DEFERRED PAYMENT CHARGES.
   All bills for water service not paid within 15 days from the due date
thereof, as stated in such bills, shall be subject to the collection or
deferred payment charge of 10% of the amount of delinquent rates and charges.
(Am. Ord. 356, passed 7-16-12; Am. Ord. 418, passed 1-7-20)
§ 51.06 TEMPORARY USERS.
   Water furnished to temporary users, such as contractors and the like, shall
be charged on the basis of the metered gallon rates set forth as estimated and
established by the Water Superintendent.
(Am. Ord. 418, passed 1-7-20)
§ 51.07 DISCONNECT; RECONNECT CHARGE.
   (A)   A charge shall be assessed to all customers who request reconnection
of water service afer the service has been disconnected for cause. This charge
and any other balances due the water utility shall be paid before water service
is reconnected.
   (B)   Reconnect charge: $25.
(Am. Ord. 356, passed 7-16-12; Am. Ord. 418, passed 1-7-20)
§ 51.08 RETURNED CHECK CHARGE.
   (A)   A charge shall be assessed to all customers who pay their account with
a check that is not honored by the bank. This charge will be assessed per
occurrence.
   (B)   Per dishonored check per occurrence: $20.
(Am. Ord. 356, passed 7-16-12; Am. Ord. 418, passed 1-7-20)
§ 51.09 NON-OWNER OCCUPIED PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Upon applying for water service for property occupied by someone other
than the owner, the person occupying the property shall provide the water
utility with the name and contact information of the owner or manager of the
property. All rates, charges, and other fees for services rendered by the water
utility to property occupied by someone other than the owner are payable by the
person occupying the property if the account or other customer or billing
records maintained by the water utility for the property indicate that:
      (1)   The property is occupied by someone other than the owner; and
      (2)   The person occupying the property is responsible for paying the
rates, charges, and fees assessed for the services rendered by the water
utility with respect to the property.
   (B)   The owner of a property occupied by someone other than the owner may,
upon notice to the water utility, take responsibility for paying the rates,
charges, and fees assessed for the services rendered by the water utility with
respect to the property.
(Ord. 377, passed 3-16-15; Am. Ord. 2022-11, passed 12-19-22)
§ 51.10 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM FROM CONTAMINATION DUE TO BACKFLOW.
   (A)   A cross connection shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains
potable water from the town's water system, and the other, water from a private
source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals,
whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow
depending on the pressure differential between the two systems.
   (B)   No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No
interconnection shall be established whereby water from a private, auxiliary,
or emergency water supply may enter the town's distribution system, unless such
private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply and the method of connection and
use of such supply shall have been approved by the town and by the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management in accordance with 327 IAC 8-10.
   (C)   The town may, at any time and from time to time, cause inspections to
be made of all properties where cross connections with the public water system
are deemed possible.
   (D)   The town may discontinue water service to any property where any
connection in violation of this section exists, and to take such other
precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water system. Water service to such property shall
not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance
with the provisions of this section. If a cross connection is deemed to be an
emergency, endangering public health, safety, or welfare and requires immediate
action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the Prince's Lakes
Public Works Superintendent and delivered to the consumer's premises, service
may be immediately discontinued.
   (E)   All consumers using toxic or hazardous liquids, all hospitals,
mortuaries, wastewater treatment plants, laboratories, and all other hazardous
users install and maintain a reduced pressure principal backflow preventer in
the main water line serving each building on the premises. The backflow
preventer must be installed in an easily accessible location not subject to
flooding or freezing.
   (F)   The reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall not be
installed below ground level.
   (G)   This section does not supersede the Indiana Plumbing Code, the IDEM
Rule 327 IAC 8-10 or any other applicable town ordinances, but is supplementary
to them.
   (H)   In addition to IDEM Rule 327 IAC 8-10-4(c), the following customer
facilities need a backflow prevention device:
      (1)   All carbonated drink mixers and dispensers that use CO2.
      (2)   All irrigation systems that are connected, at any point, directly
or indirectly, with the public water supply.
   (I)   If, in the judgment of the town's Utility Superintendent, an approved
backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water
system, the Superintendent will give notice to the water consumer to install
such an approved device immediately.
(Ord. 384, passed 6-20-16)
§ 51.11 TOWN’S RESPONSIBILITY REGARDING UTILITY CUSTOMER SOCIAL SECURITY
NUMBERS.
   (A)   The town shall reasonably protect each customer’s social security
number and/or driver’s license number from disclosure. The town shall use
customer’s social security numbers for the limited purposes of credit checks
and in efforts to collect of past due debt.
   (B)   No employee of the town has any discretion to deviate from the
policies and procedures as set forth in this section.
(Ord. 407, passed 11-19-18)
Cross reference:
   Utility policy and procedure relating to customer social security numbers, §
50.06
§ 51.12 NEW SERVICE DEPOSITS.
   (A)   New service deposits.
      (1)   As a condition of establishing new service, after December 31,
2022, the user of property to be served by the town’s water utility shall be
required to deposit $75. The deposit, less any outstanding penalties and
service fees, shall be refunded to the depositor after a notarized statement
from the depositor that as of a certain date the property being served:
         (a)   Has been conveyed or transferred to another person;
         (b)   Is no longer occupied or under the control of the depositor; or
         (c)   No longer uses or is connected with any part of the town’s water
utility.
      (2)   Any such statement must include the name and address of the person
to whom the property is conveyed or transferred.
   (B)   If a depositor, within 60 days after the termination of the
depositor’s use, control, or ownership of the property served, fails to pay to
the town’s water utility all costs and fees owed, the depositor forfeits the
depositor’s deposit and all accrued interest. The forfeited amount shall be
applied to the depositor’s outstanding fees. Any excess that remains due after
application of the forfeiture may be collected by the town as permitted by
applicable Indiana law. A deposit may be used to satisfy all or part of any
judgment awarded the municipality. As a condition of maintaining service, any
customer whose deposit is applied by the town toward any past due amounts owed,
shall, immediately, replenish their deposit.
(Ord. 2022-11, passed 12-19-22)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Speed limits on town roads
   
70.02   Load limits
   
70.03   Parking prohibited
Golf Carts
   
70.15   Definitions
   
70.16   Operation of golf carts
   
70.17   Eligible operators
   
70.18   Financial responsibility
   
70.19   Time of operation
   
70.20   Occupants
   
70.21   Traffic rules
   
70.22   Mandatory equipment
   
70.23   Slow moving vehicle sign
   
70.24   Registration and inspection
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 SPEED LIMITS ON TOWN ROADS.
   Speed limits in the town shall be 20 miles per hour on all roads unless
otherwise posted.
(Ord. 113, passed 6-18-01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.02 LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section or otherwise by
applicable Indiana State Statutes, from and beginning on December 15 of each
year through March 15 of the following year, no person shall operate or cause
to be operated on any street within the corporate boundaries of the town any
vehicle or combination of vehicles having a gross vehicle weight in excess of
20,000 pounds.
   (B)   Except as may otherwise be provided by applicable Indiana State
Statutes, no person shall operate or cause to be operated, at any time, on any
street within the corporate boundaries of the town a tractor, as that term is
defined in I.C. 9-13-2-180, in combination with a semitrailer, as that term is
defined in I.C. 9-13-2-164.
   (C)   Definitions.
      GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT or GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle without
load, plus the weight of any load on the vehicle.
   (D)   The restrictions imposed by this section shall not apply to school
buses or trash collection trucks being operated in the normal course of
business.
   (E)   A person who violates a restriction imposed under this section commits
a Class C infraction.
(Ord. 152, passed 12-11-85; Am. Ord. 378, passed 9-21-15)
§ 70.03 PARKING PROHIBITED.
   Parking is prohibited on any street in the town.
(Ord. 113, passed 6-18-01; Am. Ord. 113, passed 8-20-01) Penalty, see §
70.99
GOLF CARTS
§ 70.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURRENT DRIVING LICENSE. Every class and kind of license or permit that
evidences the privilege to operate a motor vehicle upon the highways of the
state.
   GOLF CART. A four-wheeled motor vehicle originally and specifically designed
and intended to transport one or more individuals and golf clubs for the
purpose of playing the game of golf on a golf course.
   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Proof that a policy or policies of motor
vehicle liability insurance have been obtained and are in full force and effect
for liability that arises out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of a golf
cart in the following amounts:
      (1)   $25,000 because of bodily injury to or death of any one person.
      (2)   $50,000 because of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons
in any one accident.
      (3)   $10,000 because of injury to or destruction of property in any one
accident.
   PUBLIC HIGHWAY. A street, an alley, a road, a highway, or a thoroughfare in
the state, including a privately owned business parking lot and drive that is
used by the public or open to use by the public.
(Ord. 357, passed 8-20-12)
§ 70.16 OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS.
   The operation of a golf cart on the public highways within the town is
strictly prohibited expect as expressly permitted by and pursuant to this
subchapter and all other applicable federal, state, county, and local laws,
rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 357, passed 8-20-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.17 ELIGIBLE OPERATORS.
   Persons 18 years of age and older who possess a valid current driver's
license may operate a golf cart on the public highways within the town in
strict compliance with this subchapter. Persons younger than 18 years of age
who possess a valid current driver's license may operate a golf cart on the
public highways within the town in strict compliance with this subchapter, only
while accompanied in the golf cart by his or her parent or legal guardian who
must be at least 21 years of age and possess a valid current driver's license.
(Ord. 357, passed 8-20-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.18 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   All persons operating a golf cart on the public highways within the town
must have in their possession, at all times, proof of financial responsibility.
(Ord. 357, passed 8-20-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.19 TIME OF OPERATION.
   Golf carts shall not be operated on the public highways within the town
between dusk and dawn.
(Ord. 357, passed 8-20-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.20 OCCUPANTS.
   The number of occupants in a golf cart shall be limited to the number of
persons for whom factory seating is installed and provided on the golf cart. At
all times while a golf cart is in motion, the operator and all occupants shall
be seated in the golf cart, and no part of the body of the operator or any
occupant shall extend outside the perimeter of the golf cart.
(Ord. 357, passed 8-20-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.21 TRAFFIC RULES.
   The operator of a golf cart shall comply with all traffic rules and
regulations adopted by the state and the town governing the operation of motor
vehicles.
(Ord. 357, passed 8-20-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.22 MANDATORY EQUIPMENT.
   All golf carts operated on the public highways within the town must be
equipped, at all times, with: at least one headlight, two red taillights
mounted directly over or directly behind the rear wheels, and seat lap belts
for all occupants which must be worn at all times the golf cart is in motion.
The headlight(s) and taillights must be illuminated at all times the golf cart
is located on a public highway.
(Ord. 357, passed 8-20-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.23 SLOW MOVING VEHICLE SIGN.
   All golf carts must display on the back of the golf cart a “slow moving
vehicle” sign of the same type required under state law.
(Ord. 357, passed 8-20-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.24 REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION.
   All owners of a golf cart who intend for it to be operated on the public
highways within the town must annually register their golf cart and have it
inspected by the town police department. An annual registration and inspection
fee of $25 will be charged. The town police department, upon determining that a
golf cart complies with this subchapter, will issue a written registration
certificate, valid for one year, that must be affixed to the golf cart and be
readily visible at all times.
(Ord. 357, passed 8-20-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of Title VII (referred to herein
as the “Traffic Code”) concerned with stop or yield intersections shall be
deemed guilty of an offense, and shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not
exceeding $50.
   (B)   Any person who removes, mutilates, or destroys any traffic sign shall
be guilty of an offense, and shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not
exceeding $100.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of this Traffic Code concerned
with prohibited parking shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and shall, upon
conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding $10.
(Ord. 113, passed 6-18-01; Am. Ord. 113, passed 8-20-01)
   (D)   Any person, partnership, firm, or corporation who violates any
provision of §
70.02 shall, upon conviction, be found guilty of an ordinance violation and
fined not more than $1,000, and each day within which such violation occurs,
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 152, passed 12-11-85)
   (E)   Any person who violates §§
70.15 through
70.24 shall be subject to a fine of $25 for the first violation, $50 for the
second violation, and $75 for the third violation. Any person who violates §§
70.15 through
70.24 three times shall be ineligible to register or operate a golf cart on the
public highways within the town.
(Ord. 357, passed 8-20-12)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Through streets and stop intersections
   
II.   Two-way stops
   
III.   Four-way stops
   
IV.   Yield intersections
   
V.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. THROUGH STREETS AND STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   The streets and intersections described below are hereby declared to be
through streets and stop intersections as so designated, unless otherwise
directed by traffic-control signal or a police officer. When stop signs are
placed at the entrances to through streets or stop intersections, the driver of
the vehicle approaching the signs shall stop as required by law at any marked
line on the roadway, or if none, before entering any crosswalk or the
intersection.
   Through Stre   Stop Sign Facing Traffic On
   Through Stre   Stop Sign Facing Traffic On
Bauer Drive       Fleming Drive
Bergman Drive     Scott Drive
Fleming Drive     Ayres Drive
Lakeview Drive    Adler Drive
Lakeview Drive    Any Lane
Lakeview Drive    Bergman Drive
Lakeview Drive    Christian Drive
Lakeview Drive    Dunham Drive
Lakeview Drive    Dyson Drive
Lakeview Drive    Eagle Drive
Lakeview Drive    Hall Drive
Lakeview Drive    Hinshaw Drive (in center of triangle)
Lakeview Drive    Hoover Drive
Lakeview Drive    Kay Lane
Lakeview Drive    Kinman Drive
Lakeview Drive    Mawalt Lane
Lakeview Drive    Nash Drive
Lakeview Drive    Riser Drive
Lakeview Drive    Roszell Drive
Lakeview Drive    Stopek Drive
Lakeview Drive    Work Drive
Nineveh Road      Lakeview Drive
 
(Ord. 113, passed 6-18-01; Am. Ord. 113, passed 8-20-01)
Penalty, see § 70.99
SCHEDULE II. TWO-WAY STOPS.
   A two-way stop is hereby created and stop signs are to be erected,
designating such a two-way stop at the following intersection:
   Intersection of Lakeview Drive and Fleming Drive, with northbound traffic to
stop on Fleming Drive and southbound traffic to stop on Lakeview Drive.
(Ord. 113, passed 6-18-01; Am. Ord. 113, passed 8-20-01)
Penalty, see § 70.99
SCHEDULE III. FOUR-WAY STOPS.
   A four-way stop is hereby created and stop signs are to be erected,
designating such a four-way stop at the following intersection:
   Intersection of Bauer Drive, Lakeview Drive and Andys Lane, with eastbound
traffic to stop on Bauer Drive, southbound traffic and northwest bound traffic
to stop on Lakeview Drive, and northbound traffic to stop on Andys Lane.
(Ord. 113, passed 6-18-01; Am. Ord. 113, passed 8-20-01)
Penalty, see § 70.99
SCHEDULE IV. YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   A yield intersection is hereby created and yield signs are to be erected at
the following intersections:
   Through Stree   Yield Sign Facing Traffic On
Bauer Drive        Kamliefer Drive
Bergman Drive      Providence Drive
Dunham Drive       Parmalee Drive
Fleming Drive      Warford Drive
Kinman Drive       Greenwalt Drive
Roszell Drive      Gerking Drive
Roszell Drive      Oriental Drive
Roszell Drive      Slevins Drive
 
(Ord. 113, passed 6-18-01; Am. Ord. 113, passed 8-20-01)
Penalty, see § 70.99
SCHEDULE V. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein for designated streets or sections
of streets (the "excepted streets") or specially designated and marked areas
such as school zones, parks, and worksites, the maximum speed limit for all
streets located within the annexed territory of Prince's Lakes shall be 25
miles per hour.
   (B)   The excepted streets and the applicable maximum speed limits are as
follows:
      (1)   For Howard Prince Drive, from its intersection with County Road 775
South to its intersection with Dyson Drive, the maximum speed limit shall be 30
miles per hour;
      (2)   For that part of Lakeview Drive, from its intersection with Nineveh
Road to its intersection with Stopek Drive, the maximum speed limit shall be 30
miles per hour;
   (C)   This section shall be enforced, by the town attorney, in accordance
with I.C. Chapter 34-28-5.
   (D)   A person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of $75.
(Ord. 113, passed 6-18-01; Am. Ord. 113, passed 8-20-01; Am. Ord. 413, passed
1-22-19) Penalty, see §
 70.99
Cross-reference:
   Speed limits in parks, see
§ 93.03
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   RESERVED
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
95.   BURNING
      
96.   FAIR HOUSING
CHAPTER 90: RESERVED
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Restraint of animals
   
91.03   Public nuisance animal
   
91.04   Vicious animals
   
91.05   Animal bites and quarantine
   
91.06   Disposition of dead animals
   
91.07   Duty and responsibility of animal owners
   
91.08   Injured animals; action required
   
91.09   Animal waste
   
91.10   Animals in vehicles
   
91.11   General town animal regulations
   
91.12   Enforcement procedures
   
91.13   Impounded animals
   
91.14   Authority to destroy vicious animals
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   ANIMAL. Every living non-human creature, both domestic and wild.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person who is authorized to implement and
enforce the town's animal care and control ordinances and as defined in state
statutes.
   AUTHORIZED VETERINARIAN CLINIC. Any person licensed or permitted to practice
veterinary medicine under the laws of the State of Indiana, and such person
shall have no previous incidents where money collected from the sale of rabies
or license tags has been used or handled inappropriately or illegally.
   DIRECT CONTROL. Immediate and continuous physical control of an animal
(excluding herding dogs; dogs in the process of hunting; police dogs; dogs
participating in a registered field trial, obedience trial, and confirmation
show and/or match), at all times, such as by means of a fence, leash, cord or
chain of sufficient strength to restrain the animal. When an animal is
effectively trained to immediately respond to oral or visual commands, the term
DIRECT CONTROL includes oral or visual control if the controlling person is at
all times within 100 feet of and can be clearly and fully seen and heard by the
animal.
   DOG OR CAT RUNNING AT LARGE. Any dog or cat that is not under direct control
or confined within the property limits of its owner. Hunting dogs are under the
control of the owner when hunting with the landowner's permission.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. A dog, cat, or any other animal such as a rabbit, guinea
pig, lizard, iguana, hamster, ferret, mouse, snake (non-venomous), spider,
bird, or gerbil, or other animal that is customarily kept as a pet. Livestock,
as that term is defined herein, are not considered domestic animals.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL. Any animal that is not a domestic animal, as that term is
defined herein, including, specifically, livestock.
   IMPOUNDMENT. The act of taking physical possession and control of an animal
by an animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law and
transporting it to an animal control facility or humane society.
   LIVESTOCK. Includes horses, cows, goats, chickens, ducks, other poultry,
pigs (of all types and breeds), sheep, and other typical farm animals,
excluding dogs and cats, kept for pleasure or profit.
   OWNER. Any person who owns, harbors, keeps, feeds, maintains, has lawful
possession of, or knowingly causes or knowingly permits an animal to be
harbored or kept or has an animal in his or her care or who permits an animal
to remain on or about his or her premises; provided, however, this shall not
include a person hired or acting as custodian of the animal for its owner.
   POLICE OFFICER. Any law enforcement officer empowered to make arrests or
cause to be issued summonses in the incorporated areas of the town.
   TOWN. The incorporated area of the Town of Prince’s Lakes, Indiana.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL and DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal that attacks, bites or
injures human beings, pets, companion animals or livestock or which, because of
temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite
or injure human beings, pets, companion animals or livestock. No dog may be
declared dangerous if a threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person
who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the
premises occupied by the owner of the dog or was teasing, tormenting, abusing,
or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have
teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting
to commit a crime. The definition shall not be construed to include dogs that
are part of a governmental organization or a trained guard dog in performance
of its duties.
   WILD ANIMAL. One that lives in the wild or is not domesticated. This chapter
is not intended to regulate wild and/or exotic animals. Regulation of wild and
or exotic animals is governed through the State of Indiana, 312 IAC, Article 9,
Fish and Wildlife.
(Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17)
§ 91.02 RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   An owner shall not allow any animal owned or regularly kept by that
owner to run at large within the town. Any dogs found running at large shall be
subject to impoundment by an animal control officer.
   (B)   Owners of animals running at large may be issued a violation notice
and be subject to monetary penalties as provided for herein, in addition to
having their animals impounded.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every owner to exercise reasonable care and
take all necessary steps to protect other people, property, and animals from
injuries or damage which might result from their animals' behavior.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of every owner of a dog to ensure that the dog is
restrained to the owner’s property and remains:
      (1)   Securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen
or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise
escape; and that such enclosure is securely locked at any time the dog is left
unattended.
      (2)   Securely and humanely restrained by chain, cable or trolley, or
other tether of sufficient strength to prevent escape.
      (3)   On a leash and under the control of a competent person; or off a
leash and obedient to that person's command and that person is present with the
animal any time it is not restrained as provided for in division (D)(1) or (2)
of this section while on its owner’s property.
   (E)   The following additional precautions shall be taken by owners of
vicious or dangerous dogs:
      (1)   In addition to the requirements in division (D)(1) of this section,
the owner of a dangerous or vicious dog who maintains the dog out-of-doors
shall enclose the entire area where the dog is kept with a perimeter fence.
Within this perimeter fence, the vicious or dangerous animal must be humanely
confined inside a pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not
share common fencing with the perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have
secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides. The sides must either be
buried two feet into the ground, sunken into a concrete pad, or securely
attached to a wire bottom. The gate to the kennel shall be of the inward-
opening type and shall be kept locked except when tending to the animal's needs
such as cleaning the kennel or providing food and water.
      (2)   Whenever the dog is outside of its enclosure as provided for in
this division, but on the owner’s property, it must be attended by the owner
and restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent
escape. The leash shall be no longer than ten feet, and the animal must be kept
at least 15 feet within the perimeter boundaries of the property unless the
perimeter boundary is securely fenced.
      (3)   No vicious or dangerous dog shall be chained, tethered, or
otherwise tied to any inanimate object such as a tree, post or building,
outside of its own enclosure as provided for in this division.
   (F)   The owner of any guard dog or watchdog must confine such dog within a
perimeter fence and meet the following conditions:
      (1)   The fence shall be sufficient to prevent the dog's escape, with all
points of ingress and egress securely locked at all times.
      (2)   A beware of dog sign shall be conspicuously displayed on each
exterior side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure, with a minimum of
two, as well as a sign on each ingress or egress point to the enclosure. Signs
shall be a minimum of 140 square inches.
   (G)   The chaining of dogs is discouraged, but permitted in strict
compliance with the following:
      (1)   The dog must be able to reach fresh food and water 24 hours a day.
      (2)   The chain must be at least 12 feet in length.
      (3)   The weight of the chain must not cause undue stress or injury to
the dog's neck or body.
      (4)   The chain must be attached in a manner so that it cannot wrap
around vertical items such as a barrel, pole or tree, and must move freely in
all directions.
      (5)   The dog must have easy and convenient access to adequate shelter 24
hours a day.
      (6)   The shelter or doghouse must be kept clean and sanitary and in good
repair so the dog does not injure itself on nails, wood pieces, metal pieces,
etc. A shelter from weather must be provided during all seasons of the year.
(Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL.
   (A)   A public nuisance animal shall mean and include any animal that:
      (1)   Is repeatedly found at large.
      (2)   Damages the property of anyone other than its owner’s.
      (3)   Is vicious.
      (4)   Attacks without provocation.
      (5)   Excessively makes disturbing noises, including but not limited to,
continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing
unreasonable disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close
proximity to the premises where the animal is kept.
      (6)   Creates unsanitary conditions or offensive and objectionable odors
in enclosures or surroundings and thereby creates unreasonable disturbance or
discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the
animal is kept.
      (7)   Is kept in violation of any other town ordinance.
   (B)   Any public nuisance animal may be impounded and its owner cited for a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, accompany or be
responsible for the presence of any vicious dog, cat or other animal on the
streets or public places of the town or allow the animal to run on the premises
of another at any time, unless, in addition to the other requirements of this
chapter, such dog, cat or other animal shall be securely muzzled to effectively
prevent it from biting any person or other animal. Upon impounding a vicious
animal for any reason, the animal control officer may, for reasons of public
safety, retain the animal until disposition by the appropriate court.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to law enforcement dogs.
(Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 ANIMAL BITES AND QUARANTINE.
   (A)   All animal bites shall be reported to the Police Department by the
person bitten and by the owner of the animal which has bitten someone. The
owner of any animal reported to have bitten any person shall keep that animal
confined for not less than ten days. A report of the animal's condition shall
be made to the assigned animal control officer on the third, seventh, and tenth
days, and any animal showing signs of illness must be taken to a veterinarian
or animal shelter, as may be directed by the animal control officer, for safe-
keeping and observation.
   (B)   Upon receiving information that any person in the town has been bitten
by an animal, the Police Department shall immediately make a report of the
incident to the county health officer, and shall thereafter take such further
action as the health officer may direct.
   (C)   It is the duty of the person bitten or the person's parent or guardian
to make the report in conformance with title 410 IAC 1-2.3-52, as amended.
(Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 DISPOSITION OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   A person finding a dead domestic animal or large undomesticated animal or
the surviving young of either within the town shall call the animal control
officer or Police Department.
(Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17)
§ 91.07 DUTY AND RESPONSIBILITY OF ANIMAL OWNERS.
   Every owner of every animal kept in the town shall ensure that each of their
animals:
   (A)   Is kept, at all times, under clean and sanitary conditions that
promote good health and comfort;
   (B)   Has proper and adequate food, fresh potable drinking water, at all
times, and continuously accessible shelter of sufficient size to permit the
animal to move about freely and protect it from the elements;
   (C)   Is not tethered by use of a choke collar or chain, rope, or cord
directly attached to the animal's neck, or by a leash, rope, cord, cable or
chain that is less than 12 feet in length or of such unreasonable weight as to
prevent the animal from moving about freely;
   (D)   Is not subjected to abuse, cruelty, neglect, torment or any other
mistreatment;
   (E)   Receives necessary and customary veterinary care, including
specifically, but without limitation, the required rabies, distemper and parvo
virus vaccinations; and
   (F)   Is kept and maintained in strict compliance with all applicable
federal, state, county, and local laws, regulations, and ordinances.
(Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.08 INJURED ANIMALS; ACTION REQUIRED.
   Any person who, by any means, either accidentally or intentionally, causes
injury to an animal not owned by that person shall immediately report to the
Police Department the injury with sufficient detail to allow the animal to be
identified and located.
(Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.09 ANIMAL WASTE.
   Owners of animals and persons in control of animals not owned by them shall
collect and remove from all public property and the private property of others,
the waste, excrement, and feces of their respective animals. Owners of service
dogs, who are not capable of complying with this provision, are exempt.
(Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.10 ANIMALS IN VEHICLES.
   No animal shall be left unattended in a vehicle when the conditions in that
vehicle would constitute a health risk.
(Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.11 GENERAL TOWN ANIMAL REGULATIONS.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Permit a domestic animal to destroy or deface shrubbery, lawns,
flowers, gardens, or other property;
   (B)   Permit any animal to chase or harass vehicles or pedestrians on public
streets and sidewalks; or
   (C)   Keep any livestock or exotic animal, except as may be expressly
permitted by the town's zoning ordinance, codified in
Chapter 152 of this code, and all applicable federal, state, and county, laws
and regulations.
(Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.12 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   To secure the proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the
appropriate authorities of the town may pursue any or a combination of the
following remedies as they deem appropriate:
   (A)   Taking into custody and impounding any animal found to be kept in
violation of any provision applicable under this chapter;
   (B)   If the violation is a violation only of this chapter, and is not
concurrently a violation of a state statute, citing the owner of the animal for
a town ordinance violation;
   (C)   If the violation constitutes an infraction or crime under state
statute, citing or arresting the owner of the animal accordingly; and/or
   (D)   Seeking an injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to
I.C. 36-1-6-4.
(Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17)
§ 91.13 IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   The town may retain or cause to be retained an impounded animal,
either in town facilities or the facilities of a cooperating state or county
agency, for a period of time deemed necessary and appropriate under the
circumstances. If the animal is a wild animal, of a species indigenous to
Indiana, that no person has a lawful right to possess, is deemed to pose no
unusual threat to humans or livestock, and is sufficiently mature to care for
itself in the wild, the town may, as permitted by applicable federal, state,
and county laws and regulations, release the animal back into the wild.
   (B)   Upon the expiration of applicable time periods, the town or a
cooperating agency may humanely destroy or otherwise lawfully dispose of an
impounded animal. An impounded domestic animal shall be kept for at least five
days. If the owner of an impounded domestic animal is known, the town shall, as
soon as is practicable, notify that owner of the animal's impoundment.
   (C)   Unless a court, or a state or county officer having proper authority
orders the continued detention of an animal, the owner of an impounded domestic
animal, other than an animal impounded for violation of I.C. 35-46-3, may
reclaim the animal, prior to its destruction or other disposition as set forth
herein, by paying to the town the following fees:
      (1)   A charge of $25 for initial capture of the animal; and
      (2)   A charge of $10 per day for boarding and feeding the animal.
   (D)   If the town delivers the animal to a cooperating agency, the above
charges shall nevertheless apply for the time that the animal is in the town's
custody, and an additional fee of $25 for transporting the animal shall apply.
These charges and fees are in addition to any penalties or costs assessed under
this chapter. Any cooperating agency into whose custody an animal is delivered
may charge and collect its own usual and standard fees from the person
reclaiming the animal for the period of time the animal was in its custody. An
animal impounded by reason of a suspected violation of I.C. 35-46-3 shall be
deemed in protective custody and may not be released to its owner except as
permitted by and in compliance with the provisions of I.C. 35-46-3.
(Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17)
§ 91.14 AUTHORITY TO DESTROY VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the town, acting by and
through its Town Marshal and Police Department may immediately destroy any
vicious animal that cannot be safely captured or kept in custody by usual and
customary means or which is observed attacking a person or other animal.
(Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating this chapter may be fined by the town up to $300 per
occurrence, in addition to penalties imposed by Indiana state statute.
(Ord. 289, passed 8-28-00; Am. Ord. 402, passed 11-20-17)
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
Weeds
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Weeds and other rank vegetation nuisance
   
92.03   Procedure for notice of violation
   
92.04   Procedure for entering and abating violation
   
92.05   Procedure for issuing bills
   
92.06   Procedure for appealing a notice or bill
Property Nuisances
   
92.15   Enforcement officer
   
92.16   Public nuisance prohibition
   
92.17   Public nuisances enumerated
   
92.18   Owner responsibility
   
92.19   Written notice
   
92.20    Bill for abatement
   
92.21   Appeal of violation notice
 
   
92.99   Penalty
WEEDS
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   REAL ESTATE IMPROVED AS A RESIDENCE. Shall mean and refer to every parcel of
real estate that includes a residential structure or partial residential
structure (whether or not occupied and whether or not inhabitable) and/or
related improvements such as, without limitation, driveways, boat docks,
accessory structures, or temporary living quarters.
   WEEDS AND RANK VEGETATION. Shall mean:
      (1)   All types of grass, weeds, and vegetation (excluding non-volunteer:
trees, bushes, shrubs, landscaping flowers, and landscaping plants) which
exceed the permissible height for each type of property as follows:
         (a)   With respect to all real estate improved as a residence, and all
real estate located within 15 feet of the edge of a public street or within
public right of way, grass, weeds, and vegetation in excess of 12 inches in
height.
         (b)   With respect to all other real estate, including, without
limitation, unimproved residential and commercial lots, grass, weeds, and
vegetation in excess of 18 inches in height.
         (c)   With respect to real estate located within dedicated or platted
drainage easements, except for platted drainage easements running along and
parallel to side yard property lines between residential lots, grass, weeds and
vegetation in excess of 30 inches in height; and
         (d)   Every kind of grass, weeds, vegetation, trees (including
volunteer and planted trees), or brush which interferes with the public safety
or lawful use of governmental property, right-of-way, or easement. Interference
includes interference with line of sight.
      (2)   WEEDS AND RANK VEGETATION shall not include agricultural crops such
as hay and pasture, unless they pose a threat to public safety.
(Ord. 395, passed 5-15-17)
§ 92.02 WEEDS AND OTHER RANK VEGETATION NUISANCE.
   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person to allow weeds and
other rank vegetation to exist on their property. Owners and occupants of real
property within the town shall cut and remove weeds and other rank vegetation
on their property.
(Ord. 395, passed 5-15-17) Penalty, see §
 92.99
§ 92.03 PROCEDURE FOR NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Notice of a violation of this subchapter may be sent by the Town Marshal or
the town's code enforcement officer, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by alternative service as permitted under I.C. 1-1-7-1 to:
   (A)   The owner of record of real property with a single owner; or
   (B)   At least one of the owners of real property with multiple owners.
   (C)   The notice shall:
      (1)   Inform the property owner of violation of this subchapter;
      (2)   Direct the property owner to abate the nuisance within ten days;
      (3)   Inform the property owner that if the violation is not abated the
town may impose monetary penalties and/or elect to abate the nuisance and bill
the property owner for the costs incurred by the town, including administrative
costs and removal costs; and
      (4)   Advise the property owner that the property owner may appeal the
notice of violation by submitting to the Clerk-Treasurer's office, within the
time prescribed in the notice for abating the violation, a written notice of
appeal, stating the basis of the appeal and requesting a hearing by the Town
Council.
   (D)   If an initial notice of the violation is provided by certified mail or
equivalent service, a continuous abatement notice may be posted at the
property, at the time of abatement, instead of by certified mail or equivalent
service as required by I.C. 36-7-10.1-3. A continuous abatement notice serves
as notice to the property owner that each subsequent violation during the same
year for which the initial notice of the violation was provided may be abated
by the town or its contractors.
(Ord. 395, passed 5-15-17)
§ 92.04 PROCEDURE FOR ENTERING AND ABATING VIOLATION.
   In the event a violation of this subchapter is not abated within the time
prescribed in the notice, the town may enter on to the property and abate the
violation or contract with a private contractor to abate the violation. The
town may abate an ongoing violation in the same manner and as often as the
conditions on the property require.
(Ord. 395, passed 5-15-17)
§ 92.05 PROCEDURE FOR ISSUING BILLS.
   The Town's Clerk-Treasurer's office shall prepare and mail to the property
owner(s), at the tax billing address, via certified mail, return receipt
requested, a bill for abating the violation. The bill shall state that payment
is due to the Clerk-Treasurer's office within 30 days and that if such payment
is not timely made the Clerk-Treasurer will certify to the county auditor the
amount of the bill, plus any additional administrative costs incurred in the
certification. The amount of the total bill, plus accrued interest, will be
placed on the property tax bill for the property affected, to be collected as
delinquent property taxes are collected.
(Ord. 395, passed 5-15-17)
§ 92.06 PROCEDURE FOR APPEALING A NOTICE OR BILL.
   A property owner may appeal a notice of violation or a bill issued under
this subchapter by, within ten days after receipt of a notice of violation or
30 days after receipt of a bill, submitting to the Clerk-Treasurer a written
notice of appeal stating the basis of the appeal and requesting a hearing at
the next regular meeting of the Town Council. Upon receiving a timely appeal,
the Clerk-Treasurer shall include the appeal on the agenda of the next regular
Town Council meeting. At the hearing appeal, the property owner may present to
the Town Council evidence. Upon the conclusion of the hearing the Town Council
shall make a final decision concerning the appeal, take the matter under
advisement, or take such other action as the Town Council deems advisable in
its discretion.
(Ord. 395, passed 5-15-17)
PROPERTY NUISANCES
§ 92.15 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   The Prince’s Lakes Town Marshal, and deputy marshals, and the town's
appointed code enforcement officer, shall be responsible for the enforcement
and administration of this subchapter.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-15-17)
§ 92.16 PUBLIC NUISANCE PROHIBITION.
   For purposes of this subchapter, any person who:
   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition that unreasonably annoys, injures, or
endangers the safety, health, morals, or comfort of the public;   
   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage or use,
any public right-of-way or easement, sidewalk, ditch, or other public facility;
   (C)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-1012, uses property or allows a condition on
property in violation of the town’s zoning ordinance, Chapter 152 of this code;
or
   (D)   Does any other act or omission declared by law or this chapter to be a
public nuisance;
      will be in violation of this chapter and subject to the enforcement and
abatement actions and penalties as set forth herein and as provided for in I.C.
36-1-6-2, incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-15-17) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.17 PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   The following, for purposes of this subchapter, are declared to be public
nuisances:
   (A)   Snow or ice, rain, storm water, wastewater, fuel, oil or other
lubricants, or other liquids, cast upon, diverted upon, or permitted to flow
upon streets, public sidewalks or other public properties transferred;
   (B)   All trees, shrubs, hedges, weeds, grass and other vegetation, signs,
fences, and other obstructions that block or interfere with the view or "line
of sight" of oncoming vehicular traffic on public roads;
   (C)   All trees (and limbs or roots thereof), shrubs, hedges, weeds, grass
and other vegetation that cause damage to or interfere with the safe and
efficient use, by pedestrian and vehicular traffic, as the case may be, of
public streets, sidewalks, or trails;
   (D)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary and intended
public use of streets, alleys, sidewalks, public grounds, natural waterways,
ditches, gutters, drains, and curbs, except as may be expressly permitted by
this or other ordinances or other applicable law;
   (E)   Barbed wire, razor wire, or any sharp iron points on any railing or
posts;
   (F)   Discarded or irreparable machinery, household appliances, automobile
bodies or other materials or related parts stored or kept in open view;
   (G)   Any well, hole, or similar excavation that is left uncovered or in
such other condition as to constitute a hazard, including but not limited to
puddles and other low areas where water accumulates and becomes stagnant;
   (H)   Litter garbage, trash, debris, leaves, grass clippings, compost or
limbs, or other items placed or left on a public right-of-way, including,
without limitation, sidewalks, trails, streets, and curbs, or on adjacent
private property, except as expressly permitted by this subchapter or other
applicable ordinances of the town, for example, to allow for planned and
scheduled collection by the town or its agents and contractors;
   (I)   Litter, garbage, trash, debris, leaves, grass clippings, compost or
limbs, or other discarded items placed or left anywhere on private property,
except as expressly permitted by this subchapter or other applicable ordinances
of the town, for example, in approved containers for trash and recyclables to
allow for planned and scheduled collection;
   (J)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharge of tire
exhaust of any internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, motorcycle, or all-
terrain vehicle (ATV), except through a muffler or other device that
effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom and complies with all
applicable state laws and regulations;
   (K)   A party or other gathering that unreasonably disturbs the peace,
quiet, or repose of the public or of another person's use and enjoyment of
their property. The use or operation, or permitting the use or operation, of
any radio receiving set, musical instrument, music device, paging system,
machine, or other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a distinct
and loud manner that disturbs the peace, quiet, or comfort of any other or the
general public;
   (L)   Abandoned vehicles as that term is defined in I.C. 9-13-2-1, which, as
of the date of this subchapter, defines an ABANDONED VEHICLE as:
      (1)   A vehicle located on public property illegally;
      (2)   A vehicle left on public property without being moved for 24 hours;
      (3)   A vehicle located on public property in such a manner as to
constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic on a public right-of-way;
      (4)   A vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control of that property for more than 48 hours;
      (5)   A vehicle from which the engine, transmission, or differential has
been removed or that is otherwise partially dismantled or inoperable and left
on public property;
      (6)   A vehicle that has been removed by a towing service or public
agency upon request of an officer enforcing a statute or an ordinance other
than this chapter if the impounded vehicle is not claimed or redeemed by the
owner or the owner's agent within 20 days after the vehicle's removal;
      (7)   A vehicle that is at least three model years old, is mechanically
inoperable, and is left on private property continuously in a location visible
from public property for more than 20 days. For purposes of this subchapter, a
vehicle covered by a tarpaulin or other plastic, vinyl, rubber, cloth, or
textile covering is considered to be visible;
      (8)   A vehicle:
         (a)   That was repaired or stored at the request of the owner;
         (b)   That has not been claimed by the owner; and
         (c)   For which the reasonable value of the charges associated with
the repair or storage remain unpaid more than 30 days after the date on which
the repair work is completed or the vehicle is first stored.
      I.C. Chapters 9-22-1 and 9-13-2, as may be amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and, to the extent
applicable, will control in all matters related to the removal, storage,
disposal, and other regulation of abandoned vehicles.
   (M)   All other uses and conditions of property that violate the town’s
zoning ordinance, as codified in
Chapter 152 of this code, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-1012, or are defined as
public nuisances in other town ordinances.
   (N)   Additional definitions, for the purpose of this subchapter:
      FRONT BUILDING LINE. A line extending the entire width of a lot across
that part or face of the building nearest the front line of the lot and
parallel to the front lot line. Corner lots, which are bounded on two sides by
a public street, will be deemed to have two front building lines oriented to
both streets. Exposed steps, patios, decks, and porches shall not be considered
a part of the building for purposes of defining a front building line.
      LITTER. Includes, but is not limited to, garbage, trash, debris, lawn or
garden waste, ashes, animal waste, animal carcasses, newspapers, magazines,
glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, construction materials, scrap metal,
discarded clothing, appliances, furniture, motor vehicle, trailer, and boat
parts, or other nauseous or offensive matter, of any kind, that is not kept in
a designated container that: 1) is designed to prevent its escape; and 2)
picked up (emptied) on a routinely scheduled basis. Litter kept in or on a
trailer or truck bed shall not be deemed to be kept in a designated container.
      OPEN VIEW. Visible from private property and/or public property
including, without limitation, public roads and rights-of-way.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-15-17) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.18 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   Owners and occupants of real property within the town shall maintain and use
their property in a manner that does not constitute a public nuisance and,
otherwise, complies with this subchapter. All other persons shall comply with
this subchapter to the extent it may be applicable.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-15-17) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.19 WRITTEN NOTICE.
   In the event of a violation of this subchapter, an officer of the Prince’s
Lakes Police Department shall issue a written notice (Violation Notice) to the
violating person or persons, either by personal delivery or by way of
registered or certified mail or other public means by which a written
acknowledgment of receipt may be requested and obtained. The violation notice
shall:
   (A)   Inform the violating person or persons of a violation of this
subchapter and describe, with reasonable particularity, the conditions that
constitute a public nuisance;
   (B)   Direct the violating person or persons to abate the violation within a
prescribed time;
   (C)   Inform the violating person or persons that if the violation is not
abated the town may elect to abate the violation and bill the violating person
or persons for the costs incurred by the town, including administrative costs
and attorney's fees; and
   (D)   Advise the violating person or persons that the violation may be
appealed by submitting, within ten days from the date of receipt of the
violation notice, a written notice of appeal.
   If the use/and or condition of private property is the basis of a violation
notice issued under this subchapter, then all owners and occupants of that
property will be deemed to be violating persons and subject to enforcement
actions and remedies of the town.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-15-17)
§ 92.20 BILL FOR ABATEMENT.
   If the town abates a violation, it will issue a bill to the property owner
for the costs it incurs in bringing the property into compliance with this
subchapter, including administrative costs, removal costs, and attorney's fees.
A bill issued to the property owner, under this section, will be delinquent if
not paid within 30 days after the date of the issuance of the bill.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-15-17)
§ 92.21 APPEAL OF VIOLATION NOTICE.
   A property owner may appeal a violation notice or a bill issued under this
subchapter by delivering to the Town Marshal, within ten days of receipt of a
violation notice or bill, a written notice of appeal, stating the basis of the
appeal, and requesting a hearing at the next regular meeting of the Town
Council. At the hearing, the property owner may present evidence to the Town
Council. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Town Council shall make a
final decision concerning the appeal, take the matter under advisement, or take
such other action as the Town Council deems advisable. During the pendency of
the appeal, the town will cease enforcement and collection efforts.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-15-17)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   If corrective action for violations of §
92.02 is not taken within ten days of the property owner’s receipt of notice,
the property owner(s) will be subject to a fine in the amount of $150. Each day
the property remains in violation of §
92.02 shall constitute a separate violation.
   (B)   In the event a violation of §§
92.15 through
92.21 is not abated within the time prescribed in the violation notice, the
town, as permitted by and pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-2, may enter on to the
property and abate the violation or contract with a private contractor to abate
the violation. The town may abate an ongoing violation in the same manner and
as often as the conditions on the property require. Additionally, in the event
a violation of §§
92.15 through
92.21 is not abated within the time prescribed in the violation notice, the
property owner may be subject to penalties of up to $300 per day for each day
the violation continues beyond the time prescribed for the abatement.
(Ord. 269, passed 6-28-99; Am. Ord. 303, passed 6-18-01; Am. Ord. 394, passed
5-15-17; Am. Ord. 395, passed 5-15-17)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Park and Recreation Board
   
93.02   Park alcohol and drug free policy
   
93.03   Speed limit in parks
Cross-reference:
   Campgrounds, see § 150.50
   Pets prohibited in parks, see § 91.22
§ 93.01 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established for the town a Park and
Recreation Board (“Park Board”), which shall be governed by and operate
pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 36-10-3, the applicable provisions of which,
as they may be amended, are hereby incorporated, by reference, as part of this
section.
   (B)   Park Board.
      (1)   The Park Board shall consist of four members appointed by the
Council. Those members shall be appointed based upon their interest in and
knowledge of parks and recreation. Members of the Park Board must be residents
of the town and not more than two members may be affiliated with the same
political party. The Council, pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-4.1, upon determining
that there is an absence of persons who are willing to serve on the Park Board
and who satisfy all statutory requirements, may waive the political affiliation
requirement. A member of the Council may not serve on the Park Board. Initial
appointments to the Park Board shall be as follows:
         (a)   One member for a term of one year.
         (b)   One member for a term of two years.
         (c)   One member for a term of three years.
         (d)   One member for a term of four years.
      (2)   After the appointment of the initial Park Board members setting the
staggering of the member terms, each of the members shall be appointed for a
four-year term. All terms will expire on the first Monday in January, but a
member continues in office until the member’s successor is appointed. At its
first regular meeting of each year, the Park Board shall elect a president,
vice president, and secretary. The Park Board shall meet at least quarterly and
shall be subject to the Indiana Open Door Law. A majority of the members
constitutes a quorum, and action of the Park Board is not official unless it is
authorized by at least three members present and acting.
   (C)   Park Board duties and powers. The Park Board shall exercise general
supervision of and make rules for the Department, shall establish rules
governing the use of the town’s park and recreation facilities by the public,
and shall otherwise carry out its duties as provided under I.C. 36-10-3-10 and
I.C. 36-10-3-11, subject to the legislative, budgetary, and salary setting
authority of the Town Council.
   (D)   Appointment of a Superintendent.
      (1)   The Park Board may appoint a superintendent of parks and
recreation. The Park Board may not consider political affiliation in the
selection of the superintendent. The superintendent must:
         (a)   Be qualified by training or experience in the field of parks and
recreation; or
         (b)   Have a certification or an advanced degree in the field of parks
and recreation.
      (2)   Under the direction of the Board, the superintendent shall perform
duties that the Board directs.
(Ord. 2022-5, passed 11-21-22)
§ 93.02 PARK ALCOHOL AND DRUG FREE POLICY.
   The park in the town shall be free of alcohol and drugs not prescribed by a
physician. No person in the park shall possess or use alcohol or drugs not
prescribed by a physician. The Marshal, or his or her deputy or designee, shall
confiscate any alcohol or drugs not prescribed by a physician.
(Ord. 240, passed 7-14-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.03 SPEED LIMIT IN PARKS.
   The maximum speed for all vehicles in the parks shall be 25 miles per hour.
(Ord. 237, passed 7-14-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 94: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Use or application of non-approved materials on roads
Excavations
   
94.15   Permit required for excavation
   
94.16   Application; fee
   
94.17   Use of tractors, bulldozers
   
94.18   Culverts
   
94.19   Water not to be discharged onto public road
Addressing
   
94.30   Title
   
94.31   Compliance
   
94.32   Purpose; jurisdiction
   
94.33   Definitions
   
94.34   Property address numbering system
   
94.35   Property addressing
   
94.36   Responsibility for property addressing and road numbering
   
94.37   Requirements for obtaining street address
   GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 USE OR APPLICATION OF NON-APPROVED MATERIALS ON ROADS.
   (A)   Since the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of
Health of the State of Indiana have banned and condemned the use or application
of non-approved oils, chemicals and emulsion on public roads, and since such
use or application has occurred in the town, such use or application is now
hereby prohibited.
   (B)   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person or persons, firm or
corporation to use or apply any oil, chemical, emulsion, or any other material
onto or upon any public road, maintained by the town of, or onto or upon any
private street, roadway or drive located within the corporate limits of the
town, without the written approval of the Town Council.
(Ord. 141, passed 8-8-84)
Penalty, see § 10.99
   EXCAVATIONS
§ 94.15 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EXCAVATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any firm, person or corporation to excavate for any
water, gas or sewer piping or for any other purpose in any public highway,
alley or driveway in the town, without first obtaining from the Building
Inspector of the town a permit to do so and/or filing a bond as hereinafter
provided.
(Ord. 98, passed 3-9-77)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.16 APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   Any firm, person or corporation desiring to obtain a permit for
excavating as above provided, shall file with the Building Inspector a written
application for such permit, stating the exact location of the proposed
excavation, and the purpose of making the proposed excavation, and by filing
therewith a cash or a performance bond in the sum of $500 where the excavation
is to be made in a paved highway, alley or driveway, and in the sum of $250 for
an unpaved highway, alley or driveway. Any excavation to be made across the
entire width of a paved highway, alley or driveway shall be bored. Each bore
constitutes a separate excavation and bond shall be posted as such. The bond
shall be made payable to the town, conditioned upon payment by the applicant to
the town of all costs incident to the replacement of the highway, alley or
driveway in as good a condition as it was prior to excavation thereof. The bond
shall be held for one year; or less as determined by the scope of work
performed. It shall be the duty of the Street Department of the town to fill
and repair all excavations in the thoroughfares or if the town is unable to
repair to the original condition and must obtain outside assistance, the cost
of the repair shall be paid by the person, firm or corporation applying for
such permit. The cost to be paid within ten days after receipt of notification
of the amount of the costs. Upon failure to do so, the bond shall be forfeited
to the town. Otherwise, the bond shall be returned to maker thereof, upon
receipt of the costs of the repair.
   (B)   The fee for obtaining each permit shall be $25.
(Ord. 98, passed 3-9-77)
§ 94.17 USE OF TRACTORS, BULLDOZERS.
   The operation, use or driving of any tractor, bulldozer or any other vehicle
with lugs or cleats upon the public highways in the town is hereby prohibited.
(Ord. 98, passed 3-9-77)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.18 CULVERTS.
   The Street Department shall determine the size and construction standards of
all culverts in the town. Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to
construct any culvert shall, prior to the construction and building of any
culvert, obtain an excavation permit as provided in
§ 94.16.
(Ord. 98, passed 3-9-77; Am. Ord. 229, passed 3-25-96)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.19 WATER NOT TO BE DISCHARGED ONTO PUBLIC ROAD.
   No tile, ditch, sewer or drain of any type shall be so constructed as to
discharge water or any of its contents upon any public highway or right-of-way
thereof.
(Ord. 98, passed 3-9-77)
Penalty, see § 10.99
   ADDRESSING
§ 94.30 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the Addressing Ordinance.
(Ord. 236, passed 6-23-97)
§ 94.31 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure shall be assigned an address or street named in any matter
whatsoever in the town except in full compliance with all provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 236, passed 6-23-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.32 PURPOSE; JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter shall be to set standards for
residences and other structure numbering and road naming in the town, and
establish the authority and numbering and road naming in the town, and
establishing the authority and methods to be used when assigning addresses to
properties in the town. These standards shall be used in the implementation of
an Enhanced 911 emergency response system in the town. It is intended to
provide continuity, avoid duplication, and prevent general confusion regarding
the location of developed parcels of real estate in the town.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. This subchapter shall apply to all real estate in the
town.
(Ord. 236, passed 6-23-97)
§ 94.33 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADDRESS PLANNING AUTHORITY. The Plan Commission, town of Prince's Lakes,
Indiana, shall serve as the coordinating body in the town with the
responsibility for assigning street addresses within its jurisdiction.
   CUSTOMER (ADDRESSEE). A family, individual, residence, business, or industry
which receives mail at a delivery point.
   LOT. A lot is a designated parcel, tract, development, or area of real
estate which is either now being or will be used eventually for construction of
a structure.
(Ord. 236, passed 6-23-97)
§ 94.34 PROPERTY ADDRESS NUMBERING SYSTEM.
   (A)   Advantages of a property address numbering system. A street numbering
system and corresponding property addresses provide individual structure with
an exact geographic location in the town. Town-type street/road addresses are
necessary in order to provide a structure with a specific and more accurate
identification for efficient mail delivery; to provide an easily identifiable
geographic reference point for quick dispatch of police, fire, and emergency
rescue equipment; and to provide ease of location identification for friends,
service vehicles or other individuals trying to locate a specific structure or
town road. A numbering system should make it easy for anyone to find the
location of a town road residential property in a short period of time and
allow for a systematic expansion of address numbers as community growth occurs.
   (B)   The system employed. The town will structure the naming of its road
system and the issuance of property address based on the system and method
approved by the Plan Commission.
   (C)   Property numbering intervals. Street addresses will be assigned in
order and frequency as determined by the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 236, passed 6-23-97)
§ 94.35 PROPERTY ADDRESSING.
   (A)   Assignment of official permanent property addresses. All residences,
commercial, industrial, and public structures located in the town shall be
assigned permanent town-type street addresses by the Plan Commission.
   (B)   Placement and size of address numbers. Once a property address has
been assigned by the Plan Commission, it shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to provide visible and current address numbers on both the
structure and the mailbox. Also, if the structure is not visible from the road
and the mailbox is not by the drive, a 4x4 post must be staked at the entrance
to the drive with three-inch numbers on it. The letters and numbers on the
mailbox must all be in compliance with U.S. Postal Service regulations and
recommendations. The lettering shall be in contrast to its background. The
address shall be placed on both sides of the mailbox, when possible. The
letters and numbers placed on structure shall be at least three inches in
height. The letters and numbers shall be placed on the mail level in a location
which faces the street upon which it is addressed.
(Ord. 236, passed 6-23-97)
§ 94.36 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROPERTY ADDRESSING AND ROAD NUMBERING.
   The responsibility for the issuance of street addresses shall be assigned to
the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall issue and keep a permanent
record of all issued property addresses within its jurisdiction and shall share
such addresses with local postal authorities and E-911 personnel. Determination
of town or road or highway names or changes in such names shall be the
responsibility of the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 236, passed 6-23-97)
§ 94.37 REQUIREMENTS FOR OBTAINING STREET ADDRESSES.
   A person or business who submits an application to build a new structure in
the town shall submit a plat or site plan as is normally required to obtain a
building permit. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the Plan Commission
shall issue an official address that shall be forwarded to postal officials,
the Johnson County Auditor, and local authorities, no other address shall be
used for identification of the structure on that property.
(Ord. 236, passed 6-23-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 95: BURNING
Section
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Clearance between fires and combustibles
   
95.03   Fire hazard prohibited
   
95.04   Burning of structures prohibited
   
95.05   Open burning
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING MATERIALS. All material used in new construction or removed from
existing structures, which may be new or used, including without limitation
boards, lumber, flooring, siding, roofing, shingles, paper, packaging, wall
board, insulation, pipes, wires, fixtures, asphalt, plastic, fiberglass, and
mortar.
   HOUSEHOLD GARBAGE  or HOUSEHOLD WASTE.  Food products or byproducts or
materials containing fecal matter or other human or animal body waste.
HOUSEHOLD GARBAGE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE  shall not mean paper products, unless the
paper product contains fecal matter or other human or animal body waste.
   INCINERATOR.  A structure, or portion thereof, container, device or other
appliance designed, used or intended to be used for the disposal of combustible
material by burning. Every INCINERATOR shall be equipped and maintained with a
spark arrester constructed of iron, heavy wire, mesh or other non-combustible
material, with openings not larger than one-half inch.
   OPEN BURNING  and OPEN FIRE.  Any burning or fire which is not confined to
an incinerator, barbecue grill, barbecue pit, or outdoor fireplace.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-21-03; Am. Ord. 372, passed 12-16-13)
§ 95.02 CLEARANCE BETWEEN FIRES AND COMBUSTIBLES.
   A minimum clearance of ten feet shall be maintained between any open fire or
barbecue pit and any combustible material.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-21-03)
§ 95.03 FIRE HAZARD PROHIBITED.
   A person shall not construct, erect, install, maintain or use any
incinerator, barbecue pit or outdoor fireplace, or burn any combustible
material so as to constitute or occasion a fire hazard by the use of burning
thereof.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-21-03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.04 BURNING OF STRUCTURES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall set fire to or burn, or cause the setting of fire to or the
burning, or aid, counsel, or procure the setting of fire to or the burning of
any building or structure, whether finished or unfinished, occupied or
unoccupied and whether owned by him or her or another, within the town without
the express written permission of the Town Marshal.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-21-03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.05 OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   No open burning shall be permitted within the town except for open
burning that is constantly attended by a person at least 16 years of age until
such fire is extinguished. This person shall have a garden hose connected to a
water supply, or other fire-extinguishing equipment readily available for use.
   (B)   The Town Marshal may prohibit any open burning when atmospheric
conditions, weather conditions, or local circumstances make such fires
hazardous, in the Marshal's discretion.
   (C)   If a fire creates a nuisance or hazard, the fire shall be
extinguished.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall be unlawful for any person to
burn, to cause to be burned, or permit to be burned any household garbage or
household waste or building materials. This chapter shall not apply to the
burning of leaves, twigs, or similar yard waste.
   (E)   It shall be the responsibility of the office of the Town Marshal to
enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 316, passed 7-21-03; Am. Ord. 372, passed 12-16-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 96: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
96.01   Policy statement
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Unlawful practice
   
96.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
96.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions
   
96.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage service
   
96.07   Interference, coercion, or intimidation
   
96.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
   
96.09   Equal access to housing in HUD programs
   
96.10   Exemptions
   
96.11   Administrative enforcement of chapter
   
96.12   Separability of provisions
§ 96.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   It shall be the policy of the town to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the federal Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 367, passed 1-22-13; Am. Ord. 396, passed 5-15-17)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who (I.C. 22-9.5-2-2):
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
   COMMISSION. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-3). The state Civil Rights Commission created
pursuant to I.C. 22-9-1-4 et. seq.
   COMPLAINANT. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-4). A person, including the Commission, who
files a complaint under I.C. 22-9.5-6.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
96.04 through
96.08 of this chapter or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that
is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a
residence by one or more families (I.C. 22-9.5-2-8).
   FAMILIAL STATUS.
      (1)   One or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years
being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody of such
individual or the written permission of such parent or other person.
      (2)   The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process
of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18
years.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9), with the status of
such family being further defined in the definition of FAMILIAL STATUS.
   HANDICAP. With respect to a person:
      (1)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more of such person's major life activities;
      (2)   A record of having such an impairment; or
      (3)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;
      (4)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; or
      (5)   Any other impairment defined in 910 IAC 2-3.
The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use of or addictions to a
controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802 (910 IAC 2-3-2(14)); nor
does the term HANDICAP include an individual solely because that individual is
a transvestite (910 IAC 2-3-2(14)).
   PERSON. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-11). Includes one or more individuals, corporations,
partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual
companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations,
trustees, trustees in cases under Title 11 of the United States Code,
receivers, and fiduciaries.
   TO RENT. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-13). Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and
otherwise to grant for a consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned
by the occupant.
(Ord. 367, passed 1-22-13; Am. Ord. 396, passed 5-15-17)
§ 96.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   Subject to the provisions of division (B) of this section and §
96.10(B) of this chapter, and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against
discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and
in §
96.04 of this chapter shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) of this section and
I.C. 22-9.5-3.
   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) of this section, nothing in
§
96.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses
at any one time, provided that in the sale of such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale, an
exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24-month period. The
private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on his or her behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses
at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be
exempted from application of this section only if such house is sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or any person in the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any
such broker, agent, or salesman, or person; and
         (b)   Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
96.04(C) of this chapter, but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use
of attorneys, escrow agents, abstracters, title companies, and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title; or
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) of this section, a person shall be
deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein; or
      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions
involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
      (3)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended
for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Ord. 367, passed 1-22-13; Am. Ord. 396, passed 5-15-17)
§ 96.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   As made applicable by §
96.03 and except as exempted by §§
96.03(B) and
96.10, it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise to make unavailable
or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin.
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services of
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin.
   (C)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published
any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of
a dwelling, that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based
on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin,
or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination.
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available.
   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
   (F)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or otherwise to make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap
of:
      (1)   That buyer or renter;
      (2)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after
it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
      (3)   Any person associated with that person.
   (G)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of:
      (1)   That person; or
      (2)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after
it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
      (3)   Any person associated with that person.
   (H)   (1)   For purposes of this section, DISCRIMINATION includes:
         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by
such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a modification on
the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months after
September 13, 1998, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a
manner that:
            1.   The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
            3.   All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
               a.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
               b.   Light, switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
               c.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
      (2)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard for Buildings
and Facilities Providing Accessibility and Usability for Physically Handicapped
People (commonly cited as “ANSI A117.1”) suffices to satisfy the requirements
of subdivision (1)(c)3.c. of this division.
      (3)   Nothing in this subsection requires that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.
(Ord. 367, passed 1-22-13; Am. Ord. 396, passed 5-15-17)
§ 96.05 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED
TRANSACTION means any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status.
(Ord. 367, passed 1-22-13; Am. Ord. 396, passed 5-15-17)
§ 96.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICE.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers'
organization, or other service, organization, or facility related to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her
in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on
account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national
origin.
(Ord. 367, passed 1-22-13; Am. Ord. 396, passed 5-15-17)
§ 96.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected
by §§
96.03 through
96.06 of this chapter.
(Ord. 367, passed 1-22-13; Am. Ord. 396, passed 5-15-17)
§ 96.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates, or interferes with, or attempts to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status, or national origin and because he or she is or has been
selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or
facility related to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in division (A) of
this section; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate; or
   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in
division (A) of this section, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful
assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate shall be fined
according to local, state, and federal law; and if bodily injury results shall
be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both;
and if death results shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of years or
for life.
(Ord. 367, passed 1-22-13; Am. Ord. 396, passed 5-15-17)
§ 96.09 EQUAL ACCESS TO HOUSING IN HUD PROGRAMS.
   Pursuant to 24 CFR Part 5.403 and 24 CFR Part 574.3 the definition of FAMILY
is revised to include families regardless of the actual or perceived sexual
orientation, gender identity, or marital status of its members.
(Ord. 396, passed 5-15-17)
§ 96.10 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq. shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those activities or
organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) of this section.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or
national origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not
in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or
purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to
its members or from giving preference to its members.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply with
respect to housing for older persons. As used in this section, HOUSING FOR
OLDER PERSONS means housing:
      (1)   Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of
the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the state civil
rights commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program); or
      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, person 62 years of age or
older; or
      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years
of age or older per unit.
(Ord. 367, passed 1-22-13; Am. Ord. 396, passed 5-15-17)
§ 96.11 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering this
chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioner as set forth
in division (B) of this section shall be vested in the chief elected official
of the town.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the town because of
lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully administer enforcement
proceedings and possible civil actions under this chapter, herein elects to
refer all formal complaints of violation of this chapter by complainants to the
state Civil Rights Commission for administrative enforcement actions pursuant
to I.C. 22-9.5-6, and the chief elected official of the town shall refer all
said complaints to the Commission as provided for under division (A) of this
section to said Commission for purposes of investigation, resolution, and
appropriate relief as provided for under I.C. 22-9.5-6.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the town shall administer
their departments, programs, and activities relating to housing and urban
development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter
and shall cooperate with the chief elected official and the Commission to
further such purposes.
   (D)   The chief elected official of the town or the chief elected official's
designee shall provide information on remedies available to any aggrieved
person or complainant requesting such information.
(Ord. 367, passed 1-22-13; Am. Ord. 396, passed 5-15-17)
§ 96.12 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances shall be determined to be invalid, the remainder of the chapter
and the application of its provisions to other persons not similarly situated
or to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 367, passed 1-22-13; Am. Ord. 396, passed 5-15-17)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
CHAPTER 110: PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   License requirement
   
110.03   Application procedure
   
110.04   Standards for issuance
   
110.05   Revocation procedure
   
110.06   Standards for revocation
   
110.07   Appeal procedure
   
110.08   Exhibition of identification
   
110.09   Town policy on soliciting
   
110.10   Notice regulating soliciting
   
110.11   Duty of solicitors to ascertain notice
   
110.12   Prohibited solicitation
   
110.13   Orders by solicitors
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is a transient merchant,
peddler, or solicitor as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity form,
either as principal or agent, who engages in any temporary business in the town
of offering for sale or selling goods, wares, or merchandise, and who, in the
furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure, vehicle, or any
place within the town for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, or
merchandise.
   PEDDLER. Any person, not a transient merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the town.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods to be delivered in the
future or for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a
solicitor is not a peddler.
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is a transient merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the town.
   (B)   The fee for the license required for this chapter shall be as follows:
For one day, $10; for one week, $25; for one month, $50; for one year, $150.
   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (D)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any person, individual, firm, corporation, or other entity form
that grows the goods, wares, or merchandise that is sold or offered for sale;
      (2)   A person who makes crafts, or items by hand and sells them or
offers them for sale;
      (3)   An auctioneer who is licensed under I.C. 25-6.1;
      (4)   A resident of the town who conducts a sale of tangible personal
property for no more than four days per calendar year;
      (5)   A not-for-profit organization that is exempt from the Indiana Gross
Retail Tax under I.C. 6-2.5-5-26;
      (6)   A person who:
         (a)    Sells merchandise;
         (b)   Offers to sell merchandise; and
         (c)   Provides proof that the sale is being conducted as part of an
activity sponsored by an organization described in subdivision (5); or
      (7)   A person or entity that solicits the sale of goods or services
exclusively to commercial customers.
§ 110.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the Clerk-Treasurer, which application shall be filed with the
Clerk-Treasurer at least seven days before such applicant shall be authorized
to begin such business. This application shall be signed by the applicant if an
individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by an authorized officer if
a corporation or other form of entity. Such application shall state the name
and residence of the applicant; the place where such business is to be
conducted, the kind of goods to be sold, and the length of time for which the
license is desired. The applicant may be requested to provide information
concerning the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the town;
         (b)   The local address of such individual;
         (c)   The permanent address of such individual;
         (d)   The capacity in which such individual will act;
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on, and, if a corporation or other form of entity, the
state of origination;
      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
applicant's business within the town;
      (5)   (a)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services
to be offered for sale or delivery;
         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by
sample as well as from stock;
         (c)   If goods, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or
grown, and where such goods are at the time of application;
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business
within the town;
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in
division (A)(2)(a) above, or the person identified in division (A)(3) has been
convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each offense
and the penalty assessed for each offense.
      (8)   The last municipalities, not exceeding three, where applicant
carried on business immediately preceding the date of application, and the
addresses from which such business was conducted in those municipalities.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (A) above:
      (1)   A description of the applicant;
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to
their application, if required by the town, credentials from the person or
entity, if any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing
the applicant to act as such representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs which have not been canned
shall also attach to their application, in addition to any attachments required
under division (C), a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than
ten days prior to the date of application, certifying the applicant to be free
of contagious or communicable disease.
   (E)   All applications shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of
$1,000 executed by a surety company authorized to conduct business within the
state of Indiana (or in lieu thereof a cash bond of an equal amount) securing
that all goods sold by such applicant will be as represented by him or her and
that he or she will refund the purchase price of any goods, wares, merchandise,
or articles sold by him or her which are not as represented. Any person
aggrieved by the action of any such transient merchant, peddler, or solicitor,
shall have a right of action on the bond for the recovery of money or damages
or both. In the event a cash bond is deposited, the same shall be retained by
the town for 90 days after the expiration of any such licenses. Upon the filing
of such application bond, license fee, and the approval of such application and
bond by the Clerk-Treasurer, a license shall be issued by the Clerk-Treasurer
to such applicant to begin business not less than seven days after the date of
filing such application, bond, and fee.
   (F)   All such license fees must be paid in advance, and if any such
licensee desires to continue in business after the expiration of such license,
a new license must be secured in the same manner and upon the same terms as the
original license.
   (G)   Any persons exempted by the laws of this state from the payment of the
license fees shall before beginning such business, present to the Clerk-
Treasurer his or her credentials, showing that he or she is entitled to such
exemption and shall complete an application and file a bond as above provided.
Upon approval of the application and bond by the Clerk-Treasurer, he or she
shall then receive a certificate from the Clerk-Treasurer authorizing him or
her to engage in the business of transient merchant, peddler, or solicitor,
within the town for any period not longer than one month. If at the end of a
month the person desires to continue in such business, another certificate must
be procured from the Clerk-Treasurer. Pursuant to I.C. 25-25-2-1, any veteran
described in I.C. 10-5-12-1 or I.C. 10-5-13-1, or any other veteran to whom
I.C. 25-25-2-1 et seq. applies, and who holds an honorable discharge from such
service issued by the proper authorities, shall be entitled to a license under
this chapter without the payment of any fees therefore.
Penalty, see § 10.99
Editor’s note:
   This section references I.C. 10-5-12-1 and 10-5-13-1. These statutes were
repealed in 2003.
§ 110.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant's
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant's business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant has committed any of the
following will constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
transient merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the like;
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   Has a record of past breaches of solicited contracts.
§ 110.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Clerk
after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in
§ 110.06. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her known
address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 110.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the license of any felony, or conviction of the licensee
of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, or general welfare
of the public.
§ 110.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§ 110.04 or 100.06 shall
have the right to appeal to the Town Council. The appeal shall be taken by
filing with the Town Council, within 14 days after notice of the decision has
been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting
forth the grounds for appeal. The Town Council shall set the time and place for
a hearing, and notice for such hearing shall be given to such person in the
same manner as provided in
§ 110.05.
   (B)   The order of the Town Council after the hearing shall be final.
§ 110.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to a transient merchant under this chapter shall be
posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more than
one place within the town shall be used to conduct the business licensed,
separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The Clerk shall issue a license to each peddler or solicitor licensed
under this chapter. The license shall contain the words “licensed peddler” or
“licensed solicitor,” the expiration date of the license, and the number of the
license. The license shall be kept with the licensee during such time as he or
she is engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.09 TOWN POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town that the occupants of the
residences in the town shall make the determination of whether solicitors or
peddlers shall be or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
§ 110.10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors or peddlers to any
residence shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the
applicable words, as follows:
   “NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS INVITED”
   (B)   The letters shall be at least 1/3-inch in height.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor or peddler of the determination by the occupant of the residence of
the information contained thereon.
§ 110.11 DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO ASCERTAIN NOTICE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor or peddler upon going onto any
premises in the town upon which a residence is located to first examine the
notice provided for in
§ 110.10 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states “NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS INVITED,” then the
solicitor or peddler, whether registered or not, shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor or peddler who has gained entrance to any residence,
whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises when requested to do so by the occupant.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.12 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of
§ 110.10.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.13 ORDERS BY SOLICITORS.
   All orders taken by solicitors within the town shall be in writing, in
duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in advance, and one
copy of such order shall be given to the purchaser.
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Disturbing the peace and disorderly conduct
   
130.02   Congregating in public places
   
130.03   Disturbing place of worship or meetings
   
130.04   Curfew for minors
   
130.05   Interference with officials
   
130.06   Use of firearms
Cross-reference:
   Civil emergencies, see §§
30.35 through
30.37
§ 130.01 DISTURBING THE PEACE AND DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   It is unlawful for any person or persons, to disturb the peace and quiet of
the town or of its inhabitants by loud talking or by the making of unusual
noises, or by the crying of any alarm without good cause, or by threatening any
person or challenging him or her to fight or menacing him or her with physical
injury or pecuniary loss, or by accosting or approaching any person of the
opposite sex unknown to such person and by word, sign or gesture attempting to
speak to or become acquainted with such person against his or her will except
in the transaction of legitimate business.
(Ord. 59, passed 2-25-70)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.02 CONGREGATING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It is unlawful for any person to congregate or cause to be congregated a
crowd of three or more persons upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parking
lot, school or school grounds, building, or any other public place within the
town so as to obstruct the same or as to hinder or annoy passers-by or
occupants of adjacent premises, or as to interfere with the activities normally
carried on on the premises.
(Ord. 59, passed 2-25-70)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.03 DISTURBING PLACE OF WORSHIP OR MEETINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the town by any loud
or unnecessary talking or shouting or by any threatening, abusive, profane or
obscene language or violent action, or by any other rude behavior, to
interrupt, molest, annoy or disturb any group of persons convened for the
purpose of worship, or in like manner to interrupt, molest, annoy or disturb
any meeting of persons met together for any lawful purpose.
(Ord. 59, passed 2-25-70)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.04 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years to be upon the
public streets, alleys, public places, public grounds, or public thoroughfares
of the town during the hours from 10:00 p.m. official town time to 5:00 a.m.
official town time. Such curfew time shall be extended to 11:00 p.m. on Friday
and Saturday. It shall also be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care or custody of any person under the age of 16 years,
knowingly to permit such minor person to be upon the streets, alleys, public
places, public grounds, or public thoroughfares of the town during the above
mentioned hours. The provisions of this section shall not apply when such minor
person is accompanied by the child’s parent, guardian or custodian, or an adult
specified by the child’s parent, guardian, or custodian, or while such minor is
engaged in interstate or international travel from a location outside Indiana
to another location outside Indiana, or participating in, going to, or
returning from:
      (1)   Lawful employment;
      (2)   A school sanctioned activity;
      (3)   A religious event;
      (4)   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property from
an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
      (5)   An activity involving the exercise of the child’s rights protected
under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or Article 1,
Section 31, of the Constitution of the State of Indiana, or both, such as
freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or
      (6)   An activity conducted by a non-profit or governmental entity that
provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the supervision
of one or more adults.
(Ord. 59, passed 2-25-70)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Generally, see I.C. 31-37-3-1 et seq.
§ 130.05 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to intentionally impede
or interfere, or attempt to impede or interfere with any police officer,
firefighter, or any other town official in the performance of his or her duty
or emergency functions as a firefighter, police officer, or town official.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
interference alleged consisted of speech only.
(Ord. 59, passed 2-25-70)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.06 USE OF FIREARMS.
   (A)   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person or persons to fire,
shoot or otherwise discharge any gun, revolver, rifle, shot-gun or any other
type of firearm within the corporate limits of the town for any purpose other
than in the defense of his or her life or the life of another person, or the
protection of his or her property entrusted to him or her by another person.
   (B)   Law enforcement officers of the town, of Johnson County and of the
State or Federal government, and their duly constituted deputies in the
discharge of official duty are excepted from the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 3, passed 6-12-57)
Penalty, see § 10.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
152.   ZONING
      
153.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Building Code
Article I. Generally
   
150.01   Title
   
150.02   Purpose
   
150.03   Definitions
   
150.04   Scope
   
150.05   Authority
   
150.06   Effect of adoption on prior ordinance
   
150.07   Building permit required
   
150.08   Application for building permit
   
150.09   Issuance of building permit
   
150.10   Certificate of occupancy
Article II. Investigations and Inspections of Construction Activities
   
150.11   General authority to make inspections and investigations
   
150.12   Inspections by Fire Department
Article III. Enforcement and Penalties
   
150.13   Withhold issuance of permits
   
150.14   Permit revocation
   
150.15   Stop-work order
   
150.16   Civil action
   
150.17   Monetary penalty
   
150.18   Right of appeal
   
150.19   Adoption of rules by reference
   
150.20   Lifting devices located within a private residence
   
150.21   Use of engineered roof trusses and floor joists
Unsafe Buildings
   
150.30   Statutes adopted
   
150.31   Definitions
   
150.32   Enforcement authority; hearing authority
   
150.33   Unsafe building and unsafe premises defined
   
150.34   Standards for reconstruction, alteration, repair or demolition
   
150.35   Compliance required
   
150.36   Unsafe Building Fund
   
150.37   Bids and contracts
Campgrounds
   
150.50   Generally
 
   
150.99   Penalty
BUILDING CODE
ARTICLE I. GENERALLY
§ 150.01 TITLE.
   This chapter and all material included herein by reference shall be known as
the “Prince’s Lakes Building Code.”
(Ord. 161, passed 9-11-89; Am. Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the life, public safety, health
and general welfare of the citizens of the town, and shall be construed in such
a manner as to effectuate this purpose.
(Ord. 161, passed 9-11-89; Am. Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise clearly indicated by its context, the words and terms
defined in this section shall have the specified meanings.
   BUILDING COMMISSIONER. As used in this chapter, shall mean the person
designated by the Prince’s Lakes Plan Commission to enforce the town's Building
Code and includes individuals employed by the town, if any, who are authorized
to represent the Building Commissioner.
   CLASS 1 STRUCTURE. Shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-
4, as it may be amended. As of the effective date of this subchapter, CLASS 1
STRUCTURE means any part of the following:
      (1)   (a)   A building or structure that is intended to be or is occupied
or otherwise used in any part by any of the following:
            1.   The public.
            2.   Three or more tenants.
            3.   One or more persons who act as the employees of another.
         (b)   A site improvement affecting access by persons with physical
disabilities to a building or structure described in division (a) above.
         (c)   Outdoor event equipment.
         (d)   Any class of buildings or structures that the Commission
determines by rules to affect a building or structure described in division (a)
above, except buildings or structures described in divisions (3) through (6).
      (2)   Subsection (1)(a) includes a structure that contains three or more
condominium units (as defined in I.C. 32-25-2-9) or other units that:
         (a)   Are intended to be or are used or leased by the owner of the
unit; and
         (b)   Are not completely separated from each other by an unimproved
space.
      (3)   Subsection (1)(a) does not include a building or structure that:
         (a)   Is intended to be or is used only for an agricultural purpose on
the land where it is located; and
         (b)   Is not used for retail trade or is a stand used for retail sales
of farm produce for eight or less consecutive months in a calendar year.
      (4)   Subsection (1)(a) does not include a Class 2 structure.
      (5)   Subsection (1)(a) does not include a vehicular bridge.
      (6)   Subsection (1)(a) does not include a structure that is intended to
be or is occupied solely to provide periodic maintenance or repair of:
         (a)   The structure; or
         (b)   Mechanical or electrical equipment located within and affixed to
the structure.
   CLASS 2 STRUCTURE. Has the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-14-4, as
it may be amended. As of the effective date of this subchapter, CLASS 2
STRUCTURE means any part of the following:
      (1)   (a)   A townhouse or a building or structure that is intended to
contain or contains only one dwelling unit or two dwelling units unless any
part of the building or structure is regularly used as a Class 1 structure; or
         (b)   An outbuilding for a structure described in division (a) above,
such as a garage, barn, or family swimming pool, including an above ground
swimming pool, unless any part of the outbuilding is regularly used as a Class
1 structure.
      (2)   Subsection (1) does not include a vehicular bridge.
      (3)   For purposes of subsection (1)(a), TOWNHOUSE means a single-family
dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units in which
each unit:
         (a)   Extends from foundation to roof;
         (b)   Is not more than three stories in height;
         (c)   Is separated from each adjoining unit by:
            1.   Two one hour fire-resistance rated walls with exposure from
both sides; or
            2.   A common two hour fire-resistance rated wall; and
         (d)   Has open space on at least two sides.
   CONSTRUCTION. Shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-7, as
it may be amended. As of the effective date of this subchapter, CONSTRUCTION
means any of the following:
      (1)   Fabrication of any part of an industrialized building system or
mobile structure for use at another site.
      (2)   Erection or assembly of any part of a Class 1 or Class 2 structure
at the site where it will be used.
      (3)   Installation of any part of the permanent heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, electrical, plumbing, sanitary, emergency detection, emergency
communication, or fire or explosion suppression systems for a Class 1 or Class
2 structure at the site where it will be used.
      (4)   Work undertaken to alter, remodel, rehabilitate, or add to any part
of a Class 1 or Class 2 structure.
      (5)   Work undertaken to relocate any part of a Class 1 or Class 2
structure, except a mobile structure.
   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING SYSTEM. Has the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-
12-1-14, as it may be amended.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. Has the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-16 as it
may be amended.
   MOBILE STRUCTURE. Has the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-17, as it
may be amended.
   PERSON. Has the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-18, as it may be
amended. As of the effective date of this subchapter, PERSON means an
individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, unincorporated
association, or governmental entity.
   STRUCTURE. Both Class 1 and Class 2 structures, unless specifically stated
otherwise, and includes swimming pools.
   VEHICULAR BRIDGE. Has the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-26, as it
may be amended.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.04 SCOPE.
   All construction shall be accomplished in compliance with the provisions of
the town’s Building Code and all other applicable state, county, and local
regulations.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-6, the town’s Building Code shall not apply
to industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under I.C.
Chapter 22-15-4; however, the provisions of the town’s Building Code and the
rules promulgated by the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission do
apply to any construction related to an industrialized building system or
mobile structure not certified under I.C. 22-15-4.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-9, this subchapter is not applicable to
regulated amusement devices, regulated boilers, regulated pressure vessels, or
regulated lifting devices.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.05 AUTHORITY.
   The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to administer
and enforce the following:
   (A)   All of the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Variances granted in accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-11.
   (C)   Orders issued under I.C. 22-12-7.
(Ord. 161, passed 9-11-89; Am. Ord. 322, passed 9-20-04; Am. Ord. 399, passed
8-21-17)
§ 150.06 EFFECT OF ADOPTION ON PRIOR ORDINANCE.
   The expressed or implied repeal of amendment by this subchapter of any other
ordinance or part of any other ordinance does not affect any rights or
liabilities accrued, penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the
effective date of this subchapter. Such rights, liabilities, and other
proceedings are continued and penalties shall be imposed and enforced under the
repealed or amended ordinance as if this subchapter had not been adopted.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.07 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Construction is prohibited unless in conformity with a valid building permit
obtained from the Building Commissioner prior to commencement of construction.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.08 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person required to have a building permit shall submit a complete
application to the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   This application shall be submitted on a form prepared by the Building
Commissioner, and shall contain the following:
      (1)   Information that the Building Commissioner determines to be
necessary to locate and contact the applicant.
      (2)   A clear and understandable copy of detailed plans and
specifications drawn to scale which indicate in a precise manner the nature and
location of all construction to be accomplished.
      (3)   A plot plan drawn to scale; provided, however, such plot plan shall
not be required in the instance where all such construction is to occur
entirely within an existing structure. This plot plan shall reflect the
location of the structure in relation to existing property lines and shall show
streets, curbs and sidewalks and proposed changes or additions to such streets,
curbs and sidewalks.
      (4)   If required by Indiana law or any rule of the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission, a copy of a construction design release for the
construction to be done that has been issued by the Building Law Compliance
Officer pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3.
      (5)   Any additional information that the Building Commissioner finds to
be necessary to determine that the construction will conform to all applicable
building and fire safety laws and will not violate any other applicable
ordinances or laws.
      (6)   The fee established by.
   (C)   Application for a building permit shall be made by the person entitled
to obtain the permit or by an employee or agent of that person. The Building
Commissioner may require that such an employee or agent provide written
authority to apply for a permit.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.09 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT.
   The Building Commissioner shall issue a building permit to a person after
the person has submitted a complete application, including any applicable fee,
provided that the proposed construction will conform to all applicable building
and fire safety laws and will not violate any other applicable ordinances or
laws.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.10 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No certificate of occupancy for any structure shall be issued unless such
structure was constructed in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
It shall be unlawful to occupy any structure unless a full, partial, or
temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building
Commissioner.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
ARTICLE II. INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
§ 150.11 GENERAL AUTHORITY TO MAKE INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   All construction shall be subject to periodic inspections by the
Building Commissioner irrespective of whether a building permit has been or is
required to be obtained.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner may at any reasonable time go in, upon,
around or about the premises where any structure subject to the provisions of
this subchapter or to the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission is located for the purposes of inspection and investigation of such
structure. Such inspection and investigation may be made before and/or after
construction on the project is completed for the purposes of determining
whether the structure meets building standards and procedures, and ascertaining
whether the construction and procedures have been accomplished in a manner
consistent with this subchapter and the rules of the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.12 INSPECTIONS BY FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The Building Commissioner and the Fire Department shall work cooperatively
to conduct inspections and investigations to promote compliance with fire
safety laws. (The Fire Department has independent authority to conduct
inspections and take enforcement actions under I.C. 36-8-17).
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
ARTICLE III. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
§ 150.13 WITHHOLD ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Whenever a person who is either an applicant for a building permit or
an obtainer of a building permit owes fees (including checks returned for
insufficient funds, permit fees owed to the Building Commissioner) the Building
Commissioner may withhold the issuance of subsequently requested permits until
such time that the fees are paid.
   (B)   Whenever a person applies for a building permit for a structure that
is not being used or constructed in conformance with applicable provisions of
an applicable zoning ordinance or other ordinance relating to land use, the
Building Commissioner is authorized to withhold the issuance of requested
permit(s) until such time that the property is brought into conformance with
applicable ordinances.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.14 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The Building Commissioner may revoke a building permit when any of the
following are applicable:
   (A)   The application, plans or supporting documents contain a false
statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact.
   (B)   The application, plans or supporting documents reflect a lack of
compliance with building standards and procedures.
   (C)   There is failure to comply with this subchapter.
   (D)   The structure for which the building permit has been issued is not
being used or constructed in conformance with an applicable zoning ordinance or
other ordinance relating to land use.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.15 STOP-WORK ORDER.
   (A)   The Building Commissioner may issue an order requiring suspension of
the pertinent construction (stop-work order) in accordance with this section.
   (B)   The stop work order shall:
      (1)   Be in writing.
      (2)   State with specificity the construction to which it is applicable
and the reason for its issuance.
      (3)   Be posted on the property in a conspicuous place.
      (4)   If practicable, be given to:
         (a)   The person doing the construction; and
         (b)   To the owner of the property or the owner's agent.
      (5)   The stop-work order shall state the conditions under which
construction may be resumed.
   (C)   The Building Commissioner may issue a stop-work order if:
      (1)   Construction is proceeding in an unsafe manner, including, but not
limited to, in violation of any standard set forth in this subchapter or any
state law pertaining to safety during construction.
      (2)   Construction is occurring in violation of this subchapter or in
such a manner that if construction is allowed to proceed, there is a reasonable
probability that it will be substantially difficult to correct the violation.
      (3)   Construction for which a building permit is required is proceeding
without a building permit being in force.
   (D)   The issuance of a stop-work order shall in no way limit the operation
of penalties provided elsewhere in this subchapter.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.16 CIVIL ACTION.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-4, the town may initiate a civil action in a court
of competent jurisdiction to restrain any person from violating a provision of
the town's Building Code.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.17 MONETARY PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this subchapter may be subject to a
fine in any sum not exceeding $2,500. The assessment of a monetary penalty
shall in no way limit the operation of the penalties provided elsewhere in this
subchapter.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.18 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by an order issued under the town's Building Code shall
have the right to petition for review by filing a petition using either, or
both, of the following procedures:
   (A)   Appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
      (1)   A person aggrieved by an order issued under this subchapter may
appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission, in accordance
with I.C.22-13-2-7.
      (2)   The Commission may modify or reverse any order issued by the
municipality that covers a subject governed by I.C. 22-12, I.C. 22-13, I.C. 22-
14, I.C. 22-15, a fire safety or a building rule.
      (3)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission must review
orders that concern a Class 2 Structure if the person aggrieved by the order
petitions for review under I.C. 4-21.5-3-7 within 30 days after the issuance of
the order.
      (4)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission may review all
other orders issued under this subchapter.
      (5)   The review of an order by the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission does not suspend the running of the time period under any statute in
which a person must petition a court for judicial review of the order.
   (B)   Appeal to an established local administrative body or court. Pursuant
to I.C. 36-7-8-9, a person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Department
may appeal as in other civil actions. The appellant must, by registered mail,
give the municipality executive a 15 day written notice of his or her intention
to appeal. This notice must concisely state the appellant's grievance. If,
pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-9, the municipality has established by ordinance to
hear appeals of orders issued under ordinances, then a person aggrieved by an
order may petition for review with this administrative body in accordance with
said ordinance. If no such administrative body exists, then the person may
petition a court for judicial review of the order.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.19 ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-3(b), the rules of the Indiana Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission as set out in the following Articles
of Title 675 of the Indiana Administrative Code are hereby incorporated by
reference in this code and shall include any later amendments to those rules.
      (1)   Article 13 - Building Codes.
      (2)   Article 14 - Indiana Residential Code.
      (3)   Article 16 - Indiana Plumbing Code.
      (4)   Article 17 - Indiana Electrical Code.
      (5)   Article 18 - Indiana Mechanical Code.
      (6)   Article 19 - Indiana Energy Conservation Code.
      (7)   Article 20 - Indiana Swimming Pool Code.
      (8)   Article 22 - Indiana Fire Code.
      (9)   Article 25 - Indiana Fuel Gas Code (k) Article 28 - NFPA Standards.
   (B)   Two copies of the above rules incorporated by reference are on file in
the office of the clerk for the legislative body for public inspection as
required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
   (C)   The Building Commissioner and the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission may grant a variance to the fire safety laws and building laws
adopted in this subchapter. Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-7(b), a variance granted
by the Building Commissioner is not effective until it has been approved by
Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.20 LIFTING DEVICES LOCATED WITHIN A PRIVATE RESIDENCE.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-22(b)(12), lifting devices, such as elevators
and wheelchair lifts, located within a private residence are not regulated
lifting devices. Therefore, the following standards applicable to lifting
devices located within a private residence are incorporated by reference:
      (1)   Part 5.3, Private Residence Elevators, ANSI/ASME A17.1-2000, Safety
Code for Elevators and Escalators published by the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016.
      (2)   Part 5.4, Private Residence Inclined Elevators, ANSI/ASME A17.1-
2000, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators published by the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016.
      (3)   Section 5, Private Residence Vertical Platform Lifts, ASME A18.1a,
2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway
Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three
Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
      (4)   Section 6, Private Residence Inclined Platform Lifts, ASME A18.1a,
2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway
Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three
Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
      (5)   Section 7, Private Inclined Stairway Lifts, ASME A18.1a, 2001
(Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway Chair
Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park
Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
   (B)   Two copies of the above lifting device standards incorporated by
reference are on file in the office of the town's Clerk Treasurer for public
inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
§ 150.21 USE OF ENGINEERED ROOF TRUSSES AND FLOOR JOISTS.
   This section applies only to new construction of a Class 1 Structure and a
Class 2 Structure.
   (A)   As used in this subchapter, engineered lumber roof trusses and/or
floor joists refers to a structural assembly that:
      (1)   Is fabricated from:
         (a)   Wood;
         (b)   Light gauge metal;
         (c)   Other component materials; or
         (d)   Any combination of materials described in clauses (a) through
(c);
      (2)   Has less mass cross sectional area than sawn lumber members that
would be used in an equivalent application;
      (3)   Is assembled from combustible or noncombustible materials, or both;
and
      (4)   Is not a vertical member and supports a roof or floor, or both.
   (B)   The term does not include a structural assembly that provides a
minimum of one hour fire resistance when tested in accordance with ASTM
Standard E119.
   (C)   As used in this section, OWNER means a person having control or
custody of any structure to which this section applies.
   (D)   A structure that contains engineered lumber roof trusses and/or floor
joists must have a placard affixed to the structure that meets the requirements
of this section.
   (E)   The placard shall use [insert required color] coding and lettering
that identifies both of the following:
      (1)   The types of engineered lumber roof trusses and floor joists used
in the structure, including truss or engineered lumber.
      (2)   The location of engineered lumber roof trusses and/or floor joists
used in the structure including floor joists or truss roof systems.
   (F)   The placard may not be:
      (1)   Smaller than three and one-half inches by four and one-half inches;
and
      (2)   Larger than five inches by five and one-half inches.
   (G)   The placard must be permanently affixed:
      (1)   Below the structure's electrical meter, if the structure has
electrical service; or
      (2)   On the left side of the front entrance four to six feet above the
ground, if the structure does not have electrical service. [may insert one or
more additional locations]
   (H)   An applicant for a building permit must indicate on the application:
      (1)   The types of engineered lumber roof trusses and/or floor joists
used in the structure; and
      (2)   The location of the engineered lumber roof trusses and/or floor
joists used in the structure.
   (I)   The application form for a building permit must include a place on the
form for providing the information under division (A).
   (J)   An applicant for a building permit shall not be issued a building
permit unless the individual at the time of the application is issued a placard
by the Building Commissioner.
   (K)   A fee, not to exceed $5, shall be charged for each placard issued.
   (L)   The Building Commissioner shall not:
      (1)   Approve a structure on final inspection; or
      (2)   Issue a certificate of occupancy for a structure;
      unless a placard is affixed to the structure that meets the requirements
of this subchapter.
   (M)   Not later than ten business days after issuing a building permit, the
Building Commissioner shall send written notification to the local fire
department and the 911 telephone call center that has jurisdiction in the area
where the structure is located. The notification shall be sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested.
   (N)   The notification must include the following information:
      (1)   The street address of the property.
      (2)   The name of the municipality and county in which the structure is
located.
      (3)   The types of engineered lumber roof trusses and/or floor joists
used in the structure.
      (4)   The location of the engineered lumber roof trusses and/or floor
joists by area within the structure.
   (O)   Upon receiving a copy of the notification under division (M) of this
subchapter, the chief of the fire department or the chief’s designee shall:
      (1)   Post the information in a conspicuous place for all emergency
personnel;
      (2)   Provide the information to any fire department providing mutual
aid; and
      (3)   For Class 1 Structures only, add the structure to the inspection
file for follow up on a timely basis for inspection.
   (P)   Upon receiving a notification under division (M) of this section, the
911 telephone call center shall maintain the information on each property, by
the address of the property, that uses engineered lumber roof trusses and/or
floor joists. When dispatching to the listed address, the dispatcher shall
notify the responding units of the information.
   (Q)   An owner of a structure shall ensure that the placard remains affixed
to the structure during the life of the structure.
   (R)   If:
      (1)   The Building Commissioner provides written notice to an owner that
the owner has failed to install or maintain a placard on the structure in
violation of this subchapter; and
      (2)   The owner fails to correct the violation not later than ten
business days after receiving the written notice;
      the owner is liable for a civil penalty of not more than $100 per day
during the period beginning ten business days after the owner receives written
notice of the violation from the unit and until the date the violation is
corrected. A penalty imposed under this subchapter may not exceed $3,000 per
structure per year.
(Ord. 399, passed 8-21-17)
UNSAFE BUILDINGS
§ 150.30 STATUTES ADOPTED.
   I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference
as the Unsafe Buildings and Premises Law. All proceedings within the town for
the inspection, repair, and removal of unsafe buildings and/or premises shall
be governed by said law and the provisions of this subchapter. In the event
that provisions of this subchapter and provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-
7-9-28 conflict then the provisions of the state statute shall control.
(Ord. 276, passed 11-8-99)
§ 150.31 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to the definitions provided for in the state statute the
following definitions shall apply to this subchapter.
   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. Refers to the Zoning Administrator for the town.
   HEARING AUTHORITY. Refers to the Plan Commission for the town.
   SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. The definition set forth in I.C. 36-7-9-2 is
hereby incorporated by reference, as if copied in full.
(Ord. 276, passed 11-8-99)
§ 150.32 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY; HEARING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Enforcement Authority is hereby authorized to administer and
proceed under the provisions of this subchapter in the inspection of buildings
and/or premises, and in ordering the repair and/or removal of any buildings or
premises found to be unsafe as specified in I.C. 36-7-9-4, as amended, or as
specified hereinafter.
   (B)   The Hearing Authority is hereby authorized to conduct hearings in
accordance with I.C. 36-7-9-7.
(Ord. 276, passed 11-8-99)
§ 150.33 UNSAFE BUILDING AND UNSAFE PREMISES DEFINED.
   The definition of unsafe buildings and unsafe premises contained in I.C. 36-
7-9-4 is supplemented as follows, to provide minimum standards for building
conditions and/or maintenance within the jurisdiction of the Plan Commission:
   (A)   Any building, structure, and/or premises that has any or all of the
unsafe conditions or defects described hereinafter shall be deemed an unsafe
building and/or unsafe premises, provided that such condition(s) or defect(s)
exist to the extent that life, health, property or safety of the public or its
occupants are endangered;
   (B)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway or other means of exit is not of
sufficient width or size or is not arranged as required so as to be in
compliance with the applicable Indiana State Building Code then in force;
   (C)   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due
to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working
stress or stresses allowed for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or
location as established by the applicable Indiana State Building Code then in
force;
   (D)   Whenever any portion of a building, structure and/or premises has been
damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or any other cause to such extent that
the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was
prior to catastrophe and less than the minimum requirements for new building
codes of similar structure, purpose or location, as established by the
applicable Indiana State Building Code then in force;
   (E)   Whenever any portion, member or appurtenance of any building or
structure is likely to fail to become detached or dislodged or to collapse and
thereby injure persons or damage property;
   (F)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient
strength or stability or is not anchored, attached or fashioned in place so as
to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified for
new buildings or similar structure, purpose or location, without exceeding the
working stresses permitted for such buildings as established by the applicable
Indiana State Building Code then in force;
   (G)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure has wracked, warped,
buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions
have materially less resistance to wind or earthquakes than is required in the
case of similar new construction;
   (H)   Whenever any building or structure or any portion thereof is likely to
partially or completely collapse because of:
      (1)   Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
      (2)   Faulty construction;
      (3)   The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground
necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;
      (4)   The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation;, or
      (5)   Any other cause;
   (I)   Whenever, for any reason, the building, structure or premises or any
portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being
used;
   (J)   Whenever the exterior walls or vertical structural members lift, lean
or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of
gravity does not fall beside the middle one-third of the base;
   (K)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows
33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50%
damage or deterioration of its supporting members enclosing outside walls or
coverings;
   (L)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become:
      (1)   An attractive nuisance to children; or
      (2)   Freely accessible to persons without a substantial property
interest;
   (M)   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to any building or structure provided by building regulations of the town or
any law or ordinances of the State of Indiana or Johnson County relating to the
condition, location or structure of buildings;
   (N)   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in
accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has any non-supporting
part, member or portion less than 50% or in any supporting part, member or
portion less than 66% of the:
      (1)   Strength,
      (2)   Fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or
      (3)   Weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in
the case of a newly constructed building of the like, area, height and
occupancy in the same location;
   (O)   Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, default, faulty construction or arrangements, inadequate light, air or
sanitation facilities, or otherwise is determined by the Enforcement Authority
to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition that it is
likely to cause sickness or disease;
   (P)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site
after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure; or
   (Q)   Whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess
of six months, so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an
attractive nuisance or a hazard to the public.
(Ord. 276, passed 11-8-99; Am. Ord. 322, passed 9-20-04)
§ 150.34 STANDARDS FOR RECONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, REPAIR OR DEMOLITION.
   All work for the reconstruction, alteration, repair or demolition of any
building, structure and/or premises shall be performed in a good, workmanlike
manner, according to acceptable standards and practices in the trade. The
provisions of the rules, regulations and statutes pertaining to construction,
plumbing, electrical, mechanical and one and two family dwellings obligated by
the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission shall be accepted standard
and acceptable practice for all matters covered by this subchapter or orders
issued pursuant to this subchapter by the Enforcement Authority.
(Ord. 276, passed 11-8-99)
§ 150.35 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation, whether it is owner, lessee, sublessee, or
occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or
premises, or cause or permit the same to be done contrary to, or in violation
of, any of the provisions of this subchapter or any order issued pursuant to
this subchapter by the Enforcement Authority.
(Ord. 276, passed 11-8-99)
Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.36 UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.
   (A)   The Enforcement Authority shall establish in its operating budget a
fund designated as the Unsafe Building Fund (hereinafter referred to as the
Fund).
   (B)   The Fund may receive appropriations from the Town Council or any other
governmental unit, as well as any funds received from settlements or
obligations, judgments, proceeds of bond money received from civil penalties,
or other sources permitted under I.C. 36-7-9-14.
   (C)   The Fund shall be used for any and all costs incurred by the
Enforcement Authority and/or the Hearing Authority, its agents or assigns,
including but not limited to, costs incurred under I.C. 36-7-9-14(c).
   (D)   The Enforcement Authority shall prepare an annual report to be filed
with the Town Council reporting the source and use of all monies within the
fund.
(Ord. 276, passed 11-8-99)
§ 150.37 BIDS AND CONTRACTS.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Plan Commission to administer any bids
for demolition contracts awarded pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 276, passed 11-8-99)
   CAMPGROUNDS
§ 150.50 GENERALLY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   CAMPGROUND. Any plot of ground where two or more trailers or mobile
dwellings are placed or located or intended to be placed or located for use as
living quarters.
      (2)   MOBILE DWELLING. Any temporary living quarters such as trailers,
truck bodies, bus bodies, tents, knock-down houses, and improvised shelters
designed or intended to be moved from place to place.
      (3)   TRAILER. Any vehicle used or intended for use for living or
sleeping purposes and which is equipped or is intended to be equipped with any
device for purposes of transportation, being either self propelled or
otherwise.
      (4)   USE OF LIVING QUARTERS.     Includes the acts of sleeping,
preparation of meals or any sanitary measure such as bathing, dishwashing or
laundering clothing, or any natural or performed operation, which produces
waste which may become a nuisance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or
permit the use of any lot, parcel or tract of land within the corporate limits
of the town for a campground, as herein defined, without having first complied
with all of the provisions of 410 IAC 6-7.1-1 et seq., relating to campgrounds
and with all of the other requirements, rules, and regulations of the State
Department of Health heretofore or hereafter promulgated under the authority of
I.C. 16-19-3-4.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy as living
quarters any trailer or mobile dwelling, as herein defined, within the
corporate limits of the town, unless such trailer or mobile dwelling shall be
located within a campground regularly established and maintained in full
compliance with division (B) above.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or manager of any
campground located within the town to permit any person to occupy or use any
trailer or mobile dwelling in the camp, without requiring such person to first
register in a permanent book kept for that purpose, showing the registrant’s
full name, date of entry, license number of his vehicle, permanent place of
residence and occupation, which register shall at all times be open to
inspection by any police officer of the town or state.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to so locate, construct, or maintain any
campground within the corporate limits of the town, as to create an unusual
fire hazard to permanent structures in its vicinity, and adequate and proper
provisions shall be made for fire protection within every such camp, which
provision shall be inspected and approved in writing by the Town Building
Inspector before being opened for occupancy.
   (F)   Any trailer, campground or mobile dwelling located, maintained or
operated within the town in violation of the provisions of this section or in
which disorderly conduct or indecent or immoral practices or acts in violation
of any criminal law of this state are permitted or carried on, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance subject to abatement as such.
(Ord. 1, passed 4-10-57)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   If any person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter or shall do any act prohibited therein, or shall fail to perform
any duty lawfully enjoined, within the time prescribed by the Building
Inspector in connection with the provisions of §§ 150.01 through 150.16 for
each such violation, failure or refusal, such person, firm or corporation shall
be fined in any sum not less than $1 nor more than $2,500. Each day of such
unlawful activity as is prohibited by the first sentence of this section shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 161, passed 9-11-89)
CHAPTER 151: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Statement of purpose
   
151.04   Objectives
   
151.05   Definitions
   
151.06   Applicability
   
151.07   Regulatory flood data
   
151.08   Floodplain development permit
   
151.09   Compliance
   
151.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.11   Discrepancies
   
151.12   Interpretation
   
151.13   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
151.20   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
151.21   Permit procedures
   
151.22   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.30   Standards
   
151.31   Specific standards
   
151.32   Subdivision proposals
   
151.33   Critical facility
   
151.34   Identified floodways
   
151.35   Identified fringe
   
151.36   SFHAs without established base flood elevation and/or floodways/
fringes
   
151.37   AO zones
Variances
   
151.40   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board
   
151.41   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board
   
151.42   Variance procedures
   
151.43   Conditions for variances
   
151.44   Variance notification
   
151.45   Historic structures
   
151.46   Special conditions
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Indiana Legislature has in I.C. 36-7-4 granted the power to local
government units to control land use within their jurisdictions. Therefore, the
Town Council does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to
other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise
unprotected from flood damages.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase erosion or flood
damage;
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands; and
   (F)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for structures and
their contents in the town by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are:
   (A)   To protect human life and health;
   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in floodplains;
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood-blight
areas; and,
   (G)   To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in
a flood area.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   A ZONE. Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding is
runoff from rainfall, snow melt, or a combination of both. In A zones,
floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant
threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE, Zones A1 -
A30, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM or FHBM. The definitions
are presented below:
      (1)   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no base
flood elevation or depths are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements apply.
      (2)   ZONES AE and A1 - A30. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood elevations are
shown within these zones. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements
apply. (Zone AE is on new and revised maps in place of Zones A1 - A30.)
      (3)   ZONE AO. Areas subject to inundation by 1% chance shallow flooding
(usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are between one
and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses
are shown within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements
apply.
      (4)   ZONE AH. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between one and
three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are
shown within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply.
      (5)   ZONE AR. Areas that result from the decertification of a previously
accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of
being restored to provide base flood protection. Mandatory flood insurance
purchase requirements apply.
      (6)   ZONE A99. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of an under-
construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of special flood
hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction of a protection
system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to consider it complete for insurance
rating purposes. ZONE A99  may only be used when the flood protection system
has reached specified statutory progress toward completion. No base flood
elevations or depths are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements
apply.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE or APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure that is located on
the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should
constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation,
and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory
structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay
sheds.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is
connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls is new construction.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the 1% annual chance flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the regular
program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to
develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding
might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to,
schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or
hazardous waste.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including
but not limited to:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a structure or any
addition to a structure;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing recreational vehicle on a site for more than
180 days;
         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences, construction
of roads, or similar projects;
         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes,
dams, channel improvements, etc.;
         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling
operations;
         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
         (g)   Storage of materials; or
         (h)   Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing
roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent
structures.
   ELEVATED STRUCTURE.  A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter
walls, pilings, or columns (posts and piers).
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE.  A certified statement that verifies a structure's
elevation information.
   EMERGENCY PROGRAM.  The first phase under which a community participates in
the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first-layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.  Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the community's first floodplain
ordinance.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the community's first floodplain ordinance.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (500-YEAR FLOOD).  The flood that has a 0.2% chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any year.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM).  An official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration
(FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
FEMA, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
identified as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a community, on which
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic report
provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FBFM
(where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory
flood. FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the fringe districts.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited
to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in
flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in
any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS are also referred to
as floodplain regulations, floodplain ordinance, flood damage prevention
ordinance, and floodplain management requirements.
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory flood plus two
feet at any given location in the SFHA. (See also FREEBOARD.)
   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING). A method of protecting a structure that
ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with walls that
are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated debris impact
forces.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for non-
residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or above
the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional engineer or
architect.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently
carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood.
   FRINGE. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood
processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   HARDSHIP (as related to variances of this chapter). The exceptional hardship
that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Town
Council requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the
property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not
exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps,
personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as
a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be
resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and
Structures.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially
damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to
bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local flood
damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation,
relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All renewal and new
business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after June 1,
1997, will include ICC coverage.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment to the currently effective FEMA
map that establishes that a property is not located in a SFHA. A LOMA is only
issued by FEMA.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the currently
effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones, delineations,
and elevations.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An official revision by
letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA's determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the
BFE and excluded from the SFHA.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.
   LOWEST FLOOR means the lowest of the following:
      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure;
      (2)   The top of the basement floor;
      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of
the structure;
      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or
pillars;
      (5)   The top of the first floor of a structure constructed with a crawl
space, provided that the lowest point of the interior grade is at or above the
BFE and construction meets requirements of division (6)(a) below; or
      (6)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement,
below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure provide any
resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:
         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic
flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters,
by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows)
having a total net area of one square inch for every one square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all such openings shall be no
higher than one foot above grade; and
         (b)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parking of
vehicles and building access.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. MANUFACTURED HOME
does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MAP AMENDMENT. A change to an effective NFIP map that results in the
exclusion from the SFHA of an individual structure or a legally described
parcel of land that has been inadvertently included in the SFHA (i.e. no
alterations of topography have occurred since the date of the first NFIP map
that showed the structure or parcel to be within the SFHA).
   MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four-digit number followed by a letter suffix assigned
by FEMA on a flood map. The first four digits represent the map panel, and the
letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been revised.
(The letter A is not used by FEMA, the letter B is the first revision.)
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a
willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market
will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified appraisal,
replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value), or
adjusted assessed values.
   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to
people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of mitigation
is two-fold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the cost of
disaster response and recovery.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, is a vertical
control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within
the floodplain.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced after the effective date of the community's first floodplain
ordinance.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.
   OBSTRUCTION. Including, but not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, canalization,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its propensity to snare
or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being
carried downstream.
   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). The flood that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with
the letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See also REGULATORY
FLOOD.
   ONE-PERCENT (1%) ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD.  The flood that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with
the letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See also REGULATORY
FLOOD.
   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. Any community that voluntarily elects to
participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management
regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.
   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a community's FEMA
map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood elevations, floodplain
boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and planimetric features. These
changes typically occur as a result of structural works or improvements,
annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas, or correction to base
flood elevations or SFHAs.
   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that started
on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later.
   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement, which
started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the
initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
   PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating communities of
violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local
floodplain management regulations.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community's participation in the NFIP
where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and
higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations
determined in a FIS.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is acceptable
to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at any location is
as defined in §
151.07. REGULATORY FLOOD is also known by the terms BASE FLOOD, ONE-PERCENT
ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD, and 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event for
which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood
damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of the
structure at the time of each such flood event.
   SECTION 1316. That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as
amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be provided
for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a duly
constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to
be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that
intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in
flood-prone areas.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdictions
(including extraterritorial jurisdictions) of the town subject to inundation by
the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the town are generally identified as such on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map of Johnson County and Incorporated Areas dated
March 20, 2017, as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions,
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date.
(These areas are shown on a FIRM as Zones A, AE, Al - A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO).
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual start means the first placement or permanent construction of a
structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of
slabs or footing, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation for placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred substantial
damage or repetitive loss regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not include improvements of structures to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code requirements or any
alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structures continued designation as a “historic structure.”
   SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP because
the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain management
regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1929 (or other datum here specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.
   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
Shaded X zones shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood). Unshaded X zones (C zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.
   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FHBM or FIRM that reflects the severity
or type of flooding in the area.
   ZONE A.  (See A ZONE.)
   ZONE B, C, and X. Areas identified in the community as areas of moderate or
minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area. However,
buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated rainfall
coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is available in
participating communities but is not required by regulation in these zones.
(Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and C.)
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.06 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the town.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.07 REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.
   This chapter's protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best
available regulatory flood data is listed below. Whenever a party disagrees
with the best available data, the party submitting the detailed engineering
study needs to replace existing data with better data and submit it to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and approval.
   (A)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for the
studied SFHAs of the town shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles
in the most current Flood Insurance Study of Johnson County and Incorporated
Areas, and the corresponding FIRM (to the extent that both exist), as well as
any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency with the most recent date.
   (B)   The regulatory flood elevation for each SFHA of the town delineated as
an AO Zone (in fringe), if any, shall be that elevation (or depth) as may be
delineated on the most current FIRM of Johnson County and Incorporated Areas.
   (C)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for each
of the unstudied SFHAs of the town delineated as an A Zone on the most current
FIRM of Johnson County and Incorporated Areas shall be according to the best
data available as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.08 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally
altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within the SFHA shall
hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.11 DISCREPANCIES.
   (A)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped floodplain
(SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation provided on
the profiles shall govern.
   (B)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood
elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated accordingly.
   (C)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is above the
base flood elevation, that site shall be considered outside the SFHA and the
floodplain regulations will not be applied. The property owner should be
advised to apply for a LOMA.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.12 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.13 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any
liability on the part of the town, the Indiana Department of Natural Resources,
or the State of Indiana, for any flood damage that results from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.20 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Town Council hereby appoints the Zoning Administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this chapter and is herein referred to as the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.21 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen
fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing. Specifically the following information is required:
   (A)   Application stage.
      (1)   A description of the proposed development;
      (2)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately
locate property and structure in relation to existing roads and streams;
      (3)   A legal description of the property site;
      (4)   A site development plan showing existing and proposed development
locations and existing and proposed land grades;
      (5)   Elevation of the top of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of 1929 (NGVD);
      (6)   Elevation (in NGVD) to which any non-residential structure will be
floodproofed; and
      (7)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or related as a result of proposed development.
   (B)   Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or
floodproofing, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NGVD elevation of the lowest
floor or floodproofed elevation, as built. The certification shall be prepared
by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by the same. When floodproofing is utilized
for a particular structure said certification shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the
same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at
the permit holder’s risk. (The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest
floor and floodproofing elevation survey data submitted.) The permit holder
shall correct deficiencies detected by the review before any further work is
allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make corrections
required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.22 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Floodplain Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of
this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      (2)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in SFHA and complete
substantial damage determinations;
      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects subject to
§§
151.34 and
151.36(A) of this chapter, and maintain a record of such authorization (either
copy of actual permit or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment);
      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have been
received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit. Copies
of such permits are to be maintained on file with the floodplain development
permit;
      (5)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain Coordinator
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of
such notifications to FEMA;
      (6)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local
permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, letters of map amendment
(LOMA), letters of map revision (LOMR), copies of DNR permits and floodplain
analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal permit
documents, and as-built elevation and floodproofing data for all buildings
constructed subject to this chapter;
      (7)   Utilize and enforce all letters of map revision (LOMR) or physical
map revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA maps of the
community;
      (8)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished;
      (9)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in
accordance with §
151.21;
      (10)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new or
substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with §
151.21;
      (11)   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance;
      (12)   Stop work orders.
         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator, work on any
building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall immediately cease.
         (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner
of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall
state the conditions under which work may be resumed; and
      (13)   Revocation of permits.
         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit or approval,
issued under the provisions of the chapter, in cases where there has been any
false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application
or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit upon
determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the
structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in
conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.30 STANDARDS.
   (A)   General standards. In all SFHAs the following provisions are required:
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard
shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for
resisting wind forces.
      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage below the FPG.
      (4)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      (5)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
      (6)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
      (7)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
      (8)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      (9)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet
the requirements of new construction as contained in this chapter.
      (10) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure
that is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be
undertaken only if said non-conformity is not further extended or replaced.
      (11)   Whenever any portion of the SFHA is authorized for use, the volume
of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the
BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by an equivalent volume of excavation
taken below the BFE. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to the
volume of storage lost (replacement ratio of 1 to 1) due to the fill or
structure.
         (a)   The excavation shall take place in the floodplain and in the
same immediate watershed in which the authorized fill or structure is located;
         (b)   Under certain circumstances, the excavation may be allowed to
take place outside of but adjacent to the floodplain provided that the
excavated volume will be below the regulatory flood elevation, will be in the
same immediate watershed in which the authorized fill or structure is located,
will be accessible to the regulatory floodwater, will not be subject to ponding
when not inundated by flood water, and that it shall not be refilled;
         (c)   The fill or structure shall not obstruct a drainage way leading
to the floodplain;
         (d)   The fill or structure shall be of a material deemed stable
enough to remain firm and in place during periods of flooding and shall include
provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any increased runoff or
drainage resulting from its placement; and
         (e)   Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and filled shall be
submitted prior to the actual start of construction or any site work; once site
work is complete, but before the actual start of construction, the applicant
shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a certified survey of the
excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and excavation comply with
this chapter.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.31 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
    In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required:
   (A)   All structures. In addition to the requirements of division (A), all
structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage below
the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of any new structure having a floor area
greater than 400 square feet;
      (2)   Structural alterations made to:
         (a)   An existing (previously unaltered structure), the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the pre-altered structure (excluding the
value of the land); or
         (b)   Any previously altered structure;
      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure that are
valued at more than 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the
value of the land) before damaged occurred;
      (4)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days;
      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to returning the existing
manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed
to avoid flood damage; and,
      (6)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss structure.
   (B)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest
floor; including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood
elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of division (D).
   (C)   Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (or
manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation). Structures located
in all A Zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated if done in
accordance with the following:
      (1)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account
flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures, and impacts
from debris or ice. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in §
151.22(B)(10); and
      (2)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention
and without an outside source of electricity.
   (D)   Elevated structures. New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated structures that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and
other exterior walls below the base flood elevations shall be designed to
preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls.
      (1)   Designs for complying with this requirement must either be
certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum
criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher
than the exterior foundation grade);
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions;
         (d)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and
         (e)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
   (E)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or nonresidential
structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in accordance with the
following:
      (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep
before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with the Standard
Proctor Test method.
      (2)   The fill should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation of
the structure before sloping below the FPG.
      (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is
used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
      (5)   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be at or
above the FPG.
   (F)   Standards for structures constructed with a crawlspace. A residential
or nonresidential structure may be constructed with a crawlspace located below
the flood protection grade provided that the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
      (2)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection grade shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of
enclosed area. The bottom of the openings shall be no more than one foot above
grade;
      (3)   The interior grade of the crawlspace must be at or above the base
flood elevation;
      (4)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four
feet at any point;
      (5)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time
after a flood event;
      (6)   Portions of the building below the flood protection grade must be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
      (7)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection grade.
   (G)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement. This requirement applies to all manufactured homes to be
placed on a site.
         (a)   Outside a manufactured home park or subdivision;
         (b)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
         (c)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
         (d)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood.
      (2)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the lowest floor of
the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. This requirement applies to all
manufactured homes to be placed on a site in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision that has not been substantially damaged by a flood.
      (3)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:
         (a)   Be on site for less than 180 days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (defined as being on
its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions); or
         (c)   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes as stated earlier
in this section.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.32 SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards; and
   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.33 CRITICAL FACILITY.
   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible,
located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new critical facilities
shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site. Floodproofing and
sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be
displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above
the FPG shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.34 IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   Located within SFHAs, established in §
151.07, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and has erosion potential.
   (B)   If the site is in an identified floodway, the Floodplain Administrator
shall require the applicant to forward the application, along with all
pertinent plans and specifications, to the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources and apply for a permit for construction in a floodway.
   (C)   Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1 a permit for construction in a
floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources is required prior to
the issuance of a local building permit for any excavation, deposit,
construction or obstruction activity located in the floodway. This includes
land preparation activities such as filling, grading, clearing and paving etc.
undertaken before the actual start of construction of the structure. However,
it does exclude non-substantial additions/improvements to existing (lawful)
residences in a non-boundary river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26 allows
construction of non-substantial additions/improvements to residences in a non-
boundary river floodway without obtaining a permit for construction in a
floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if
fill is needed to elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval
(construction in a floodway permit) for the fill is required from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources.)
   (D)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until a
permit (when applicable) has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources granting approval for construction in a floodway.
   (E)   Once a permit for construction in a floodway has been issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources, the Floodplain Administrator may issue
the local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in
§§
151.30 through
151.36 have been met.
   (F)   The floodplain development permit cannot be less restrictive than the
permit for construction in a floodway issued by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources. However, a community's more restrictive regulations (if any)
shall take precedence.
   (G)   No development shall be allowed which acting alone or in combination
with existing or future development, will increase the regulatory flood more
than 0.14 of one foot; and
   (H)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including
levees) the town shall submit the data and request that the Federal Emergency
Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.35 IDENTIFIED FRINGE.
   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit provided the
provisions contained in §§
151.30 through
151.36 have been met. The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of
any new or substantially improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.36 SFHAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND/OR FLOODWAYS/
FRINGES.
   (A)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile:
      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the drainage area
upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along
with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources for review and comment.
      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
either a permit for construction in a floodway or a floodplain analysis/
regulatory assessment citing the 100-year flood elevation and the recommended
flood protection grade has been received from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.
      (3)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper permit
for construction in a floodway or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment
approving the proposed development, a floodplain development permit may be
issued provided the conditions of the floodplain development permit are not
less restrictive than the conditions received from the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources and the provisions contained in §§
151.30 through
151.36 have been met.
   (B)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile:
      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the drainage area upstream
of the site is less than one square mile, the Floodplain Administrator shall
require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the limits of
the floodway, fringe and 100-year flood elevation for the site.
      (2)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in §§
151.30 through
151.36 have been met.
   (C)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and will not increase flood damages
or potential flood damages.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.37 AO ZONES.
   AO Zones have flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to
three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist and the water path
of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate with respect to AO Zones that
may exist in the town:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at two
feet greater than the flood depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map above the highest adjacent grade.
   (B)   Drainage paths must be provided to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures to be constructed on slopes.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential
structures shall:
      (1)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated two feet
greater than the flood depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
above the highest adjacent grade; and
      (2)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
completely floodproofed to the specified flood level so that any space below
that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is
required as per §
151.31(C).
(Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
VARIANCES
§ 151.40 DESIGNATION OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
   The appointed board as established by the Town Council shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.41 DUTIES OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
   The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator
in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by
the decision of the Board may appeal such decision to the Johnson County
Circuit Court, as provided by statute.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.42 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   In passing upon such applications, the appointed board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
   (A)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   (B)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
   (C)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
   (D)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
   (E)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
   (F)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
   (G)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
   (H)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
   (I)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment of
transport of the floodwaters at the site; and
   (J)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.43 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship; and
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
   (B)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to §§
151.34 or
151.36(A) may be granted.
   (C)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §§
151.34 or
151.36(A) will require a permit from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.
   (D)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of §
151.31, may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot of
one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.
   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (F)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration of any
structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
   (G)   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the
elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of
the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or
the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
Cross-reference:
   Variance notification, see §
151.44
§ 151.44 VARIANCE NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances
issued in the community's biennial report submission to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.45 HISTORIC STRUCTURES.
   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and
the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of
the structure.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.46 SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
   Upon the consideration of the factors listed in §§
151.40 through
151.45, and the purposes of this chapter, the appointed board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or failure to
comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit or conditions
of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. All violations
shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such in accordance with
the provisions of the Zoning Code for the town with respect to each violation,
including the provisions relating to violations and fines.
   (A)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the violation
continues to exist.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall inform the owner that any such violation
is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 334, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 393, passed 3-20-17)
Cross-reference:
   Zoning code penalty, see §
152.999
CHAPTER 152: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Title
   
152.002   Purpose
   
152.003   Declaration of necessity
   
152.004   Authority
   
152.005   Compliance
   
152.006   Severability
   
152.007   Application
   
152.008   Definitions
Zoning Districts and Official Map
   
152.020   Zoning districts established and defined
   
152.021   Official zoning map
   
152.022   Rules for interpretation of district boundaries
District Regulations
   
152.035   Permitted uses and special exceptions
   
152.036   General standards for property development
   
152.037   Residential districts
   
152.038   General Business District
General Use Regulations
   
152.050   Nonconforming uses, lots, buildings and structures
   
152.051   Accessory uses, buildings and structures
   
152.052   Appurtenances
   
152.053   Animals
   
152.054   Corner visibility
   
152.055   Fences, walls and hedges
   
152.056   Home occupations
   
152.057   Houses of worship
   
152.058   Off-street parking regulations
   
152.059   Parks, playgrounds and recreation areas
   
152.060   Private swimming pools
   
152.061   Signs
   
152.062   Street development requirements
   
152.063   Temporary uses
   
152.064   Storage and parking of trailers, boats and commercial vehicles
   
152.065   More than one structure on a lot
   
152.066   Structures to have access
   
152.067   Performance standards
   
152.068   Lakeside yard restrictions
   
152.069   Temporary signs
Flood Hazard District (FH)
   
152.080   Purpose
   
152.081   Definitions
   
152.082   Basis for establishing Flood Hazard Districts
   
152.083   Designation and duties of the Commission
   
152.084   Uses in Flood Hazard District
   
152.085   Nonconforming uses
   
152.086   Determination of flood elevation
   
152.087   Variances
   
152.088   National flood insurance program regulations
   
152.089   Disclaimer
Erosion and Sediment Control
   
152.100   Purpose
   
152.101   Design criteria, standards, and specifications for erosion control
measures
   
152.102   Control of erosion and sediment during land disturbing activities
   
152.103   Maintenance of erosion control measures
   
152.104   Permit application, erosion control plan, and permit issuance
   
152.105   Inspection
   
152.106   Enforcement
   
152.107   Project termination
Amendments, Variances and Special Exceptions
   
152.120   Zoning amendments
   
152.121   Effect of annexation
   
152.122   Variances
   
152.123   Special exceptions
   
152.124   Public hearing; notice; records
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.135   Plan Commission
   
152.136   Board of Zoning Appeals
   
152.137   Zoning Administrator
   
152.138   Improvement location permits
   
152.139   Certificate of occupancy; temporary occupancy permit
   
152.140   Appeals; review by certiorari
   
152.141   Violations
 
   
152.999   Penalty
   GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and designated as the Zoning Code or the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Prince's Lakes, Indiana.
(Ord. 172, § 1-100, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.002 PURPOSE.
   This chapter establishes a zoning ordinance for the town and provides for
the administration, enforcement, and amendment thereof in accordance with the
provisions of I.C. 36-7-4 et seq. and for the repeal of all ordinances in
conflict herewith.
(Ord. 172, § 1-200, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.003 DECLARATION OF NECESSITY.
   The Zoning Ordinance of Prince's Lakes, Indiana is deemed necessary by the
Town Council in order to:
   (A)   Preserve, promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort,
morals, convenience and general, welfare of the town;
   (B)   Provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from
fire, flood and other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue
congestion of population;
   (C)   Protect the character and the social and economic stability of all
parts of the town and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of
all parts of the town;
   (D)   Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the town and the
value of buildings and improvements upon the land and to minimize the conflicts
among the use of land and buildings;
   (E)   Guide public and private policy and action in order to provide
adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks,
playgrounds, recreation and other public improvements and facilities;
   (F)   Prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the natural resources throughout
the town in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the
community and the value of land;
   (G)   Preserve the natural beauty and topography of the town and to insure
appropriate development with regard to these natural features.
(Ord. 172, § 1-300, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.004 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4 et seq. as added by Public
Law 309, Acts of 1981 of the General Assembly of Indiana, and all acts
supplemental and amendatory thereto.
(Ord. 172, § 1-400, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.005 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved,
converted or enlarged; nor shall any structure or land be used or designed to
be used except in full compliance with all provisions of this chapter and after
lawful issuance of permits required by this chapter.
(Ord. 172, § 1-500, passed 4-5-90)
Penalty, see § 152.999
§ 152.006 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of this chapter or application of any provision to
particular circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the
application of such provision to other circumstances shall not be affected.
(Ord. 172, § 1-600, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.007 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted and applied as minimum
requirements. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance or in
any way conflict with other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances or
restrictions, the most restrictive requirements, or the higher standards shall
govern.
(Ord. 172, § 1-700, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.008 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Whenever any
words and phrases are not defined within this section but are defined in I.C.
36-7-4 et seq. and in any acts supplemental or amendatory thereto, the state
statutory definition shall be deemed to apply. Any words not defined in this
section or in I.C. 36-7-4 et seq. shall be construed in their generally
accepted meanings as defined in a recent edition of a dictionary of the English
Language. The masculine shall include the feminine. The present tense shall
include the past and future tense. The singular number shall include the plural
and the plural shall include the singular. The word “shall” is a mandatory
requirement; the word “may” is a permissive requirement; and the word “should”
is a preferred requirement.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USE.  
      (1)   A building or use which:
         (a)   Is enclosed with four walls that supports a roof system with a
height greater than 42" from grade level;
         (b)   Is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection
with a principal building or use;
         (c)   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or a principal
use;
         (d)   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal
building or principal use served;
         (e)   Contribute to the comfort, convenience or necessity of
occupants, business or industry in the principal building or principal use
served; and,
         (f)   Is located on the same lot as the principal building or use
served;
      (2)   Where an accessory building is attached to a principal building by
means of a wall or roof assembly, such accessory building shall be considered a
part of the principal building.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE AND USE. A structure or use which:
      (1)   Maintains a total height of less than 42" above grade level;
      (2)   Is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with a
principal building and use;
      (3)   Is subordinate to and served a principal building or principal use;
      (4)   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building
or use served;
      (5)   Contribute to the comfort, convenience or necessity, of occupants,
business or industry in the principal building or principal use served; and,
      (6)   Is located on the same lot as the principal building or use served.
   AGRICULTURAL LAND USE. The use of land for the production of animal or plant
life, including pasturing or livestock, and planting, growing, cultivating, and
harvesting crops for human or livestock consumption.
   ALTERATION. As applied to a building or structure, means any change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities; or an
enlargement, whether by extending outward from a side or sides, or by
increasing in height; or the moving from on location or position to another.
   APARTMENT. A building or portion thereof arranged, intended or designed to
be occupied by three or more families living independently of each other.
   AUTOMOBILE WASHING. An activity conducted for the purpose of cleaning
automobiles, whether performed automatically, semiautomatically, or manually.
   AUTOMOBILE, TRAVEL TRAILER, OR MOBILE HOME SALES. An open area other than a
street used for the display, sale, or rental of new or use automobiles, travel
trailers, or mobile homes. No repair work is done, except minor incidental
repair of automobiles, travel trailers, or mobile homes to be displayed or sold
on the premises.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. The repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of motor
vehicles or parts thereof, including collision service, painting, and steam
cleaning of vehicles.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building or structure that is constructed either
partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurement, a basement
shall be counted as a story when more than one-half of its height is above the
average level of the adjoining ground.
   BILLBOARD. Any off-premises sign on a permanent structure on which the copy
is periodically changed and which is not located on the premises to which such
advertising copy pertains.
   BOARD. The Board of Zoning Appeals of Prince's Lakes, Indiana.
   BOARDING HOUSE. Any owner occupied dwelling in which the owner rents up to
three separate guest quarters that may not, necessarily, be complete dwelling
units, but does not rent to any one boarder or group of boarders the entire
dwelling.
   BUILDING. Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of person, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. See “Accessory Building and Use.”
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average level of
the proposed or existing finished surface of ground adjacent to the exterior
walls of the building to the highest point of the building.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The term shall be synonymous with the term Zoning
Administrator, and shall refer to the person delegated the primary
responsibility of issuing improvement location permits (building permits),
conducting relate inspections and issuing certificates of occupancy.
   BUILDING PERMIT (IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT). A certificate issued by the
Building Inspector permitting a person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, more, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure
within the locality, or cause the same to be done.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the main or principal
use of the lot on which the building is situated.
   BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF. A line extending across that portion or face of the
building nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and
covered porches whether enclosed or unenclosed but does not include steps. If
no building exists, the depth of the required front yard shall determine the
front line of building.
   BUILDING, SETBACK LINE. The line, established by this chapter, beyond which
a building shall not extend unless varied according to the procedures in this
chapter. Also called a building line. Setback lines may be applicable to the
front, side, and/or rear yard.
   BUSINESS, GENERAL.  Commercial uses which generally require locations on or
near major arterial and/or their intersections, and which serve the daily needs
of the neighborhood and also supply the more durable and permanent needs of the
community.
   BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL, RETAIL OFFICE. Quasi-commercial uses which may often
be transitional between retail business and/or manufacturing and residential
uses. Office business generally accommodates such occupations as
administrative, executive, professional, accounting, clerical, and drafting.
   BUSINESS SERVICES. Any profit making activity which renders services
primarily to other commercial or industrial enterprises, or which services and
repairs appliances and machines used in businesses and homes.
   CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for other
cemetery purposes, including columbaria, crematories, mausoleums, and
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such
cemetery.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate issued by the Building Inspector
stating that the actions approved in the building permit (improvement location
permit) have been completed satisfactorily and that the occupancy and use of
land or building referred to therein complies with the provisions of this
chapter.
   CHILD CARE CENTER. Any place, home or institution which receives four or
more children under the age of 16 years, and not of common parentage, for care
apart from their natural parents, legal guardians, or custodians, for regular
periods of time and for compensation.
   CLINIC. An establishment where patients who are not lodged overnight are
admitted for examination and treated by physicians.
   CLUB. A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a
corporation, association, person, or persons, for a social, educational, or
recreational purpose, but not primarily for a profit or to render a service
which is customarily carried on as a business.
   COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES. Any activity conduct for economic gain
which is generally related to the entertainment field, such as motion picture
theater, carnivals, night clubs, and  a similar entertainment activities.
   COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. Any activity conducted for economic gain
which is generally related to the recreational field, such as bowling alleys,
roller skating rinks, miniature golf, golf driving ranges, and so on.
   COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of Prince's Lakes, Indiana.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  A plan, or portion thereof, adopted by the Plan
Commission and the governing body of the town showing the general location and
extent of present and proposed physical facilities including housing,
industrial and commercial uses, parks, schools, transportation corridors, and
other community facilities.
   CONTIGUOUS. Lands which have a boundary line or a portion of a boundary line
in common or touching.
   CORNER. The point of intersection of any public road or easements which have
been dedicated and accepted by a unit of government.
   COVENANT. A private legal restriction on the use of land contained in the
deed to the property. Normally applied to all lots in a subdivision.
   COVERAGE. The lot area covered by all buildings located upon it, including
the area covered by all overhanging roofs.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street having only one means of ingress and egress and
terminating in a tree or turn around.
   DAY CARE CENTER AND OTHER PRESCHOOL FACILITIES. A facility operated on a
regular basis providing daytime care or instruction for four or more children
under seven years of age, who are  not related to the operator.
   DENSITY. A unit of measurement; the number of dwelling units per acre of
land.
   DENSITY, GROSS. The number of dwelling units per acre of land when the
acreage involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses, excluding
public right-of-way and other public land.
   DENSITY, NET. The number of dwelling units per acre of land when the acreage
involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses, excluding public
right-of-way and other public land.
   DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A drawing, including a legal or site description, of the
real estate, which shows the location and size of all existing and proposed
lots, buildings, structures, and yards; location and dimension of all building
lines and easements; widths and lengths of all entrances and exits to and from
the real estate; location of all adjacent or adjoining streets; all of which
presents a unified arrangement of streets, lots, buildings, and public parking
areas, all of which shall have a functional relationship to all real estate
comprising the planned development and to the uses of properties immediately
adjacent thereto.
   DISTRICT. A part of the town wherein the restrictions of this chapter are
uniform.
   DRIVEWAY. A public or private access which provides ingress or egress to a
property.
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof which is designed for residential
purposes.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY. A residential building occupied by three or more
families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of
dwelling units provided.
   DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY. A detached residential dwelling unit other than a
mobile home, occupied by only one family.
   DWELLING, TWO FAMILY. A detached residential building containing two
dwelling units, designed for occupancy by two families with each unit having a
separate entrance.
   DWELLING UNIT. One room, or rooms connected together, constituting a
separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental
or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separated from
any other rooms or dwelling unity which may be in the same structure, and
containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
   EASEMENT. An authorization or grant by a property owner to a specific person
or to the public to use land for specific purpose. The title to the land shall
remain in the name of the property owner and shall be subject to the right of
use designated in the easement.
   EROSION.  The detachment and movement of soil sediment, or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice, or gravity.
   EROSION CONTROL MEASURE. A practice or a combination of practices to control
erosion and resulting sedimentation.
   EROSION CONTROL PLAN. A written description of pertinent information
concerning erosion control measures designed to meet the requirements of this
chapter as submitted by the applicant for the review and approval by the
Building Inspector.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that
unless all members are related by blood, marriage, or adoption, no such family
shall contain over five persons.
   FENCE. A structure, including entrance and exit gates, designed and
constructed for enclosure or screening.
   FILLING STATION. Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is
used or designed to be used for the supply of gasoline or oil or other fuel at
retail for the propulsion of motor vehicles and which may include facilities
used or designed to be used for polishing, greasing, washing, spraying, dry
cleaning, or otherwise cleaning or servicing such motor vehicles.
   FLOOD (OR FLOODWATER). The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and
inundated by overflow from a river, stream, lake or other body of water. I.C.
14-28-1 as amended by Public Law 123, Acts of 1973, defines flood as “the water
of any river or stream in the state of Indiana, which is above and outside the
banks thereof.” See I.C. 14-28-1 for additional definitions.
   FLOOD CONTROL.  The prevention of floods, the control, regulation, diversion
or confinement of flood water or flood flow, and the protection therefrom,
according to sound and accepted engineering practice, to minimize the extent of
floods, and the death, damage and destruction caused thereby, and all things
incidental thereto or connected with.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. A floodplain, or portion thereof, which has not been
adequately protected from floodwater by means of dikes, levees, reservoirs, or
other works approved by the Indiana Natural Resources Commission.
   FLOODPLAIN. The relatively flat or low land adjoining the channel of a river
or stream which has been or may be covered by flood water. The floodplain
includes the channel, floodway and floodway fringe.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the flood
plain adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the flood water or flood flow of any river or stream.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. Those portions of the flood hazard areas lying outside the
floodway.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum in square feet of the floor areas of all roofed
portions of a building as measured from the interior walls. It includes the
total of all space on all floors of a building. It also includes porches,
attached garages, or space in a basement which is used for storage or other
such incidental uses. The gross floor area is generally applied in residential
use for determining minimum ground level floor area.
   FLOOR AREA, NET. The floor area of the specified use excluding stairs,
washrooms, elevator shafts, storage spaces, display windows and so on. The net
area is used in calculating parking requirements.
   FLOOR AREA, USABLE LIVING. The usable floor area is determined by
subtracting from the gross floor area such areas as attached garages,
unfinished basements or rooms, closets, stairways, etc. Usable living floor
area is generally applied in residential use for determining minimum dwelling
size for a given residential zoning district.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The gross floor area of the building divided by the area
of the lot(s) on which the building is located.
   FRONTAGE. All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting
streets, measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended,
then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street
and the dead-end of the street.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building designed or used for the storage of
motor vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which the
garage is an accessory.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any garage other than a private garage, available to the
public, operated for gain and which is used of storage, repair, rental,
greasing, washing, servicing, adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other
motor vehicles.
   GRADE, FINISHED. The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and roads brought to
grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
   GROUND FLOOR AREA. The square foot area of a residential building within its
largest outside dimensions computed on a horizontal plane at the first floor
level, exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages, exterior
stairways and secondary stairways.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or profession for gain or support conducted
only by members of a family residing on the premises, and conducted entirely
within the principal building, provided that no article is sold or offered for
sale. Said occupation shall be customary and traditional, incidental to the
primary use of the premises as a residence, and not construed as a business,
and be of a personal services or professional service nature. There shall be no
outside storage or display. See
§ 152.056 for operating rules and regulations for home occupations and Schedule
of Uses section for permitted uses.
   HOTEL. A non-residential building designed and constructed with separate
guests quarters, or suites, that include, private bathroom facilities, and that
are accessed from a common, interior lobby and common interior hallways, and
offered to the general public for overnight accommodation.
   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT (BUILDING PERMIT). A certificate issued by the
Building Inspector permitting a person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure
within the locality, or cause the same to be done.
   JUNKYARD, INCLUDING AUTOMOBILE WRECKING.  Any place at which personal
property may be salvaged for reuse, resale, or reduction or similar
disposition.
   KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which three or more dogs (except litters of
animals not more than six months of age) are kept, raised, bred, cared for, or
boarded for commercial or non-commercial purposes.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any man-made change of the land surface including
removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, transporting, and grading. In
the context of this chapter, it includes only non-agricultural land disturbing
activities on sites which also require a local improvement location permit or
an approved subdivision plat.
   LONG TERM RENTAL. Means: 1) an entire dwelling; or 2) one or more dwelling
units, located in the same dwelling, offered to the public for rental for 30
consecutive days or more.
   LOT. A lot is a parcel of land of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other
open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved
public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of:
      (1)   A single lot of record;
      (2)   A portion of a lot of record;
      (3)   A combination of complete lots of record, or of complete lots of
record and portions of lots of records, or of portions of lots of record.
      (4)   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in no
case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
   LOT AREA. The area of any lot exclusive of street, highway, alley, road, or
other, rights-of-way. Easements are considered to be part of the LOT AREA.
   LOT, CORNER. A parcel of land at the junction of and bounded by two or more
intersecting streets.
   LOT COVERAGE. The ratio of ground floor area of all buildings on a lot to
the horizontally projected area of the lot. See “Floor Area Ratio.”
   LOT FRONTAGE. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion
nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner
lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be
considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under “Yards” in
this section.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. On an interior lot, the line separating the lot from the
street. On a corner or through a lot, the line separating the lot from either
street.
   LOT LINE, LEUCOCYTE.  A line separating the lot from a lake.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite the front lot line. On a lot pointed
at the rear, the rear line shall be an imaginary line between the side lot
lines parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long, lying
farthest from the front lot line. On a corner lot, the rear lot line shall be
opposite the side of the house containing the main entrance to the structure.
If a corner lot contains multiple family dwelling units having entrances on
each of the intersecting streets, the rear lot line shall be the interior lot
line with the larger dimension.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front line or rear line.
   LOT, MEASUREMENT OF. A lot shall be measured as follows:
      (1)   Depth. The horizontal distance between the mid-points of straight
lines connecting the foremost point of the side lot lines in front and the
rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
      (2)   Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
at the building setback line.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision or a lot or a parcel
described by metes and bounds, the descriptions of which have been recorded in
the office of the County Recorder.
   LOT TYPES. Terminology used in this chapter with reference to different
types of lots is as follows:
      (1)   CORNER LOT. A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a
corner lot if tangent projections of the front lot lines drawn perpendicular at
the side lot lines meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees in front
of the lot.
      (2)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot with only one frontage on a street.
      (3)   THROUGH LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more
than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as double
frontage lots.
      (4)   REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT. A lot on which frontage is at right angles to
the general pattern in a tile area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a
corner lot.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit fabricated on or after June 15, 1976, in
an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building
site, bearing a seal certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal
Manufacturing Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code or Indiana Public
Law 360, Act of 1971, as promulgated by the Indiana Administrative Building
Council.
   MANUFACTURED HOME, TYPE II. Shall:
      (1)   Have more than 950 square feet of occupied space in a double-
section or larger multi-section unit;
      (2)   Be placed on a permanent foundation;
      (3)   Utilize a permanent perimeter enclosure in accordance with approved
Installation Standards, as specified in the ANTI/NFPA 501 A Standard For
Installation of (Manufactured) Mobile Homes;
      (4)   Be anchored to the ground, in accordance with the One and Two
Family Dwelling Code and to the manufacturer's specifications;
      (5)   Have wheels, axles and hitch mechanisms removed;
      (6)   Have utilities connected in accordance with the One and Two Family
Dwelling Code and the manufacturer's specifications;
      (7)   Have siding material of a type customarily used on site constructed
residences; and,
      (8)   Have roofing material of a type customarily used on site
constructed residences.
   MANUFACTURED HOME, TYPE II. Shall:
      (1)   Have more than 320 square feet of occupied space in a single,
double, expando, or multi-section unit (including those with add-a-room units);
      (2)   Be placed on a permanent foundation;
      (3)   Be enclosed with foundation siding or skirting;
      (4)   Be anchored to the ground in accordance with manufacturer's
specifications or the ANTI/NFPA 501 A Installation Standards;
      (5)   Have utilities connected in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications or the ANTI/NFPA 501 A Installation Standards;
      (6)   Have siding material of a type customarily used in on site
constructed residences; and,
      (7)   Have roofing material of a type customarily used in on site
constructed residences.
   MOTEL. A non-residential building, or several buildings, on the same
property, designed and constructed with separate guests quarters, or suites,
that include private bathroom facilities, and that are accessed separately,
directly from the outdoors, not from a common lobby and common hallways, and
offered to the general public for overnight accommodation.
   MOTOR HOME.  A self-propelled vehicle containing living accommodations, used
for recreational purposes.
   NON-AGRICULTURAL LAND USE.  The commercial use of land for the manufacturing
and wholesale or retail sale of goods or services, residential or institutional
use of land intended primarily to shelter people, highway use of land including
lands, alleys and streets, and other land uses not included under agricultural
land use as defined in this chapter.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A building, structure, or use of land existing at the
time of enactment of this chapter, which does not conform to the regulations of
the district in which it is situated.
   OCCUPIED SPACE. The total area of earth horizontally covered by the
structure, excluding accessory structures, such as, but not limited to,
garages, patios and porches.
   OPEN SPACE.  A public or private outdoor area expressly set aside for the
use and benefit of many unrelated people. The area may include along with
natural environmental features, swimming pools, tennis courts, and other
outdoor recreational facilities that the Plan Commission deems permissive.
Streets, parking areas, structures for habitation and the like shall not be
included in the open space area calculation.
   ORDINANCE. Any legislative action, however denominated, of local government
which has the force of law, including the amendment or repeal of any ordinance.
   PARKING LOT, OFF STREET.  An area which is adequate for parking sufficient
automobiles to meet the optimum need of each appropriate land use, together
with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room,
and located totally off of a public right-of-way. Required, off-street parking
areas for three or more automobiles shall have individual spaces marked. As a
rule of thumb, the area provided for an off-street parking lot should be at
least one and one half times the space required for the number of parking space
anticipated.
   PARKING SPACE OR STALL.  The area required for parking one automobile, with
its attendant maneuvering room. The area required for a parked car should be
ten feet wide and 22 feet long; however, parking spaces which are designed for
the exclusive use of compact or subcompact cars, the space may be designed
appropriately smaller.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other legal entity.
   PERSONAL SERVICES. Any enterprise conducted for profit which primarily
offers services to the general public, such as barber shops, beauty parlors,
day care centers, and so on.
   PREMISES. One or more lots which are in the same ownership and are
contiguous, or separated only be a right-of-way or water body, including all
buildings, structures, and improvements.
   PRINCIPAL USES. The primary use to which the premises are devoted, and the
main purpose for which the premises exists.
   PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES. The use of offices and related spaces for such
professional services as provided by health practitioners, lawyer, architects,
engineers, and similar professions.
   PROHIBITED USE. A use indicated as prohibited for a certain district in the
Schedule of Uses shall not be allowed to locate in the district except as
specified under non-conformities. A “use” variance cannot be used to legalize
the conversion to or erection of a prohibited use.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, or corporation duly authorized to furnish
electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph, water, or sewage systems to the
public under public regulation.
   RECORDING SECRETARY. For the purposes of this chapter the Recording
Secretary shall be the person employed and delegated the responsibility of
recording and writing minutes and transcripts of the proceedings of the Plan
Commission and/or Board of Zoning Appeals.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle primarily designed as temporary living
quarters for recreation, camping or travel, either with its own motor power or
mounted on or towed by another powered vehicle.
   REPLACEMENT COST. The sum of money which could be required to reerect a
structure identical to the one in question.
   RESIDENTIAL. Of or relating to residences, where persons live or reside,
privately, on a sustained or permanent basis.
   ROADSIDE STAND. A temporary structure designed or used for the display or
sale of agricultural and related products, or novelties and other items of
interest, to the motoring public.
   RUNOFF. The portion of precipitation from such sources as rainfall, snow
melt or irrigation water that flows over the ground surface.
   SCREENING. A structure erected or vegetation planted which eventually is of
sufficient height and density for concealing an area from view.
   SEAT. For purpose of determining the number of off-street parking spaces for
certain use, the number of seating units installed or indicated or each 24
lineal inches of benches, pews, or space for loose chairs.
   SETBACK. A required open area unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure,
or any projection except as specifically provided for in this chapter.
   SETBACK, FRONT.  A setback extending across the front of a lot, being the
required minimum horizontal distance between the front line and front of the
buildings.
   SETBACK LINE. A line established by this chapter, generally parallel with
and measured from the lot line (property line), defining the limits of a yard
in which no building, other than a permitted accessory building or structure
may be located above ground, except as may be provided in this chapter.
   SETBACK, REAR. A setback extending across the rear of a lot, being the
required minimum horizontal distance between the rear property line and the
rear of the building.
   SETBACK, SIDE. A setback between any structure and the side lot extending
from the required front setback to the required rear setback and being the
minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the rear of the
building.
   SHORT TERM RENTAL. Means: 1) an entire dwelling; or 2) one or more dwelling
units, located in the same dwelling, offered to the public for rental for less
than 30 consecutive days.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the road right-of-way which is improved for the
use of pedestrian traffic.
   SIGN. An identification, description, illustration, or device which is
affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building , structure,
or land and which directs attention to a product, place activity, service,
person, institution, or business. Sign regulations are set out in
§ 152.061 of this chapter.
   SITE. The entire area included in the legal description of the land on which
land disturbing activity has been proposed in the permit application process of
§§ 152.100 through 152.107 of this chapter.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS. A use that is not listed as a permitted use in the
particular district under this chapter but which may be compatible with such
permitted uses and may promote the realization of the purposes of the chapter
if such special exception uses are restricted as to number and location in the
district and to such other conditions as may be required by the Board of Zoning
Appeals. Special exceptions permitted in each district are listed in the
official schedule of uses.
   STATE. The State of Indiana.
   STREET. A dedicated public right-of-way, other than an alley, intended for
vehicular traffic, including collector streets, local streets, cul-de-sacs,
roads, lanes, and other public ways, further defined as follows:
      (1)   COLLECTOR STREETS. Streets designed, planned, and intended to carry
intermediate traffic volumes within residential area and from minor streets to
secondary, primary and arterial streets.
      (2)   LOCAL STREETS. Streets designed, planned, and intended to carry
intermediate traffic volumes within residential areas to secondary, major, and
arterial streets.
      (3)   CUL-DE-SACS. Short streets having one end open to traffic, the
other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
   STORY. The part of a building between the surface of a floor and the ceiling
immediately above; or if there is a floor above, the portion of a building
between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among
other things, structures include buildings, walls, fences, decks, and signs.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit, as part of
a unit or as contiguous units, on the last preceding transfer of ownership
thereof, into two or more parcels or lots, for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of transfer of ownership thereof, into two or more parcels or lots,
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or
building development, provided however, that the division of land into parcels
of more than three acres, not involving any new streets or easements of access,
and the transfer or exchange of parcels between adjoining land owners, if such
transfer or exchange does not create additional building lots, shall not
constitute a subdivision for purposes of this chapter.
   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS. The applicable requirements, standards and
specifications imposed by the subdivision control ordinance as enacted by the
governing body of the town.
   SWIMMING POOL. A pool, pond, lake, or open tank containing at least 18
inches of water at any point and maintained by the owner or manager.
   SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE. A swimming pool used exclusively without paying an
additional charge for admission, by the residents and guests of a single
household, a multiple family development, a community, the members and guests
of a club, or the patrons of a motel or a hotel; an accessory use.
   TEMPORARY PERMITS. The Plan Commission may authorize by written permit in
any zoning district for a period of not more than one year from the date of
such permit, a temporary building which is incidental and necessary for the
sale, rental, lease construction or reconstruction of real property on premises
in the zoning districts, or as otherwise provided in
§ 152.139 of this chapter.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The portion of the comprehensive plan indicating the
general location recommended for arterial, collector, and local streets and
roads within the appropriate jurisdiction.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of Prince's Lakes, Indiana.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle or other portable structure less than 35 feet in
length designed to move on the highway, not under its own power, and designed
as a recreational dwelling.
   USE. The specific purposes for which land or a building is designated,
arranged, intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   USED OR OCCUPIED. Include the words “intended, arranged, or designed to be
used or occupied.”
   VARIANCE. A modification of the strict terms of the relevant regulations of
this chapter where such modifications will not be contrary to the public
interest, and where, owing to conditions peculiar to property and not the
result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter
would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
   WALKWAY. A public way, four or more feet in width, for pedestrian use only,
whether along the side of a street or not.
   YARD. An open area on a lot other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   YARD, FRONT. An open unoccupied area extending the full width of the lot and
situated between the front lot line and the front line of the building
projected to the side lines of the lot. Covered porches whether enclosed or
unenclosed, shall be considered a part of the building and shall not project
into a required front yard. On corner lots, the front yard shall be determined
by the location of the main entrance of the structure.
   YARD, LAKESIDE. An open, unoccupied space between the lakeside lot line and
the building line (as defined in Table B) on the lakeside of a building or
structure.
   YARD, REAR.  A yard extending the full width of the lot between a principal
building and the rear lot line or lines.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the principal building and side lot line, and
extending from the front yard line of the building to the rear line of the
building.
   ZONING. A police power measure, enacted by the governing body of local
governments, which the community is divided into districts or zones within
which permitted and special uses are established as are regulations governing
lot size, building bulk, placement, and other development standards.
Requirements vary from district to district, but they must be uniform within
districts.
   ZONING BOARD. The Board of Zoning Appeals of the town.
(Ord. 172, §§ 2-100, 2-200, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 400, passed 10-15-17)
   ZONING DISTRICTS AND OFFICIAL MAP
§ 152.020 ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED AND DEFINED.
   (A)   To classify, regulate, and restrict the use of land and structures,
the town is hereby divided into, or provisions are hereby made for future
division into, the following zoning districts. Furthermore, these districts
have been established to encourage the most appropriate use of land within the
town, to protect property values, to regulate the intensity of land use, and to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
   (B)   Single-Family Residential Districts. The Residential Districts are
intended to be limited to dwellings and public or semi-public uses which are
normally associated with residential neighborhoods. The only uses permitted in
residential districts are those which would not detract from the residential
character of the neighborhood. The purpose of these two districts is to create
an attractive, stable and orderly residential environment. However, the
property development regulations vary among the districts in order to provide
for the various housing needs and designs of citizens.
   (C)   General Business District. The General Business District is created to
provide for local or neighboring business uses that will be compatible with
adjoining residential areas. The GB District is designed to provide for
commercial, office, public and semi-public structures which are to be typically
much less commercial in appearance and architecturally harmonious with
residential structures. This district is intended to provide for the services
necessary to support local neighborhoods and their residents.
   (D)   Flood Hazard District (FH). Flood hazard zoning has been created to
protect the public health and to reduce the financial burdens which may be
imposed on the community, its governmental units and its citizens as a result
of improper use of lands which are subject to periodic flooding. Construction
or development of the flood hazard areas of the town could result in the
potential loss of life and property, create health and safety hazards and lead
to extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief. Since
development of these areas is not essential to the orderly growth of the
community these lands are to be reserved for suitable open space uses that do
not require structures or fill.
(Ord. 172, §§ 5-100 - 5-103, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 291, passed 6-18-01)
§ 152.021 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The town is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the
official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter, is hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
   (B)   The official zoning map shall be identified by the Chairperson of the
Plan Commission with the date of the adoption of this chapter.
   (C)   No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or
matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this
chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons
shall be considered a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided
under
§ 152.999.
   (D)   The official zoning map shall be located in the Town Hall and shall be
the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas,
building, and other structures in the town.
   (E)   In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed,
lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature and number of changes and
additions, the Plan Commission may by resolution adopt a new official zoning
map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or
omission in the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map shall be
identified by the signature of the Chairperson of the Plan Commission under the
following words:
   “This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of the Town of
Prince's Lakes, adopted this        day of             , and hereby supersedes
and replaces any and all previous zoning maps.
                        
   Plan Commission Chairman
                        
   Recording Secretary”
Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or has been totally
destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be
preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or
amendment.
(Ord. 172, §§ 5-201 - 5-205, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.022 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   Center lines of streets. Boundaries indicated as approximately
following the center lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed
to follow such center lines; and
   (B)   Platted lot lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following
platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines; and
   (C)   Town limits. Boundaries indicated as approximately following town
limits shall be construed as following such town limits; and
   (D)   Railroad lines.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines
shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks; and
   (E)   Conflicts to official zoning map. Where physical or cultural features
existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning
map, or in other circumstances not covered by divisions (A) through (D) above,
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries.
   (F)   Lots divided by district boundaries. Where a district boundary line
divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this
chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may permit, as a special exception, the
extension of the regulations for either portions of the lot not to exceed 50
feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.
(Ord. 172, § 5-300, passed 4-5-90)
   DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 152.035 PERMITTED USES AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   The permitted uses for each district are listed in the following Table A. A
proposed use not specifically listed shall not be permitted, unless the Plan
Commission determines, in its discretion, that it is similar enough to a listed
use that it should be permitted and deems it to be a permitted use. In which
case, the proposed use will be permitted only in those zoning classifications
in which the use to which it is deemed to be most similar is permitted. The
special exceptions for each district that may be permitted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals are also shown in Table A. The Board shall follow provision of
this and other applicable sections when considering any application for a
special exception.
TABLE A: OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF USES
P= Permitted Use   SP= Special Exception
  Districts
Use RR RS1 RS2 FH GB
TABLE A: OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF USES
P= Permitted Use   SP= Special Exception
                                                Districts
Use                                                RR RS1 RS2 FH GB
Single Family Dwelling                             P  P   P   -  S
Two Family Dwelling                                S  S   S   -  S
Attached Single Family                             S  S   S   -  S
Manufactured Homes Type I                          P  P   P   -  S
Manufactured Homes Type II                         S  S   S   -  S
Accessory Buildings                                P  P   P   P  P
Accessory Structures                               P  P   P   P  P
Auto Sales, Service and Repairs                    -  -   -   -  S
Banking and Credit Services                        -  -   -   -  P
Boarding House                                     S  S   S   S  P
Cemeteries                                         S  S   S   S  S
Commercial Recreational Uses                       -  -   -   P  S
Community Centers                                  S  S   S   S  S
Drinking Establishments:                           -  -   -   -  S
Bars, Taverns and Lounges
Eating Places, Restaurants and Drive-ins           -  -   -   -  P
Fire and Police Stations                           S  S   S   -  S
Funeral Homes                                      S  S   S   -  S
Gardening and Horticulture                         P  P   P   P  P
Government Services                                S  S   S   -  S
Home Occupations                                   S  S   S   -  S
Hotels and Motels                                  -  -   -   -  S
Houses of Worship                                  S  S   S   -  S
Long Term Rentals                                  P  P   P   -  P
   Use                                          RR RS1 RS2 FH GB
Nursery Schools and Day                            S  S   S   -  S
Parking Lots                                       P  P   P   -  P
Parks and Playgrounds                              P  P   P   P  P
Personal and Professional Services                 S  S   S   -  P
Private Clubs or Camps                             -  -   -   S  P
Public and Private Utility Services and Facilities P  P   P   P  P
Retail Sales                                       -  -   -   -  P
Short Term Rentals                                 -  -   -   -  P
Temporary Construction Offices                     P  P   P   P  P
Theaters                                           -  -   -   -  P
Veterinary Clinic and Kennel                       -  -   -   -  P
 
(Ord. 172, § 6-100, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 291, passed 6-18-01; Am. Ord. 400,
passed 10-15-17)
§ 152.036 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   General standards. The following general standards shall govern the
development of lots and buildings in all zoning districts:
 
TABLE B: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
            Minimum Lot Area and        Minimum Setbacks
District    Dimensions
            Lot Area Width of Lot Width Front Side Yard  Rear Yard  Lakeside
                     Frontage           Yard                        Yard
Low Density
Residential 40,000   100'     100'      25'   6'         25'        25'
RS 1
Medium
Density     21,780   50'      100'      25'   6'         25'        25'
Residential
RS 2
Rural
Residential 90,000   200'     200'      25'   50'        25'        25'
RR
General                                       § 152.038 § 152.038
Business GB N/A      75'      N/A       35'   (B)        (B)        25'
1
 
                 Maximum Building Height      Minimum Floor Area
                 Principal Accessory Building Usable Living Ground Level
                 Building
Low Density      35'       20'                1200          950
Residential RS 1
Medium Density   35'       20'                1200          950
Residential RS 2
Rural            35'       20'                1200          950
Residential RR
General          45'       N/A                N/A           N/A
Business GB 1
Notes to Table B:
1.   Setback lines: Setback dimensions given are based upon the
requirements for a local street. Other more stringent setbacks shall be
required if adjacent to a higher type of thoroughfare (see
§ 152.036(C)).
2.   Open space not to be counted for two structures: An open space or
lot area required for an existing building or structure shall not be
counted as open space for any other building or structure.
3.   Eaves, cornices, sills, porches: Open eaves, cornices, window
sills, and belt courses may project into any required yard a distance
not to exceed four feet. Open uncovered porches or open fire escapes may
project into a front or rear yard a distance not to exceed five feet.
4.   Minimum lot size, cover, and street frontage: A street or alley
shall form the direct and primary means of ingress and egress for all
dwelling units. Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main
building may be built in the rear yard but shall not cover more than 20%
of the rear yard.
5.   Attached or detached garages: An attached or detached private
garage which faces on a street shall not be located closer than 25 feet
to the edge of the street.
6.   Lakeside yard restrictions: The location of buildings or structures
erected in the lakeside yard shall be governed by
§ 152.068 of this chapter.
 
   (B)   Lot and yard requirements. The minimum lot area, width of frontage,
width of lot, width of side yards, depth of front and rear yards, maximum
building heights, floor area ratio and minimum floor areas for each district
shall be as shown in Table B (some district development standards may vary from
the standards defined herein - see district requirements and notes to Table B).
   (C)   Setback requirements. The below shown setbacks are considered to be
minimums. The Plan Commission may prescribe greater setbacks if either the
proposed use or the condition of the area, in the discretion of the Plan
Commission, warrant such greater setbacks. Yards, having a minimum depth in
accordance with the following setback requirements, shall be provided along al
public street right-of-way lines, and building setback lines shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Collector streets. As designated on the comprehensive plan of the
town.
      (2)   Local streets or cul-de-sacs. No part of any structure shall be
built closer than 25 feet to any right-of-way line of a local street or cul-de-
sac, except where more restrictive requirements are otherwise provided for in
this chapter. Additionally, it shall be further provided, that in any block in
which an existing yard depth is established (by existing legally established
structures within the same district) for more than 25% of the frontage of the
block (or a distance of 400 feet, whichever is the lesser), the required yard
depth and setback for any new building shall be the average of such established
yards.
      (3)   Established setbacks. 
         (a)   If 25% or more of the lots on one side of the street between two
intersecting streets are improved with buildings all of which have observed an
average setback line greater than the minimum setback requirements for that
specific zoning district, and no building varies more than six feet from this
average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street
line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings.
         (b)   If 25% or more of the lots on one side of the street between two
intersecting streets are improved with buildings all of which have observed an
average setback line less than the minimum setback requirements for that
specific zoning district, and no building varies more than six feet from this
average setback line, then it shall be permissible to erect a building as close
to the street line as the average setback line so established by the existing
building; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to corner lots
or lots having frontage on more than one street.
   (D)   Height restrictions. The following requirements are intended to
provide exception to or qualify and supplement as the case may be, the specific
district regulations set forth in division (B) above and in each of the
individual district's developmental regulations.
      (1)   Measurements. In measuring heights, a habitable basement or attic
shall be counted as a story. A story in a sloping roof, the area of which story
at a height of four feet above the floor does not exceed two-thirds of the area
of the story immediately below it and which does not contain an independent
apartment, shall be counted as half story. Height shall be measured from ground
level to the highest point of the building.
      (2)   Projections not for human occupancy. Chimneys, elevators, poles,
spires, tanks, towers, and other projections not used for human occupancy may
extend above the height limit.
      (3)   Public and semi-public buildings. Houses of worship, schools,
hospitals, sanatoriums and other public and semipublic buildings may exceed the
height limitation of the district if the minimum depth of rear yards and the
minimum width of the side yards required in district are increases one foot for
each two feet by which the height of such public or semi-public structure
exceeds the prescribed height limitation.
(Ord. 172, §§ 6-200 - 6-203, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 188, passed 2-10-92; Am.
Ord. 291, passed 6-18-01; Am. Ord. 320, passed 5-17-04)
§ 152.037 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Restrictions for permitted uses. The permitted uses of property in all
Residential Districts are the same. Variations among residential districts are
the same in Table B. See
§ 152.035 Official Schedule of Uses for a complete listing of permitted uses in
these districts. The following additional requirements shall apply in all
residential districts.
      (1)   Manufactured Housing Type I. It is the intent of this chapter to
encourage the provision of alternative modest income housing in certain
residential areas by permitting the use of Type I Manufactured Homes. To assure
similarity in exterior appearance between manufactured houses and homes
constructed on-site, only Type I Manufactured Houses as defined in
§ 152.008 of this chapter will be permitted use in general residential areas.
      (2)   Permitted placement. The establishment, location and use of Type I
Manufactured Homes as permanent residences shall be permitted in any zoning
district permitting installation of a dwelling unit, subject to requirements
and limitations applying generally to such residential use in the district, and
provided such homes shall meet the requirements for TYPE I Manufactured Homes
as set out in
§ 152.008 of this chapter.
   (B)   Residential property development regulations.
      (1)   Minimum lot areas.
         (a)   Any plat of a subdivision consisting of five plots or more for
plat approval in accordance with the subdivision control ordinance of the town
subsequent to the effective date this chapter, may reduce the minimum lot area
of 20% of the total number of lots within the plat, to the extent of 20% below
such square feet requirements, provided the average size of all lots within the
approved plat shall then be at least equal to the minimum lot area requirements
for the district involved provided the lots are served by sanitary sewers.
         (b)   When not serviced by a public sanitary sewer system the minimum
lot area for a single-family dwelling shall be increased to a minimum of 40,000
square feet for those areas with an RS1 zoning classification. The minimum lot
area for a single-family dwelling shall be increased to 80,000 square feet for
those areas with a zoning classification of RR. The Plan Commission shall
require approval of the private system to be used from the Johnson County
Health Department.
         (c)   Any plat of a subdivision of less than five lots shall be
required to follow the above requirements.
      (2)   Minimum lot width and street frontage.
         (a)   Any plat of a subdivision consisting of five lots or more
submitted for plat approval in accordance with the subdivision control
ordinance of the town subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, may
reduce said minimum width of 20% of the total number of lots within the plats,
to the extent of 10% below such 80 - 75 - and 60 foot requirements.
         (b)   Each lot shall have as a minimum the front footage shown on a
public street, and shall gain access from the street.
(Ord. 172, §§ 6-300 - 6-302, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 188, passed 2-10-92; Am.
Ord. 291, passed 6-18-01)
§ 152.038 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Restrictions for permitted uses - General Business (GB). All permitted
GB uses are listed in the Official Schedule of Uses in Table A,
§ 152.035. The following restrictions shall be applicable to all permitted uses
within the GB District:
      (1)   All uses and operations (except off-street loading, off-street
parking, and drive-in customer service windows) shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings.
      (2)   No merchandise shall be produced, stored or handled on the premises
for purposes of delivery or for sale at retail, wholesale, or discount to the
public or other businesses unless minor and incidental to the primary office
function.
      (3)   Gasoline service station and tire and auto service centers, shall
be limited to indoor service bays only. Provided, however, that the service
station and center functions, services, operation, and sales shall not include
the following:
         (a)   Outdoor operations other than the dispensing of gasoline, oil,
antifreeze, and other similar products and the performing of minor services for
customers;
         (b)   The sale, rental, display, or storage of new or used motor
vehicles, trailers, tractors, machinery, or other similar equipment; or
merchandise not related to the minor servicing of motor vehicles or for the
immediate convenience of customers;
         (c)   Commercial parking of motor vehicles;
         (d)   Major exterior displays of merchandise; or any exterior displays
which restrict traffic visibility in any way or which impede the movement of
vehicles on the service or center driveways or public rights-of-way, or located
in or in any way conflicting or interfering with pedestrian walks, off-street
parking areas, or required landscaped yards. Any exterior display shall be
maintained in an orderly manner.
         (e)   Major servicing or motor or body repair such as, but not limited
to, body fender work, motor overhaul, major transmission repair, auto glass
work, tire recapping.
         (f)   Dismantling or wrecking of motor or other vehicles, or the
storage of inoperable, damaged, or wrecked vehicles.
         (g)   A driveway so located and constructed that it permits traffic
movement completely around or behind the service station or service center
structure (except where necessary to provide adequate access to the off-street
parking are, building, storage tanks, trash containers, etc., or to adjacent
commercial property, or in the case of a station or service center structure
designed to provide service on all sides).
      (4)   Automobile sales new or used and service and repair are a permitted
use, provided:
         (a)   Any major repair and service is conducted within enclosed
buildings;
         (b)   Auto storage is incidental to the primary function;
         (c)   Not more than 50% of the developed area of the premises is used
for outdoor display, storage and/or sales;
         (d)   Outdoor storage shall be screened by a solid decorative fence or
wall not less than six feet in height, and to a distance from the front lot
line not less than the front building line of the primary structure;
         (e)   Any lighting used to illuminate an outdoor display area or an
outdoor area where any service or activity is conducted shall comply with the
following requirements:
            1.   When parking areas are illuminated, the lighting equipment
shall provide good visibility with a minimum of direct glare;
            2.   In applying exterior floodlighting, equipment shall be of
those types or distribution that are appropriate to lighting within the
property line. The lighting equipment shall be so located, shielded and
directed that the lighting distribution is confined to the area to be lighted;
            3.   Objectionable spill light onto adjacent properties or streets
shall be avoided to prevent direct glare or disability glare;
            4.   Further, it shall be prohibited to:
               a.   Light an area by the use of stringers or unshielded
incandescent lamps in which the entire lamp envelope is designed to function as
a light emitter;
               b.   Make use of attention attracting lighting from apparatus of
a type used by emergency vehicles.
   (B)   Property development regulations - GB.
      (1)   Use - GB.
         (a)   All uses and operations (except off-street loading and off-
street parking) shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except
where otherwise permitted.
         (b)   No outdoor storage shall be permitted other than trash
containers exceeding six cubic feet shall be located within a solid-walled
stall behind or beside the primary structure.
         (c)   No vending machines shall be permitted on the exterior of any
building on the premises except where contained in a shelter, stall, or other
area so located as not to interfere materially with the use of adjacent
properties.
      (2)   Required front yard, minimum front setback - GB. A front yard,
having at least 35 feet width of frontage on a public street and having a
minimum depth in accordance with the thoroughfare setback requirements of
§ 152.036 shall be provided along the street right-of-way line.
      (3)   Required corner side yard, double frontage lot minimum setback -
GB. In any case where the side or rear lot line abuts a street right-of-way
line, there shall be provided a side or rear yard in which the setback of any
structure shall comply with the minimum front setback requirements of this
section, unless subject to the established setback provisions of
§ 152.036.
      (4)   Required side yards, minimum side setback - GB. A side setback and
landscaped side yard of not less than eight feet in depth shall be provided
along each side lot line. If any portion of a side yard is used for a driveway
or off-street parking area, there shall be provided and maintained along the
entire length of such lot line, a three-foot landscaped strip, extending the
full length thereof; provided, however, that where a dedicated alley separates
a side yard form the adjacent property, the entire required side yard may be
used for off-street parking and/or driveway.
      (5)   Required year yard, minimum rear setback - GB. A rear yard and
setback of not less than ten feet in depth shall be provided along the rear lot
line. The rear yard, whether abutting an adjacent property or separated
therefrom by a dedicated alley, may be entirely used for off-street parking
and/or driveway.
      (6)   Use of required yards. All required yards shall be landscaped in
grass and shrubbery, trees and/or hedge, or in combination with other suitable
ground cover materials, except:
         (a)   Required front yards may include:
            1.   Pedestrian walks, access cuts, driveways, flag poles and
similar appurtenant uses;
            2.   Off-street parking, provided, however, a six foot wide strip
of the required front yard, paralleling and measured from the front lot line,
and extending the full length thereof (except for walks, access cuts and
driveways), shall be maintained as a landscaped portion of the front yard as
required above;
         (b)   Required side and rear yards may include:
            1.   Pedestrian walks, access cuts, driveways, flag poles, and
similar appurtenant uses;
            2.   Off-street parking, subject to the requirements of divisions
(B)(4), (B)(5), (B)(6), and (B)(7) of this section;
      (7)   Height of buildings and structures - GB. The maximum height of
buildings and structures shall be 45 feet.
(Ord. 172, §§ 6-400 - 6-402, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 188, passed 2-10-92)
   GENERAL USE REGULATIONS
§ 152.050 NONCONFORMING USES, LOTS, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Nonconforming uses, lots, buildings, and structures.
      (1)   Within the districts established by this chapter or by amendments
that may be adopted later, there exist:
         (a)   Nonconforming uses; and
         (b)   Nonconforming structures; and
         (c)   Nonconforming uses of land and structures in combination, which
were lawful before the effective date of this chapter, but which would be
prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter.
      (2)   It is the purpose of this chapter to prohibit the enlargement,
expansion, or extension of such nonconforming lots, structures, and uses.
   (B)   Existing uses. Any lawful lot, structure, or use of land existing at
the effective date of this chapter which will become a nonconforming use by the
terms of this chapter shall not be considered to be in violation of this
chapter. However, any such lot, structure, or use shall be subject to their
continuance, change, or discontinuance.
   (C)   Buildings under construction. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this
chapter shall be interpreted to require a change in the plans, construction, or
designated use of any building on which a valid building permit was issued
prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
   (D)   Nonconforming uses of land. Any use of land having lawful existence at
the effective date of adoption or amendment to this chapter which does not
conform to the provisions of this chapter may be continued, subject to the
following provisions:
      (1)   Nonconforming uses shall not be extended to occupy a greater land
area or replaced by another use not specifically permitted in the zoning
district;
      (2)   If any nonconforming uses of land are discontinued or abandoned for
more than six months, any subsequent use of land shall conform to the
requirements specified by this chapter for the district in which the land is
located;
      (3)   No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this
chapter shall be erected in connection with the nonconforming land use.
   (E)   Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not now be
built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot
coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, bulk, or other requirements
concerning the structure, such a structure may be continued so long as it
remains lawful, subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   The nonconforming structure may not be enlarged or altered in any
way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may
be altered to decrease its nonconformity;
      (2)   A non residential, nonconforming structure damaged to the extent of
more than 50% of its fair market value shall not be reconstructed except in
conformity with all then current provisions of this chapter. With regard to a
non-residential, nonconforming structure damaged to the extent of less than 50%
of its fair market value and all residential nonconforming structures damaged
to any extent, the provisions of this chapter that were applicable at the time
of original construction of the nonconforming use shall apply. This exception,
however, relates only to this chapter and does not except or affect any other
applicable town ordinances, federal, state, or county laws, rules, codes, and
regulations that may apply;
      (3)   If a structure is moved for any reason for any length of distance,
it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
located after the move.
   (F)   Nonconforming uses of structure and land in combination. If a lawful
use involving individual structures, or if a structure and land use in
combination, exist at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this
chapter, the lawful use may be continued subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   No existing structures devoted to a use not permitted by this
chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in changing the use to a
use permitted in the district.
      (2)   A non-conforming use may be extended throughout any part of the
building which was arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or
amendment of the regulations of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended
to occupy land outside such a building.
      (3)   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and land, may upon appeal to the Board of Zoning
Appeals be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more
appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting
such a change, the Board of Zoning Appeals may require appropriate conditions
and safeguards in accordance with other provisions of this chapter;
      (4)   Any structure or combination of structures and land where
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not be resumed;
      (5)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, combination of structure
and land is discontinued or abandoned for more than six months, the structure
or structure and land combination, shall thereafter only be used on conformity
with the regulations of the district in which it is located;
      (6)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
   (G)   Repairs and maintenance. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted
to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building
or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charge with protecting the
public safety. On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure
containing a nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, provided
that the area of the nonconforming use is not increased.
   (H)   Uses under special exception provision are not nonconforming use. Any
use which is a permitted use as a special exception in district under the terms
of this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but
shall without further action be considered a conforming use.
(Ord. 172, §§ 7-100 - 7-107, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 188, passed 2-10-92; Am.
Ord. 216, passed 5-8-95; Am. Ord. 363, passed 11-19-12)
§ 152.051 ACCESSORY USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Items included. This section includes those accessory uses, buildings
and structures customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or
building and located on the same lot, it does not include fences, walls and
hedges which are covered in
§ 152.055.
   (B)   Permitted accessory uses - residential districts. The following
accessory uses shall be permitted in all Residential Districts subject to the
accessory use requirements of division (A) above.
      (1)   Accessory garages, carports, canopies, patios, outdoor fireplaces,
porta-cocheres, bathhouses, cabanas, children's play houses, swings and other
play structures or equipment, greenhouses and other accessory buildings or
structures.
      (2)   Off-street parking areas, as regulated in
§ 152.058.
      (3)   Signs, as regulated in
§ 152.061.
      (4)   Private swimming pools, as regulated in
§ 152.060.
      (5)   Amateur radio sending and receiving antenna, provided the height
thereof (including masts) shall not exceed 75 feet measured from finished lot
grade.
(Ord. 172, §§ 7-200 - 7-202, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 188, passed 2-10-92)
§ 152.052 APPURTENANCES.
   The following regulations shall govern appurtenant features in all
districts:
   (A)   Such appurtenant features as walks, driveways, curbs, drainage
installations, mailboxes, lamp posts, bird baths and structures of like nature,
shall be permitted on any lot;
   (B)   The growing of vegetables, grasses, fruits, flowers, shrubs, vines,
and trees, provided such operations are not for profit, shall be permitted on
any lot;
   (C)   Fences and walls shall be permitted provided they do not impede the
view of street and/or railroad intersections.
(Ord. 172, § 7-300, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.053 ANIMALS.
   No animals other than common household pets shall be permitted in any
residential district. Examples of common household pets include but are no
limited to dogs, cats, hamsters, and parakeets. Rabbits, chickens, ducks,
snakes, and other such animals are not considered household pets.
(Ord. 172, § 7-400, passed 4-5-90)
Penalty, see § 152.999
§ 152.054 CORNER VISIBILITY.
   On a corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to
grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of 2-1/
2 feet and six feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in
an area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining
points along the street lines 25 feet from the point of the intersection.
(Ord. 172, § 7-500, passed 4-5-90)
Penalty, see § 152.999
§ 152.055 FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES.
   (A)   Construction within easement. Nothing herein shall be construed so as
to permit construction within a public or private easement in which it is
prohibited.
   (B)   Residential fences and walls. All fences and walls shall be of sound
construction, shall not detract from the surrounding area, and shall be
governed by the following standards:
      (1)   Barbed wire, etc. No barbed wire, spire tips, sharp objects, or
charged fences shall be erected in any residential area;
      (2)   Accessory structure. When used to enclose a patio, swimming pool,
garden supply or tool compound, or similar living, recreational, or storage
areas, the facility and the fences, walls, and hedges surrounding it shall be
considered an accessory structure.
      (3)   Height.
         (a)   Unless otherwise permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals under
the provisions of
§ 152.122, fences, walls, or hedges in the front or lakeside yard of any lot or
in the side yard along a flanking, street of a corner lot shall not exceed 48
inches in height.
         (b)   In the rear and side yards, not along a flanking street or
lakefront, fences, walls, or hedges shall not exceed 72 inches.
      (4)   Location.
         (a)   Fences, walls or hedges may be erected, placed, or maintained on
lot lines provided that placement of a fence, wall or hedge shall not interfere
with provisions contained in granted easements for the lot on which they are to
be located.
         (b)   Fences, walls, and hedges shall not shield the driveway
entrances in such a way as to obstruct the view of a driver entering a public
road from the driveway.
   (C)   Nonresidential fences, walls and hedges. All fences and walls shall be
of sound construction and shall not detract from the surrounding area. All
nonresidential uses shall comply with the requirements for fences, walls, and
hedges as set out in the district regulations in which the nonresidential use
is located.
(Ord. 172, §§ 7-600 - 7-602, passed 4-5-90)
Penalty, see § 152.999
§ 152.056 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Rules and regulations. This section includes rules and regulations for
occupations or activities which may be maintained or conducted within a
dwelling. These uses shall exist only if the following general provisions are
fulfilled:
      (1)   Any use of a residence for a home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purpose by its occupants.
It shall not change the character or adversely affect the uses permitted in the
residential district of which it is a part;
      (2)   Such use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit;
      (3)   Such occupation shall be conducted solely by resident occupants,
non-resident employees are expressly prohibited;
      (4)   No more than one room or 25% of the gross floor area of the
dwelling, whichever is less, shall be used for such purposes. Use of accessory
buildings or detached garages for these purposes is prohibited;
      (5)   No use shall require internal or external alterations or involve
construction features or the use of electrical or mechanical equipment that
would change the fire rating of the structure or the fire district in which the
structure is located;
      (6)   There shall be no outside storage of any kind related to the home
occupation. Generally speaking, with a nameplate as permitted herein excluded,
a home occupation shall be “invisible” from outside the dwelling;
      (7)   Only one nameplate shall be allowed. It may display the name of the
occupant and/or the name of the home occupation. It shall not exceed one square
foot in area, shall not be illuminated and shall be attached flat to the main
structure or visible through the window. The limitation to one nameplate is
extended to apply to all lots, including corner lots;
      (8)   The home occupation may increase vehicular traffic flow and parking
by no more than one vehicle at a time. Off-street parking shall be provided
without encroaching upon required front-yard open space or set-back
requirements;
      (9)   No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare,
electrical interference, fire hazard, or any other hazard or nuisance to any
greater or more frequent extent than that usually experienced in an average
residential occupancy in the district in question under normal circumstances
wherein no home occupation exists;
      (10)   The home occupation shall not involve the use of advertising signs
or any other local advertising media which calls attention to the fact that the
dwelling is used for business purposes, telephone number excluded.
   (B)   Professional offices - special restrictions. A physician, dentist,
lawyer, clergyman, engineer, insurance agent, real estate agent, consultant, or
other professional person may use his or her residence for office work,
consultation, emergency treatment, or performance of religious rites, but not
for the general practice of his or her profession and not for the installation
or use of any mechanical or electrical equipment customarily incidental to the
practice of any such profession.
   (C)   Variance procedure available. Non-residential uses which are either
expressly prohibited as home occupations or which do not conform to all of the
conditions and restrictions of this section, may be conducted in a residential
dwelling only upon submission of a variance petition to the Board of Zoning
Appeals and receiving a favorable decision from the Board. The procedures and
requirements for submitting a variance petition to the Board of Zoning Appeals
are found in § 152.122(F) of this chapter.
(Ord. 172, §§ 7-700 - 7-702, passed 4-5-90)
Penalty, see § 152.999
§ 152.057 HOUSES OF WORSHIP.
   Property development regulations for houses of worship shall be as follows:
   (A)   Houses of worship and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings, and accessory buildings to dwellings, shall be set back from all
exterior and interior sidelines a distance of not less than 25 feet;
   (B)   Houses of worship may exceed the height limitation of the district if
the minimum depth of rear yards and the minimum width of the side yards
required in district are increased one foot for each two feet by which the
house of worship exceeds the prescribed height limitations;
   (C)   Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in
§ 152.058;
   (D)   All other property development regulations within the districts in
which the house of worship is located shall apply and be the minimum required.
If a house of worship is to be located in a non-residential district, property
development regulations of the most restrictive district (RS1) shall be the
minimum unless otherwise specified in divisions (A), (B) and (C) above of this
section.
(Ord. 172, § 7-800, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.058 OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Off-street parking facilities for motor vehicle shall be provided for all
uses in the nonresidential districts in accordance with the following
regulations:
   (A)   Minimum parking space dimensions. A required off-street parking space
shall be at least ten feet in width and at least 20 feet in length, exclusive
of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or office or work areas.
   (B)   Access to and from parking areas.
      (1)   Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an
aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to such parking space.
      (2)   All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in such a mariner as
to minimize interference with traffic movement.
      (3)   No driveway extending into the street right-of-way (between the lot
line and street pavement) shall exceed a width of 25 feet. Provided, however,
two driveways, not exceeding 25 feet in width each, may constitute a single
entrance-exit.
   (C)   Location and setback.
      (1)   All parking spaces required to serve buildings or uses erected or
established after the effective date of this chapter shall be located on the
same lot as the building or use served. Buildings or uses existing on the
effective date of this chapter which are subsequently altered or enlarged so as
to require the provision of additional parking spaces under the requirements of
this chapter may be served by parking facilities located on land other than the
lot on which the building or use served is located, provided such facilities
are within 200 feet of a lot line of the use served.
      (2)   The required parking area shall not be used for the storage of any
commercial vehicles.
      (3)   Buildings or structures shall be permitted for shelters for guards,
attendants or watchmen; however, any such structure shall not occupy required
off-street parking space.
      (4)   All open off-street parking areas shall be paved with concrete or
improved with a compacted macadam base, and surfaced with an asphaltic pavement
to adequately provide a durable and dust-free surface which shall be maintained
in good condition free of weeds, dirt, trash, and debris, except that:
         (a)   A gravel surface may be used for a period not exceeding one year
after the parking area is opened for use where ground conditions are not
immediately suitable for permanent surfacing as specified above;
         (b)   A gravel surface in the area of storage or handling may be used
permanently in association with industries that handle liquids or chemicals
which create a potential hazard if containment should be lost and where
adsorption into the ground through a loose surface material would eliminate or
alleviate such hazard.
      (5)   The surface shall be graded and drained in such a manner that there
will be no free flow of water onto either adjacent properties or public
sidewalks.
      (6)   The parking area(s) shall be so lined or designated where abutting
a required yard that no part of the parked vehicles shall extend beyond the
boundary of the established parking area into any minimum required yard or into
adjoining property.
      (7)   When lighting facilities are used to illuminate the parking area(s)
they shall be so located, shielded, and directed upon the parking area that
they do not create glare or reflect onto adjacent properties or interfere with
street traffic. In no instance shall bare incandescent bulbs be used for such
illumination.
   (D)   Amount of parking area required. For any use not specified in this
section, the requirements for off-street parking for a specified use to which
the use is most similar, as determined by the Plan Commission, shall apply. The
parking spaces requirements set out in this section may be modified or waived
by the Plan Commission.
   U   Required Parking Spaces
   Use                                  Required Parking Spaces
Automobile or Trailer Sales Area        1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of retail area
Automobile Sales and Repair (Indoor)    1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Banks, Business Offices, Professional   1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area
Services, and Similar Service Uses
Clinic, Medical or Dental               1 per 100 sq. ft. of floor area
Commercial Recreational Use             1 per 1 employee plus 1 per 200 sq. ft.
                                        of floor area
Home Occupation                         1 in addition to residence requirement
Hotels, Motels or Motor Hotels          1 per employee plus 1 per sleeping room
Kindergarten or Day Nursery             1 per employee plus 1 per 5 children
Police or Fire Station                  1 per 1 employee on a shift
Private Club or Lodge                   1 per six active members
Private Recreational Development        1 per customer plus 1 employee per
                                        shift
Public Library or Town Buildings        1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Residential Use, including apartments   2 per dwelling unit
Retail Stores - Heavy Traffic           1 per 150 sq. ft. of floor area for an
Generators, including but not limited   individual use or a combination of 2 or
to: Supermarkets and Other Food Stores, more uses in 1 structure or a shopping
Restaurants, Bars, Night Clubs, Ice     center of comparably integrated uses
Cream Parlors, Bakery, Drug Stores,     where all uses included do not exceed
Beauty and Barber Shops, Discount       50,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Stores
Retail Stores - Light Traffic           1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area for an
Generators, including but not limited   individual use or a combination of 2 or
to: Furniture, Jewelry, Hardware,       more uses in 1 structure or a shopping
Appliance Stores and the like, Personal center of comparably integrated uses
Service Shops, Household or Equipment   where all uses included do not exceed
Repair Shops, Clothing and Shoe Repair  50,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Shops, Wearing Apparel
Veterinary Hospital for Small Animals,  1 per 3 animal spaces (cages or pens)
Kennel
 
(Ord. 172, §§ 7-900 - 7-905, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.059 PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND RECREATION AREAS.
   These uses are permitted in a district so long as the plans for their
development and use are approved by the Plan Commission. See individual
districts for recreational space requirements.
   (A)   Illuminated areas shall be approved prior to development. Lights shall
be placed in such a way that they do not infringe upon the rights of adjacent
property owners. In no case shall lights be placed closer than 50 feet from
adjacent property lines.
   (B)   At the option of the Plan Commission or the Plan Commission, buffers
may be required to shield adjacent residences from noise or activities. Buffers
may be in the form of a tall solid fence or hedge.
(Ord. 172, § 7-1000, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 188, passed 2-10-92)
§ 152.060 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   General requirements. The requirements of this section shall apply to
all pools which are accessory uses to single and multiple family dwellings. No
pool shall be erected or constructed until an improvement location permit has
been obtained therefor.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   Unenclosed pools or pools enclosed only with open mesh screen shall
meet the setback requirements for accessory uses. They shall be located:
         (a)   A minimum of ten feet from any principal or other accessory
building;
         (b)   A minimum of 30 feet from any street right-of-way;
         (c)   No closer to a street right-of-way than the principal building.
      (2)   Any pool which is covered by a roof shall be subject to the same
setback regulations as the principle use.
   (C)   Fencing.
      (1)   In-ground swimming pools.
         (a)   The pool area shall be enclosed by a substantial protective
barrier, which shall be adequate to prevent persons, children or animals from
danger or harm, and shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching gate.
Such protective barriers shall be chain link or ornamental fence, solid fence
or wall, and shall not be less than five feet in height.
         (b)   A buffer screen shall be provided and maintained between the
pool and lot lines.
      (2)   Above-ground swimming pools. Every above-ground pool shall meet the
fencing requirements for in-ground pools or shall be constructed to limit
access to a gate.
(Ord. 172, §§ 7-1100 - 7-1103, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 320, passed 5-17-04)
§ 152.061 SIGNS.
   (A)   General requirements. No sign shall be erected, moved, enlarged,
improved or altered nor shall any sign be established or changed in use without
an improvement location permit issued by the Plan Commission or its designated
representative. Permits shall be issued in conformance with this chapter. The
purpose of this section is to promote the use of signs which enhance the visual
environment of the town and to encourage the use of signs which are harmonious
with their surroundings.
      (1)   All signs and their surrounding structures shall be kept in good
repair;
      (2)   Any out-of-date sign which refers to a business, owner, or activity
no longer existing on the premises where the sign is displayed shall be removed
by the owner or lessee of the premises no later than 60 days after the
abandonment;
      (3)   No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where by
reason of its position, working size, shape, color or illumination it may
obscure, impair, or interfere with the view of, or be confused with any
authorized traffic control device, signal, or sign;
      (4)   No part of any sign attached to the exterior wall of a building
shall be erected to a height in excess of six feet above the roof line or
parapet line of such building;
      (5)   No part of any free-standing sign shall be erected to a height
greater than that specified for other structures in the district in which it is
located; rooftop signs shall not extend more than 20 feet above the roof line
nor shall such sign be located closer to an exterior wall than a distance equal
to the height such sign extends above the roof;
      (6)   The area of a sign shall be determined by the smallest circle,
triangle, or rectangle that can be used to enclose the sign, exclusive of
supporting members that bear no message;
      (7)   Illumination:
         (a)   No illuminated sign shall be permitted within 50 feet of any
residential district or in the GB District, unless it is so designed that it
does not reflect or shine light into the district;
         (b)   No illuminated sign shall create an unduly distracting or
hazardous condition to motorists or pedestrians. No sign shall project beyond a
lot line, obstruct a driver's vision of the road, or hinder his or her passage
in any way. Further, no sign shall hinder or obstruct any pedestrian path;
         (c)   All sign illumination shall be indirect or interior. No exposed
bulbs, neon tubing or fluorescent tubing shall be allowed, with the exception
of automatic changing signs which display time, temperature of other general
information and illuminated seasonal or holiday signs;
      (8)   Each permitted or required parking area that has a capacity of more
than five or more cars shall be permitted one sign, not more than two square
feet in area, designating each entrance or exit; and one sign, not more than 12
square feet in area, identifying or designating the conditions of use of such
parking area for each 25 spaces;
      (9)   One “For Sale” or “For Rent” sign not more than six square feet in
area for each dwelling unit, garage, other quarter, buildings, structures, or
land shall be permitted;
      (10)   One sign, not more than 20 square feet in area, pertaining to the
sale of agricultural products raised on the premises shall be permitted;
      (11)   Signs established by, or by the order of any governmental agency
shall be permitted;
      (12)   One sign, not more than six square feet in area, for construction
and development, giving the name of the contractors, engineers, or architects,
shall be permitted but only during the time that construction or development is
actively under way;
      (13)   For an event of public interest such as a county fair, or church
event, one sign, not over 24 square feet in area and located upon the site of
the event shall be permitted. Such sign shall not be erected more than 30 days
before the event in question and shall be removed immediately after such event.
Also directional signs, not more than three feet in area, showing only a
directional arrow and the name of the event of public interest. Such signs
shall not be erected more than 14 days before the event in question and shall
be removed immediately after the event;
      (14)   For real estate development that has been approved in accordance
with the subdivision control ordinance, one sign, not more than 300 square feet
in area advertising the sale of property in such subdivision shall be
permitted, but only when located on some portion of the subdivision being
advertised for sale. Such sign shall not be illuminated. Such signs shall be
maintained only during such time as some portion of the land advertised for
sale remains unsold. Permits for such signs shall be issued for one-year
periods and may be renewed for additional one-year periods to allow time for
reasonable display.
   (B)   Residential Districts.
      (1)   A nameplate which shall not exceed one square foot in area is
permitted for each dwelling unit of a single family, or multi-family structure;
such nameplate shall indicate nothing other than name and/or address of the
occupant, and/or customary home occupation. No other sign shall be allowed.
      (2)   Multiple-family residences and residential projects of all types
may display identification signs indicating nothing other than name and/or
address of the premises and/or the name of the management. Such sign shall not
exceed six square feet in area.
      (3)   For uses other than those listed in divisions (1) and (2) above,
bulletin boards or identification signs indicating nothing other than name and/
or address of the premises and schedule of services or other information
relevant to the operation of the premises; such signs shall not exceed six
square feet in area.
      (4)   For each use of divisions (2) and (3) above, eligible to display a
sign, only one sign per street frontage shall be permitted; except that uses
occupying extended frontages shall be permitted one such sign per 500 feet of
frontage or major fraction thereof.
   (C)   GB Districts.
      (1)   Residential uses shall be subject to the provisions of divisions
(B)(1) through (B)(4) above.
      (2)   Each public recreation, community facility, clinic use, and similar
uses shall be permitted one bulletin board or identification sign, not to
exceed 12 square feet, except that use occupying extended frontages or major
fraction thereof.
      (3)   Each primary use other than those listed in divisions (B)(1) and
(B)(2) above, shall be permitted signs according to the following formula: The
area of all permanent advertising signs for any single business enterprise may
have an area equivalent to 1½ square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of
width of a building, or part of a building occupied by such enterprise, but
shall not exceed a maximum area of 100 square feet.
      (4)   The area of all permanent advertising signs for any single business
enterprise shall be limited according to the widths of the building or part of
the building occupied by such enterprise. For purposes of this section, width
shall be measured along the building face nearest parallel to the street line.
In the case of a corner lot, either frontage may be used in determining width,
but the frontage selected shall be considered the front wall of the building
for the purpose of determining maximum area of the sign.
      (5)   No sign shall project over a lot line and no sign shall project in
to a required yard by more than two feet, except in those blocks where 25% of
the frontage is already occupied by business uses and where frontage is already
occupied by business uses and where overhanging signs are already established.
Signs may project to within two feet of an established right-of-way line but in
no event shall a sign extend more than six feet beyond the face of the
building.
      (6)   Free-standing signs not over 25 feet in height, having a maximum
total sign area of 100 square feet and located not closer than ten feet to any
street line, and not closer than 100 feet to any adjoining lot line may be
erected to served a group of business establishments.
   (D)   Special restrictions: signs not permitted in any district.
      (1)   Banners, pennants, and streamers shall not be permitted except:
         (a)   Flags and banners of the United States, the State of Indiana or
any other political entity, religious or fraternal organization; or
         (b)   Banners, pennants, and streamers permitted under a temporary
sign permit.
      (2)   Portable, folding, and similar movable signs shall not be
permitted, except under a commercial sign permit.
      (3)   Signs which are structurally unsafe, or are incompatible with their
surroundings as determined by the Commission or its designated representatives.
      (4)   Signs obstructing free ingress or egress from a required exit, or
which prevent light or ventilation as required in local codes and ordinances.
      (5)   Signs which by reason of size, location, content, coloring, or
illumination violate municipal or state highway standards.
      (6)   Signs, word, phrases, symbols, colors, or characteristics which may
mislead, interfere with, or confuse motorists, or otherwise be injurious to
public health and safety.
      (7)   Signs erected on or attached to any sidewalk, street, or highway
right-of-way, curb, curbstones, hydrant, lamppost, tree barricade, temporary
walkway, telephone telegraph, or electric light pole, other utility pole,
public fence, or on a fixture of the fire alarm or police system except public
information signs.
      (8)   An advertising sign shall not be painted directly on an exterior
wall of a building or structure.
      (9)   Signs which involve revolving or rotating beams of light.
(Ord. 172, §§ 7-1200 - 7-1203, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 188, passed 2-10-92; Am.
Ord. 267, passed 6-28-99)
§ 152.062 STREET DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Public street requirements.
      (1)   All public streets shall be dedicated to the public and improved
and constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the subdivision
control ordinance for the town.
      (2)   The right-of-way of all streets indicated on the comprehensive plan
for the town within the project shall be dedicated to the public, or the right-
of-way thereof shall be reserved for future dedication or acquisition.
   (B)   Requirements for private driveways - all residential districts.
      (1)   All residential driveways shall be designed with sufficient width
and length to provide off-street parking space for a minimum of two motor
vehicles. The minimum width of such driveways shall be 15 feet.
      (2)   All residential driveways shall, at a minimum, be improved with
compacted aggregate base to adequately provide a durable surface.
      (3)   All residential driveways shall be privately maintained (not by
governmental agencies) in good condition and free of weeds, dirt, trash and
debris.
      (4)   No fence, wall, hedge, tree, shrub, or other sign obstruction shall
be located so as to materially impede the view of any street, highway or
railroad intersection with a residential driveway.
(Ord. 172, §§ 7-1300 - 17-1302, passed 4-5-90)
Penalty, see § 152.999
§ 152.063 TEMPORARY USES.
   (A)   Temporary use permit.  Subject to conditions, fees, and standards
(including official Schedule of Uses) otherwise required by this chapter, a
temporary use permit may be issued:
      (1)   To an applicant in the process of the building, rebuilding,
developing or otherwise constructing within the districts set out in this
chapter to locate a manufactured or mobile home on a building lot during the
course of said construction; such permit shall not be issued until after a
building permit for the construction has been issued;
      (2)   To an applicant to use a manufactured or mobile home as a
caretaker's quarters or construction office at a job site.
   (B)   Length of temporary permit. A temporary use permit may be issued at
the discretion of the Plan Commission for a period not to exceed 90 days. The
temporary permit may be renewed for additional 90-day periods upon showing of
good cause, and with permission of the Plan Commission to do so.
   (C)   Temporary permit expiration. At the time the temporary permit expires,
the manufactured or mobile home and all appurtenances shall be removed from the
property within 30 days.
   (D)   Commercial tents. A permit shall be required for the erection of any
tent proposed to be used for commercial purposes (any use that is non-
residential or non-recreational). The applicant for a tent permit shall submit
a proposed site plan to the Plan Commission for its approval. The erection and
securing methods shall be subject to the approval of the Plan Commission. No
tent shall be erected within 25 feet of a street or highway right-of-way. A
tent permit shall be good for a maximum time period of 30 days from the date of
issuance. Renewal of a tent permit shall be at the discretion of the Plan
Commission or its designated representative.
(Ord. 172, §§ 7-1400 - 7-1403, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 188, passed 2-10-92)
§ 152.064 STORAGE AND PARKING OF TRAILERS, BOATS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Storage and parking regulations. Commercial vehicles, boats, and
trailers of all types, including travel, camping, hauling, boat, and mobile
homes, shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a residential
dwelling or on any lot in any residential district except in accordance with
the following provisions.
   (B)   Commercial vehicles. Not more than one commercial vehicle (excluding
automobiles) which does not exceed the gross vehicular weight of 10,000 pounds,
per family living on the premises, shall be permitted; but in no case shall a
commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline, chemicals, or
liquefied petroleum products be permitted in a residential area.
   (C)   Boats, campers, travels trailers, and r.v.'s. Temporary storage of
boats, campers, travel trailers and R.V.'s shall be permitted.
   (D)   Utility and hauling trailers. Not more than one utility or hauling
trailer, per family living on the premises, shall be permitted, provided that
the trailer shall not exceed 12 feet in length or eight feet six inches in
width further provided that the trailer shall not be parked or stored more than
48 hours unless it is located behind the front yard building line.
(Ord. 172, §§ 7-1500 - 7-1503, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.065 MORE THAN ONE STRUCTURE ON A LOT.
   In any district, more than one structure housing a permitted or permissible
principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other
requirements of this chapter shall be met for each structure as though it were
on an individual lot.
(Ord. 172, § 7-1600, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.066 STRUCTURES TO HAVE ACCESS.
   Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to
either a public or private street, or with legal access to either a private or
public street, and all structures shall be located on lots so as to provide
safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-
street parking.
(Ord. 172, § 7-1700, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.067 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   All uses established or placed into operation after the effective date of
this chapter shall comply with the following performance standards in the
interest of protecting public, health, safety, welfare, and lessening injury to
property. No use in existence on the effective date of this chapter shall be so
altered or modified as to conflict with these standards.
   (A)   Fire protection.  Fire fighting equipment and prevention measures
acceptable to the local fire department shall be readily available and apparent
when activity involving the handling or storage of flammable or explosive
materials is conducted.
   (B)   Electrical disturbance. No use shall cause electrical disturbance
adversely affecting radio, television or other equipment in the vicinity.
   (C)   Noise. No use shall produce noise in such a manner as to be
objectionable because of volume, frequence, intermittence, heat, shrillness, or
vibration. The noise shall be muffled or otherwise controlled so as not to
become detrimental, provided however, that public safety sirens and related
apparatus used solely for public purposes shall be exempt from this standard.
   (D)   Vibration. No use shall cause vibrations or concussions detectable
beyond lot lines without the aid of instruments.
   (E)   Odor. No use shall emit across the lot lines malodorous gas or matter
in such a quantity as to be readily detectable at any point along the lot
lines.
   (F)   Air pollution. No use shall discharge across lot lines flyash, dust,
smoke, vapors, noxious, toxic or corrosive matter, or other air pollutants in
such concentration as to be detrimental to health, animals, vegetation or
property.
   (G)   Heat and glare. No use shall produce heat and glare in such manner as
to create a nuisance perceptible from any point beyond the lot lines.
   (H)   Water pollution.  No use shall produce erosion or other pollutants in
such quantity as to be detrimental to adjacent properties and conflict with
water pollution standards established by public agencies.
   (I)   Waste matter. No use shall accumulate within the lot discharge beyond
the lot lines any waste matter, whether liquid or solid, in violation of
applicable public health, safety and welfare standards and regulations.
(Ord. 172, § 7-1800, passed 4-5-90)
Penalty, see § 152.999
§ 152.068 LAKESIDE YARD RESTRICTIONS.
   No accessory buildings shall be located in the lakeside yard or on the
lakeside of a principal building in a location that would obstruct the view of
the lake for neighboring lot owners.
(Ord. 172, § 7-1900, passed 4-5-90)
Penalty, see § 152.999
§ 152.069 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   Political campaign signs announcing candidates seeking public political
office shall be confined within private property and no within the street
right-of-way, shall be permitted no more than 45 days prior to the scheduled
election and shall be removed within 14 days after the election for which they
were made. Such signs shall not be required to obtain a permit.
(Ord. 311, passed 2-18-02)
   FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICT (FH)
§ 152.080 PURPOSE.
   Flood hazard zoning has been created to protect the public health and to
reduce the financial burdens which may be imposed on the community, its
governmental units and its citizens as a result of improper use of lands which
are subject to periodic flooding. Construction or development of the flood
hazard areas of the town could result in the potential loss of life and
property, create health and safety hazards and lead to extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief. Since development of these areas
is not essential to the orderly growth of the community these lands are to be
reserved for suitable open space uses that do not require structures or fill.
(Ord. 172, § 8-100, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.081 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
including, but not limited to, buildings, and other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operation.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Any flood plain district, floodway district, floodway
fringe district, or any combination thereof which is subject to inundation by
the regulatory flood or any flood plain district as delineated by Zone A on a
flood hazard boundary map.
   FLOOD or FLOODWATER. The water of any lake or watercourse which is above the
banks and/or outside the channel and banks of such watercourse.
   FLOOD PLAIN. The area adjoining the river or stream or other such body of
water which has been or may hereafter be covered by floodwaters.
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE. The lowest elevation of the lowest point in a
building at which flood waters may enter the interior of the building. This
lowest point is defined by the following:
      (1)   The lowest floor of the building (if a basement is included, the
basement floor is the lowest floor);
      (2)   The garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of the
building;
      (3)   The first floor of a building elevated on pilings or constructed on
a crawl space;
      (4)   The floor level of any enclosure below an elevated building where
the walls of the enclosure provide some resistance to the flow of flood waters;
         (a)   Unless the walls are designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing entry and exit of floodwater,
through providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and
windows) having a total area one square foot for every two square feet of
enclosed floor area subject to flooding. The bottom of all such openings shall
be no higher than one foot above the enclosed area's floor;
         (b)   Such enclosed space shall be usable for nonresidential purposes
and building access;
      (5)   The level of protection provided to a nonresidential building below
which the building is designed to be water tight. The design and construction
shall be certified by a professional engineer registered under I.C. 25-31-1 or
an architect registered under I.C. 25-4-1, as being adequate to withstand the
flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors
associated with the regulatory flood.
   FLOODWAY DISTRICT That area designated as “Commission Floodway” by the
Department of Natural Resources.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE DISTRICT. Those portions of flood hazard areas lying outside
the floodway district.
   NATURAL RESOURCES. The Indiana Natural Resources Commission.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. That flood having a peak discharge which can be expected
to be equaled or exceeded on the average of once in a 100-year period, as
calculated by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and approved by the
Indiana Natural Resources Commission. This flood is equivalent to a flood
having the probability of occurrence of 1% in any given year.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, shed, detached
garages, cabins, mobile homes, and other similar items.
(Ord. 172, § 8-200, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.082 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICTS.
   The Flood Hazard Districts (areas subject to inundation by the regulatory
flood) as identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific
and engineering report entitled The Flood Insurance Study for the Town of
Prince's Lakes dated February 16, 1982, with the accompanying flood insurance
rate maps and flood boundary - floodway maps along with any subsequent
revisions to the text or maps are hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study is on file in the office
of the Recording Secretary of the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 172, § 8-300, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.083 DESIGNATION AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
   The Plan Commission or its designated representative for the town is
appointed to review all development and subdivision proposals within the Flood
Hazard Districts to insure compliance.
(Ord. 172, § 8-400, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.084 USES IN FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICT.
   (A)   All buildings, structures, construction grading and deposits that are
essential to the operation of public works such as bridges, water and sewer
facilities, utility sub-stations, power and telephone line supports,
transmission towers and other service structures.
   (B)   Non-damageable or low damage potential uses, such as agriculture,
parking lots, park and recreation areas, signs, and similar uses.
   (C)   All buildings and structures permitted in the Flood Hazard District
shall be subject to the regulations of the District and provided that:
      (1)   The ground upon which the building or structure is to be located
and an area 20 feet beyond the limits of such building or structure shall prior
to or at the time of construction, be raised to an elevation of not less than
one foot above the designated flood elevation and the first floor elevation
shall be not less than three feet above the designated flood elevation.
      (2)   Buildings for uses other than residential, where permitted in a
flood hazard zone, may be constructed without reference to division (A) above,
provided they are flood proof to prevent damage and if the plans for such
buildings have been approved by Natural Resources.
      (3)   All development applications located in the Flood Hazard District
will require the review and approval by Natural Resources prior to the issuance
of an improvement location permit. The Plan Commission or its designated
representative shall forward all applications along with plans and
specifications to Natural Resources for review and comment.
      (4)   All improvement location permits shall be issued upon the condition
that no occupancy permit will be issued and no occupancy will be permitted
until the applicant furnishes a certification from a registered professional
engineer or land surveyor stating that the elevation of the structure and the
site meet the requirements of this chapter, or certification of plan approval
from Natural Resources as provided in divisions (2) and (3) above.
(Ord. 172, § 8-500, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.085 NONCONFORMING USES.
   Any building, structure, or use of land in the Flood Hazard District which
is not in conformance with this ordinance constitutes a non-conforming use. All
applications to repair, extend, or enlarge a non-conforming use. All
applications to repair, or extend a non-conforming use shall be forwarded to
Natural Resources for review and comment. All terms and conditions imposed by
Natural Resources shall be incorporated into the issuance of any improvement
location permit.
(Ord. 172, § 8-600, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.086 DETERMINATION OF FLOOD ELEVATION.
   The official flood elevation shall be that maximum elevation recommended by
Natural Resources, concurrent with the date of interpretation, and shall
therefore be variable in accordance with the flood control measures as are
being constructed from time to time to reduce the flood threat in the future.
(Ord. 172, § 8-900, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.087 VARIANCES.
   Applications for variances within a Flood Hazard District shall be forwarded
to Natural Resources for review and comment. All terms and conditions imposed
by Natural Resources shall be incorporated into the issuance of any improvement
location permit.
(Ord. 172, § 8-800, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.088 NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM REGULATIONS.
   The Plan Commission or its designated representative, during its review of
improvement location permits, shall assure that all NFIP regulations pertaining
to state and federal permits, subdivision review, mobile home tie down
standards, utility construction, record keeping (including lowest floor
elevations), and water course alteration and maintenance have been met.
(Ord. 172, § 8-900, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.089 DISCLAIMER.
   Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter
does not create any liability on the part of the community, Natural Resources,
or the State of Indiana for any damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 172, § 8-1000, passed 4-5-90)
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
§ 152.100 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to minimize the amount of sediment and other
pollutants, resulting from soil erosion due to land disturbing activities, from
being transported off-site to adjacent public or private lands including
ditches, streams, lakes, wetlands and reservoirs.
(Ord. 172, § 9-100, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.101 DESIGN CRITERIA, STANDARDS, AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR EROSION CONTROL
MEASURES.
   All erosion control measures including, but not limited to those required to
comply with this chapter shall meet the design criteria, standards and
specifications for erosion control measures similar to or the same as those
outlined in the Field Office Technical Guide of the USDA Soil Conservation
Service.
(Ord. 172, § 9-200, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.102 CONTROL OF EROSION AND SEDIMENT DURING LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITIES.
   Control of erosion and sediment is the responsibility of an applicant.
Applicability and requirements are defined as follows:
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to the following sites with land
disturbing activities:
      (1)   Those requiring a subdivision plat approval or local improvement
location permit for the construction of commercial, residential, or
institutional buildings on lots of approved subdivision plats;
      (2)   Those involving grading, removal of protective ground cover or
vegetation, excavation, land filling or other land disturbing activity
affecting a surface area of 10,000 square feet or more;
      (3)   Those involving excavation, filling, or a combination both
affecting 400 cubic yards or more of soil, sand, gravel, stone, or other
material;
      (4)   Those involving street, highway, road, or bridge construction,
enlargement, relocation, or reconstruction; and
      (5)   Those involving the laying, repairing, replacing, or enlarging of
an underground pipe or utility for a distance of 300 feet or more.
   (B)   Erosion and other sediment control requirements. The following
requirements shall be met on all sites.
      (1)   Site drainage. Sediment-laden water flowing from the site shall be
detained by temporary sediment basins. Also, water shall not be discharged in a
manner that causes erosion in the receiving channel.
      (2)   Tracking. Sediment being tracked from a site onto public or private
roadways shall be minimized. This can be accomplished initially by a well
planned layout of roads, access drives, and parking areas of sufficient width
and length. However, protective covering also may be necessary.
      (3)   Sediment removal. Public or private roadways shall be kept cleared
of accumulated sediment. If appreciable sedimentation occurs after a storm
event, the sediment shall be deposited on the parcels of land, if in the site,
from where it likely originated.
      (4)   Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets shall be protected
against sedimentation with straw bales, filter fabric, or equivalent barriers
meeting accepted design criteria, standards, and specifications.
      (5)   Site erosion control. The following items apply only to the time
period when land disturbing activities are taking place.
         (a)   Runoff passing through a site from adjacent areas shall be
controlled by diverting it around disturbed areas. Alternatively, the existing
channel may be improved to prevent erosion or sedimentation from occurring.
         (b)   Runoff from a disturbed area shall be controlled by one or more
of the following measures.
            1.   Barring unforeseeable weather conditions, all disturbed ground
left inactive for seven or more days shall be stabilized prior to insert
applicable date here, by seeding, sodding, mulching, covering, or by other
equivalent erosion control measures.
            2.   With disturbed areas within a site of ten acres or more, where
drainage is in the same direction or where runoff will result in loss of soil,
an abatement or recovery program is required. Where feasible, one or more
sediment basins shall be constructed. Each sediment basin shall have a depth of
at least three feet and have sufficient surface area to trap the sediment. The
size of sedimentation basin should be at least 1% of its drainage area.
Sediment shall be removed from time to time to maintain a minimum three-foot
depth. When the disturbed area is stabilized, the sediment basin can be
removed. However, if erosion is likely to continue, the sediment basin shall be
maintained by the existing or subsequent landowners. The discharge rate from a
sediment basin shall not cause scouring in the receiving channel.
            3.   With disturbed areas within a site of less than ten acres,
filter fences, straw bales, or equivalent erosion control measure, placed along
all sideslope and downslope sides of the site, shall be required. Also, if
concentrated runoff passes through the site, filter fences shall be placed
along the edges of the concentrated flow area to reduce the amount of sediment
removed from the site. However, if these measures are not sufficient to control
off-site sedimentation, a sediment basin may still be required.
         (c)   Erosion from all soil storage piles shall be controlled by
placing straw bales, filter fence, or other appropriate barriers around the
piles. Adjacent storm drain inlets shall be protected using similar filter
barriers. Moreover, any soil storage pile containing more than ten cubic yards
of material shall be located at least 25 feet upslope from a roadway or a
drainage channel. Furthermore, if remaining in existence for more than seven
days, the storage pile shall a stabilized by mulching, vegetative cover, tarps,
or other means. Storage piles containing less than ten cubic yards of material
may be located closer than 25 feet to a roadway or a drainage channel but shall
be covered with tarps or a suitable alternative if in existence for less than
seven days. However, if a pile is in existence for more than seven days,
barriers also shall be placed around the pile.
(Ord. 172, § 9-300, passed 4-5-90)
Penalty, see § 152.999
§ 152.103 MAINTENANCE OF EROSION CONTROL MEASURES.
   During the period of land disturbance at a site, all sediment basins and
other erosion control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this
chapter shall be applied by the applicant or subsequent landowner. If
sedimentation is likely to be a problem after land disturbing activities have
ceased, some or all of the sediment basins and other erosion control measures
shall be maintained by the applicant or subsequent landowner for as long as the
problem exists.
(Ord. 172, § 9-400, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.104 PERMIT APPLICATION, EROSION CONTROL PLAN, AND PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   No person shall begin a land disturbing activity subject to this chapter
without receiving approval of an erosion control plan. An application should be
made at the time of the preliminary plat submittal or local improvement
location permit application to minimize the time delay before a project can
begin.
   (A)   Content of erosion control plan for land disturbing activities
covering more "than one acre in a given site.
      (1)   Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions on a minimum
scale of one inch equals 100 feet and adequate to show the site and adjacent
areas, including:
         (a)   Site boundaries and adjacent lands which accurately identify the
site location;
         (b)   Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other water
courses on and adjacent to the site;
         (c)   One hundred year floodplain, floodway fringes, and floodway;
         (d)   Location of the predominant soil types as identified by the soil
survey or as determined by a certified professional soil scientist;
         (e)   Vegetative cover such as grass, weeds, and trees;
         (f)   Location and dimensions of storm water drainage systems and
natural drainage patters on and immediately adjacent to the site;
         (g)   Locations and dimensions of utilities, structures, roads,
highways, and paving; and
         (h)   Site topography at a contour interval not to exceed five feet.
      (2)   Plan of final site conditions. A plan of final site conditions on
the same scale as the existing site map showing the site changes.
      (3)   Site construction plan. A site construction plan including:
         (a)   Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing
activities;
         (b)   Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil stockpiles;
         (c)   Locations and dimensions of all erosion control measures
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter;
         (d)   Schedule of the anticipated starting and completion dates of
each land disturbing activity, including the installation of erosion control
measures needed to meet the requirements of this ordinance; and
         (e)   Provisions for maintenance of the erosion control measures
during construction.
   (B)   Content of erosion control plan for land disturbing activities
covering less than one acre in a given state. An erosion control plan statement
describing the site and erosion control measures and including a development
schedule and a simple map showing the locations of the control measures is all
that is required.
   (C)   Review of erosion control plan. The administering authority shall
promptly review the application and erosion control plan in conjunction with
the subdivision plat and local improvement permit application to determine
whether the requirements of this chapter have been met. If the conditions are
met, the administering authority shall approve the plan, inform the applicant,
and issue a permit. If the conditions are not met, the administering authority
shall inform the applicant in writing and either may require additional
information or may disapprove the plan. If requested additional information is
submitted, the administering authority shall again determine whether the plan
meets the requirements of this chapter. If the plan is disapproved, the
administering authority shall inform the applicant in writing giving reasons
for disapproval.
   (D)   Permits.
      (1)   Surety bond. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit,
the administering authority may require the applicant to provide a surety bond
or an irrevocable letter of credit when the erosion control plan has been
approved to guarantee a good faith execution of the erosion control plan and
any permit conditions.
      (2)   Permit conditions. The applicant is required to:
         (a)   Notify the building inspector at least 24 hours before
commencing with any land disturbing activity;
         (b)   Notify the building inspector of the completion of erosion
control measures within seven days after their installation;
         (c)   Obtain permission from the Building Inspector prior to modifying
the erosion control plan;
         (d)   Install all erosion control measures as identified in the
approved erosion control plan.
         (e)   Maintain all road drainage systems, storm water drainage
systems, erosion control measures, and other facilities identified in the
erosion control plan until the project has been terminated (see
§ 152.103 for continuing maintenance responsibility);
         (f)   Where access may be legally obtained, remove sediment resulting
from land disturbing activities from adjacent surfaces and drainageways and/or
repair erosion damage to adjacent surfaces and drainages.
(Ord. 172, § 9-500, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.105 INSPECTION.
   To ensure compliance with the erosion control plan, the administering
authority shall inspect the sites having ongoing land disturbing activities at
least once a month during the period between March 1 and November 30 and at
least twice during the period between December 1 and February 28. If land
disturbing activities are being carried out without a permit, the administering
authority shall issue a stop-work order.
(Ord. 172, § 9-600, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 320, passed 5-17-04)
§ 152.106 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall post a stop-work order if:
      (1)   Any land disturbing activity regulated under this chapter is being
undertaken without a permit;
      (2)   The erosion control plan is not being implemented in good faith; or
      (3)   The conditions of the permit are not being met.
   (B)   Upon appeal to the administering authority, a stop-work order or the
revocation may be retracted.
   (C)   Ten days after posting a stop-work order, the Building Inspector may
issue a notice of intent to the violator stating that 14 days after issuing the
notice of intent the Building Inspector will use the surety bond to perform
work necessary to provide compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   If, within five days after notification, a permit holder does not
comply with the erosion control plan or permit conditions, the Building
Inspector shall revoke the permit.
   (E)   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter also may be enforced by
injunction.
(Ord. 172, § 9-700, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.107 PROJECT TERMINATION.
   (A)   An orderly and timely termination of a project with land disturbing
activities should be planned between all persons involved with a site.
   (B)   Nearing the end of the project, but prior to final land grading,
seeding, and mulching, the person holding the permit should petition, in
writing, the Building Inspector to allow the installation of utility lines on
the site. Those persons involved in the installation of utility lines shall
perform their work promptly to minimize the time period during which some of
the land may be left in a relatively unprotected state. After the utility lines
have been installed, the person holding the permit shall promptly complete all
erosion control activities.
   (C)   When a project has been completed, the person holding the permit shall
petition, in writing, the Building Inspector for approval of erosion control
measures which agree to remain on the site. The Building Inspector shall
subsequently inspect site to evaluate the adequacy of these control measures.
      (1)   If the erosion control measures are approved, any surety bonds and/
or letters of credit shall be released forthrightly. However, maintenance
responsibilities (see § 152.103) shall remain with the person owning the land.
      (2)   If the erosion control measures are not approved because they are
not in line with either the erosion control plan or the general principles of
this chapter, the Building Inspector shall notify, in writing, the person
holding the permit of unacceptable features. After a minimum period of two
weeks during which corrective measures are taken, a petition, again in writing,
may be sent asking the Building Inspector to evaluate the adequacy of the
erosion control measures. If, in good faith, the Building Inspector again
decides that the erosion control measures are inadequate, the Building
Inspector may delay the release of any surety bonds and/or letters of credit
for tip to two months. After an agreed upon time period of two months or longer
has elapsed without correct measures being taken, the Building Inspector may
use the surety bonds to finance changes or additions to the erosion control
measures needed to complete the project.
(Ord. 172, § 9-800, passed 4-5-90)
   AMENDMENTS, VARIANCES AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
§ 152.120 ZONING AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Initiation. Amendments to this chapter may be initiated in one of the
following ways:
      (1)   By adoption of a motion by the Plan Commission;
      (2)   By adoption of a resolution by the Town Council;
      (3)   By filing of a petition of at least 50% of the owners of property
within the area proposed to be changed or affected by the amendment.
   (B)   Contents of application. Application for amendments to the zoning
ordinance shall contain at least the following information:
      (1)   Name, address, and phone number of applicant;
      (2)   Any application filed by any person other than the legal owner of
the real estate involved shall be accompanied by a written statement of such
legal owner consenting to the filing of such application;
      (3)   Present use;
      (4)   Present zoning district;
      (5)   Proposed zoning district;
      (6)   A vicinity map showing property lines, thoroughfares, existing and
proposed zoning, and other items which the Zoning Administrator may require;
      (7)   A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses for all
adjoining parcels of land to a depth of two ownerships or 250 feet, whichever
is greater, of the exterior boundaries of the area proposed to be rezoned or
redistricted, as well as a list of all parcels of land that are within the area
included in the petition whose owners are not petitioners, and others that may
have substantial interest in the case;
      (8)   A statement of how the proposed amendment relates to the town's
comprehensive plan.
   (C)   Public hearing by Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall schedule
a public hearing after a petition is received. The hearing shall not be less
than 20 nor more than 40 days from the date of adoption of such motion,
transmittal of such resolution, or the filing of the application.
   (D)   Notice of public hearing. Notice of public hearing shall include the
following:
      (1)   At least 15 days prior to holding the public hearing, notice of the
hearing shall be given in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the
town, and posted at the Town Hall.
      (2)   The notice shall state:
         (a)   The time and place of the hearing;
         (b)   Either the geographic areas (or zoning districts in a specified
geographic area) to which the proposal applies, if the proposal is a text
amendment; or the geographic area that is the subject of the zone map change,
if the proposal is a zone map change;
         (c)   Either a summary of the subject matter contained in the proposal
that describes any new or changed provisions, if the proposal is a text
amendment; or a description of the proposed change in the zone maps, if the
proposal is a zone map change;
         (d)   If the proposal contains or would add or amend any penalty or
forfeiture provisions, the entire text of those penalty or forfeiture
provisions;
         (e)   The place where a copy of the proposal is on file for
examination before the hearing;
         (f)   That written objections to the proposal that are filed with the
secretary of the Plan Commission before the hearing will be considered;
         (g)   That oral comments concerning the proposal will be heard; and
         (h)   That the hearing may be continued from time to time as may be
found necessary.
      (3)   The Commission shall require the initiator(s) of the petition to
bear the cost of the public notice.
   (E)   Notice to parties in interest. Notice to parties in interest shall
include:
      (1)   If the proposed amendment intends to alter, rezone, or redistrict
any parcel of land as listed on the tax duplicate, written notice of the
hearing shall be mailed by the initiators) of a petition by certified mail,
return receipt requested, in a form which meets the Board's requirement at
least 15 days prior to the day of the hearing to the owners of all adjoining
parcels of land to a depth of two ownerships or 250 feet, whichever is greater,
of the exterior boundaries of the area proposed to be rezoned or redistricted,
and to the owner of all parcels of land within the area included in the
petition, who are not petitioners. For the purpose of notification of parties
in interest, where any such adjacent parcels of land are owned by petitioner,
the subject property shall be deemed to include adjacent land owned by
petitioner;
      (2)   All cost for required notice to parties in interest shall be borne
by the initiator of petition;
      (3)   A verified written statement that all parties in interest have been
mailed a written notification as set out in (1) above shall be submitted by the
petitioner prior to final action being taken on the petition;
      (4)   Failure of a person to receive notice shall not invalidate the
amendment;
      (5)   If division (1) above does not apply to a proposed amendment, due
notice to interested parties shall be satisfied by the publication otherwise
required under I.C. 36-7-4-604 and division (D) above of this section.
   (F)   Recommendation by Plan Commission. Within 60 days from the receipt of
the proposed amendment, the Plan Commission shall transmit its recommendation
to grant, modify, or deny the request to the Town Council. After receipt of
recommendations from the Plan Commission the Town Council may amend,
supplement, change, or repeal the regulations, restrictions, and boundaries or
classifications of property whenever the public welfare of good zoning
practices require.
   (G)   Approvals. After the public hearing, the Town Council shall either
adopt or deny the recommendation of the Plan Commission of some modification
thereof, consistent with the requirements of I.C. 36-7-4.
   (H)   Effective date. An amendment adopted by the Town Council shall become
effective immediately upon adoption and approval of the Town Council.
(Ord. 172, §§ 4-100 - 4-107, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 267, passed 6-28-99; Am.
Ord. 311, passed 2-18-02)
§ 152.121 EFFECT OF ANNEXATION.
   All land annexed to the town subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
shall automatically be zoned RR low density single family residential unless
otherwise requested in the annexation ordinance or until such time as the
official zoning map is amended according to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 172, § 4-200, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.122 VARIANCES.
   (A)   General. The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize upon appeal in
specific cases variances from the terms of this chapter when because of special
conditions a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary
hardship upon a specific property. No conforming use of neighboring lands,
structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted nonconforming
use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered
grounds for issuance of a variance.
   (B)   Definitions of variance. Two types of variances may be granted by the
Board of Zoning Appeals. They are as follows:
      (1)   Dimensional variance. Designed to adjust the regulations of the
zoning ordinance to the land for which the variance is granted. Generally
speaking, a dimensional variance applies to a bulk, height, area, or space
requirement of the zoning ordinance. The primary basis for granting a
dimensional variance is the showing by the applicant that a “practical
difficulty” exists if the letter of the law is strictly applied. Once granted,
a dimensional variance shall run with the land. A dimensional variance shall
not be required to obtain a building permit for a residential accessory
building or structure (such as a garage or carport) where a principal
residential structure already exists and is in use, but that all other terms
and conditions of this chapter shall apply.
      (2)   Use variance. Serves a different function than a dimensional
variance. If a zoning ordinance is valid in general, but confiscatory as
applied to a specific property, the traditional remedy is a use variance. A use
variance grants permission for a prohibited use in a given zoning district. The
primary basis for granting a use variance is the showing by the applicant that
an “unnecessary hardship” exists if the letter of the law is strictly applied.
When granted, a use variance runs with the applicant (tenant or landlord), not
with the land itself.
   (C)   Revocation of a dimensional variance. A dimensional variance shall be
deemed automatically null and void if the property, building, or structure for
which the variance was granted is for any reason demolished or destroyed. Thus,
a new replacement building or structure may be required to conform to
regulations in effect at that time. The granting of a dimensional variance
becomes official only upon issuance of an improvement location permit for the
subject property. The issuance of the permit must occur within 90 days from the
date that the improvement location permit is obtained or the permit shall
become null and void.
   (D)   Revocation of a use variance. A use variance shall be deemed
automatically null and void under any or all of the following conditions:
      (1)   If the use for which the variance was granted ceases for any
continuous period greater than six months in length;
      (2)   If the property or structures for which the variance was granted
change ownership or occupancy;
      (3)   If the applicant to whom the variance was granted fails to comply
with any of the conditions made a part of the variance;
      (4)   If the Board of Zoning Appeals discovers at some future date that
the variance has created some previously unforeseen problem, nuisance, or
hazard that is adversely affecting the health, safety, or welfare of adjacent
properties or the general public.
   (E)   Revocation procedures. Procedures for revocation of a variance shall
be as follows:
      (1)   Upon determination by the Zoning Administrator that possible
grounds for revocation of a variance exists, the mater shall be placed on the
Board of Zoning Appeals agenda for a public hearing;
      (2)   The original applicant to whom the variance was granted or his or
her successor shall be notified by certified mail of the reasons for the
possible revocation at least 30 days prior to the public hearing;
      (3)   Notice of the public hearing shall also be given as set out in
§ 152.124.
   (F)   Application standards for a variance. A variance from the terms of
this chapter shall not be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals unless and
until a written application for a variance is submitted to the Zoning
Administrator and the Board of Zoning Appeals containing:
      (1)   Name, address, and phone number of applicant;
      (2)   Any application filed by any person other than the legal owner of
the real estate involved shall be accompanied by a written statement of such
legal owner consenting to the filing of such application;
      (3)   Legal description of nature of variance requested;
      (4)   Description of nature of variance requested;
      (5)   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance
conforms to each of the following standards:
         (a)   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure, or buildings in the same district;
         (b)   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same district under the terms of this chapter;
         (c)   That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
action of the applicant;
         (d)   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands,
structures, or buildings.
      (6)   There shall accompany such application for a variance a verified
statement (affidavit) by the applicant that adjoining property owners were
notified in writing at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing of
such application as required by
§ 152.124;
      (7)   Any applicant shall furnish a verified proof (affidavit) of at
least one publication of a notice in at least one newspaper having general
circulation within the town consistent with the requirements of
§ 152.124;
      (8)   The cost of legal advertising any required notice to affected
property owners shall be borne by the petitioners.
   (G)   Considerations prior to granting a variance. Prior to granting a
variance, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider the following conditions:
      (1)   The variance must not be injurious to the public health, safety,
and welfare of the town;
      (2)   The use or value of adjacent property must not be adversely
affected by the variance;
      (3)   The need for a variance must arise from some condition peculiar to
the property involved and must not exist in similar property in the same
district;
      (4)   Undue hardship as a result of strict application of the chapter
must be proven. Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter must
be shown to deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same zoning district;
      (5)   The hardship must not be self-imposed from previous actions. It
should not be a purely financial hardship or a matter of convenience;
      (6)   The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make it
possible to reasonable use the land or structure.
   (H)   Supplementary conditions and safeguards. Under no circumstances shall
the Board of Zoning Appeals grant an appeal or variance which allows a use not
permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district. The Board of
Zoning Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this chapter. Violations of these conditions and safeguards
when made a part of the terms under which the appeal or variance is granted,
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable under
§ 152.999.
   (I)   Public hearing for appeal and variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall hold a public hearing within a reasonable length of time after a receipt
of an application for an appeal or variance for the applicant, but only after
assuring itself that legal advertisement and interested party notification
requirements as set out in § 152.124(B) and (C) have been met. However, the
public hearing shall not be held sooner than 15 days after its receipt.
   (J)   Action by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Within a reasonable length of
time after the public hearing required in division (I) above, the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall either approve, approve with conditions and safeguards, or
disapprove the request for an appeal or variance. Furthermore, the Board shall
demonstrate that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting
of a variance to make a reasonable use of the land or buildings possible.
(Ord. 172, §§ 4-300 - 4-309, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 216, passed 5-8-95)
§ 152.123 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   General. Special exceptions or conditional uses are uses which have
unique characteristics and cannot be properly classified in any particular
zone. In each case, the impact of those uses upon neighboring land must be
given individual consideration. Special exceptions, while requiring special
consideration by the Board of Zoning Appeals, shall be deemed permitted uses in
the district in which they are provided.
   (B)   Application for a special exception. An application for a special
exception permit shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and the Board of
Zoning Appeals by at least one owner or lessee of the property for which the
special exception is proposed. At a minimum, the application shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   Name, address, and phone number of applicant;
      (2)   Any application filed by any person other than the legal owner of
the real estate involved shall be accompanied by a written statement of such
legal owner consenting to the filing of such application;
      (3)   Legal description of the property;
      (4)   Description of existing uses;
      (5)   Zoning district;
      (6)   Description of the proposed special exception;
      (7)   A plan of the proposed site for the special exception showing the
location of all buildings, parking and loading areas, traffic access and
traffic circulation, open space, landscaping, refuse, and service areas,
utilities, signs, yards, and other information as the Board may require to
determine if the proposed special exception meets the intent and requirements
of this chapter and is appropriate for the location at which it is proposed;
      (8)   There shall accompany such application for a special exception a
verified statement (affidavit) by the applicant that adjoining property owners
were notified in writing at least 15 days prior to the date of the public
hearing of such application as required by § 152.124(C);
      (9)   Any applicant shall furnish a verified proof (affidavit) of at
least one publication of a notice in at least one newspaper having general
circulation within the town consistent with the requirements of § 152.124(B);
      (10)   The cost of legal advertising and any required notice to affected
property owners shall be borne by the petitioner.
   (C)   Considerations prior to granting a special exception. The Board of
Zoning Appeals may grant a special exception after consideration of the
appropriateness of the specific property for the use, congestion of public
streets, availability of public facilities, and impact on surrounding property.
The Board shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed
use in terms of the following standards and shall find adequate evidence that
such use at the proposed locations:
      (1)   Is in fact a special exception as established under the provisions
of this chapter and appears on the official schedule of uses for the zoning
district involved;
      (2)   Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained in a manner
which is harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing character
of the area and shall not change the essential character of the area;
      (3)   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment,
and conditions of operation that will be hazardous or disturbing to any persons
or property;
      (4)   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall not
create an interference with traffic on surrounding public thoroughfares;
      (5)   Will not create excessive additional requirements for public
facilities and services;
      (6)   Will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of natural,
scenic, or historic features.
   (D)   Supplementary conditions and safeguards. In granting any special
exceptions, the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this chapter. When the conditions and safeguards are made part
of the terms upon which the special exception is granted, violations shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable under
§ 152.999.
   (E)   Expiration of special exception. A special exception authorized by the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall become void if the use for which the special
exception was granted has not commenced within one year.
   (F)   Revocation of a special exception.
      (1)   Special exceptions may be revoked or modified by the Board of
Zoning Appeals after a public hearing for any one or more of the following
reasons:
         (a)   The approval was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation of the
facts;
         (b)   The special exception is being exercised contrary to the terms
or conditions of approval or in violation of any statute, ordinance, law, or
regulation.
      (2)   Procedure for revocation of a special exception shall be as
follows:
         (a)   Upon determination by the Zoning Administrator that possible
grounds for revocation of a special exception exists, the matter shall be
placed on the Board of Zoning Appeal's agenda for a public hearing;
         (b)   The original applicant to whom the special exception was granted
or his or her successor shall be notified by certified mail of the reasons for
the possible revocation at least 30 days prior to the public hearing.
         (c)   Notice of the hearing shall also be given as stated in
§ 152.124.
   (G)   Public hearing for special exception. The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall hold a public hearing within a reasonable length of time after receipt of
an application for a special exception from the applicant, but only after
assuring itself that legal advertisement and interested party notification
requirements as set out in
§ 152.124 have been met. However, the public hearing shall not be held sooner
than 15 days after its receipt.
   (H)   Action by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall approve, approve with stipulations, or disapprove the request for a
special exception within a reasonable time after the public hearing.
(Ord. 172, §§ 4-400 - 4-407, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.124 PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE; RECORDS.
   (A)   Board to hold public hearing. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a
public hearing within a reasonable length of time after the receipt of an
application for an appeal, variance, special exception, or revocation from the
applicant or initiator. However, the public hearing shall not be held sooner
than 15 days after its receipt.
   (B)   Notice of public hearings. The notice requirements for publication in
a newspaper are as follows:
      (1)   Before holding the public hearing, notice of the hearing shall be
given in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the town at least 15
days before the date of the hearing;
      (2)   The notice shall set forth the time and place of the hearing, and
the nature of the proposed appeal, variance, special exception or revocation;
      (3)   All cost for the notice of public hearing shall be borne by the
applicant or initiator and a proof of publication shall be required from the
applicant or initiator prior to final action being taken on the petition.
   (C)   Notice to parties in interest. Notice shall be given to parties of
interest as follows:
      (1)   Before holding the public hearing, written notice of such hearing
shall be mailed by the applicant(s) or initiator(s) by certified mail, return
receipt requested, in a form which meets the Board's requirements at least 15
days prior to the day of the hearing to the owners of all adjoining parcels of
land to a depth of two ownerships or 250 feet, whichever is greater, of the
exterior boundaries of the subject property. For the purpose of notification of
parties in interest, where any such adjacent parcels of land are owned by the
applicant(s), the subject property shall be deemed to include adjacent land
owned by the applicants;
      (2)   A verified written statement that all interested parties have been
mailed a written notice as set out in division (C)(1) above shall be submitted
by the applicant prior to final action being taken on the petition.
   (D)   Records. The Board shall keep records of its examinations, findings,
and other official actions, all of which shall be public record and be
immediately filed in the office of the Recording Secretary of the Board.
(Ord. 172, §§ 4-500 - 4-503, passed 4-5-90)
   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.135 PLAN COMMISSION.
   (A)   Office of Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall consist of seven
members appointed as follows:
      (1)   The Town Council shall appoint three persons in the municipal
government as members of the Plan Commission;
      (2)   The Town Council shall appoint four citizen members who are not
elected or appointed members of the municipal government, of whom no more than
two may be of the same political party.
   (B)   Term of appointments. Each new appointment to the Plan Commission
shall be made for a term of four years:
      (1)   The term of each member shall expire on the first Monday of January
of the fourth year after the year of the member's appointment. A member serves
until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. A member is eligible for
reappointment.
      (2)   If a vacancy occurs among the members of the Plan Commission, the
Town Council shall appoint a member for the unexpired term of the vacating
member. In addition, the Town Council may appoint an alternate member to
participate with the Plan Commission in any hearing or decision in which the
regular member has a disqualification under division (C) of this section.
      (3)   An appointed member who misses three consecutive regular meetings
of the Plan Commission shall be deemed to have resigned. An appointed member
who misses regular Plan Commission meetings because they are out of state or
unable to attend because of illness is excused for those reasons if the
appointed member informs the Town Council of such excuse prior to the Town
Council appointing someone to fill the member's position.
   (C)   Conflict. A member of the Plan Commission may not participate in a
hearing or decision of the Board concerning a zoning matter in which he or she
has a direct or indirect financial interest. For the purpose of this section
the term “zoning matter” does not include the preparation or adoption of a
comprehensive plan. The Plan Commission shall enter in its records:
      (1)   The fact that a regular member has such a disqualification and,
      (2)   The name of the alternate member, if any, who participated in the
hearing or decision in place of the regular member.
   (D)   Proceedings of the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall adopt
rules necessary for the conduct of its affairs in keeping with the provisions
of this chapter;
      (1)   At the first meeting of each year the Commission shall elect a
Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson from its members;
      (2)   Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson or at other
times which the Commission deems it necessary;
      (3)   All meetings shall be open to the public;
      (4)   The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the
vote of each member for each question, or if absent or failing to vote
indicating such;
      (5)   The Commission shall also keep records of its examinations and
other official actions all of which shall be of public record and be
immediately filed in the office of the Plan Commission;
   (E)   Duties of the Plan Commission. For the purposes of this chapter, the
Plan Commission shall have the following duties:
      (1)   To initiate proposed amendments to this chapter;
      (2)   To review all proposed amendments to this chapter and make
recommendations to the Town Council;
      (3)   To review and make findings on development plans for subdivisions,
commercial structures, industrial structures, planned unit developments within
the Commission's jurisdiction;
      (4)   To review and revise the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations,
and other land use regulations to keep them up-to-date;
      (5)   Tender interpretations of this chapter as may be necessary from
time to time;
(Ord. 172, §§ 3-100 - 3-104, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 188, passed 2-10-92; Am.
Ord. 216, passed 5-8-95; Am. Ord. 267, passed 6-28-99)
§ 152.136 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)   Establishment and appointment. As part of this chapter, a Board of
Zoning Appeals is hereby re-established and shall consist of five members,
appointed as follows:
      (1)   Four citizen members appointed by the Town Council of whom one must
be a member of the Plan Commission and three must not be members of the Plan
Commission;
      (2)   One citizen member appointed by the Plan Commission, who must be a
member of the Plan Commission other than the member appointed under division
(1) above.
   (B)   Qualification of members. The members appointed to the Board or Zoning
Appeals must have the following qualifications:
      (1)   A member must be a town resident;
      (2)   No member may hold other elective or appointed offices in the town
government.
   (C)   Term of appointments. Each new appointment to the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be made for a term of four years.
      (1)   The term of each member shall expire on the first Monday of January
of the fourth year after the year of the member's appointment. A member serves
until his successor is appointed and qualified. A member is eligible for
reappointment.
      (2)   If a vacancy occurs among the members of the Board of Zoning
Appeals, the appointing authority (Town Council or Plan Commission) that had
appointed the vacating member shall appoint a member for the unexpired term of
the vacating member. In addition, the appointing authority may appoint an
alternate member to participate with the Board in any hearing or decision in
which the regular member it has appointed has a disqualification under division
(D) of this section.
      (3)   A member of the Board of Zoning Appeals who misses three
consecutive regular meetings of the Board shall be treated as if he or she had
resigned.
   (D)   Conflict. A member of the Board of Zoning Appeals may not participate
in a hearing or decision of the Board concerning a zoning matter in which he or
she has a direct or indirect financial interest. The Board shall enter in its
records:
      (1)   The fact that a regular member has such a disqualification; and,
      (2)   The name of the alternate member, if any, who participates in the
hearing or decision in place of the regular member.
   (E)   Proceedings of the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board shall adopt
rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs in keeping with the provisions of
this chapter.
      (1)   At the first meeting of each year the Board will elect a
Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson from its members.
      (2)   Meetings shall be at the call of the Chairperson and at other times
as the Board may determine.
      (3)   The Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Vice-Chairperson,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
      (4)   All meetings shall be open to the public.
      (5)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member, or if absent or failing to vote.
      (6)   The Board shall keep record of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be public record and be immediately filed in the
office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
      (7)   A majority of Board members shall constitute a quorum.
      (8)   The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be
necessary to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which the Board
is required to pass under the provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   Duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals. For the purpose of this
chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals has the following specific duties:
      (1)   To hear and to determine appeals from and review any decision or
determination made by the Zoning Administrator;
      (2)   To hear and to determine special exceptions to the terms of this
chapter;
      (3)   To authorize variances from this chapter in cases where a literal
enforcement of this chapter would result in undue hardship, provided that the
public interest is not injured by granting the variance.
(Ord. 172, §§ 3-200 - 3-205, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.137 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Office. A Zoning Administrator employed and designated by the Plan
Commission shall administer and enforce this chapter. For the purpose of this
chapter the term “Zoning Administrator” shall be synonymous with the term
“Building Inspector.” He or she may be provided with the assistance of other
persons as the Town Council directs.
   (B)   Duties of the Zoning Administrator. For the purpose of this chapter,
the Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties:
      (1)   To issue improvement location permits, conduct inspections to
assure compliance with this chapter and issue certificates of occupancy;
      (2)   To notify in writing persons responsible for violations of the
provisions of this chapter and order the action necessary to correct such
violations;
      (3)   To order discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings, or
structures;
      (4)   To order removal of illegal buildings, structures, or illegal
additions or alterations;
      (5)   To order discontinuance of any illegal work being done;
      (6)   To assume responsibilities as the Plan Commission directs;
      (7)   To take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure
compliance with or to prevent violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 172, §§ 3-300, 3-301, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.138 IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   No building or structure shall be erected, moved, enlarged,
improved, or altered nor shall any building, structure, or land be established
or changed in use without an improvement location permit issued by the Plan
Commission or its designated representative. Building permits shall be issued
in conformance with this chapter unless a written order is received from the
Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or Court directing the issuance of a
permit not in conformance with this chapter.
      (2)   The town requires that an improvement location permit (building
permit) be obtained for the following specific projects:
         (a)   Single-family and two-family residential dwellings;
         (b)   Residential storage sheds, except that building permits shall
not be necessary for residential storage sheds less than 160 square feet in
size and less than 12 feet in height;
         (c)   Detached residential buildings (greater than 140 square feet);
         (d)   Residential garages, carports, and/or additions;
         (e)   Temporary structures;
         (f)   Signs;
         (g)   Swimming pools;
         (h)   Demolition;
         (i)   New buildings;
         (j)   Alterations, modifications or remodeling;
         (k)   Structures other than buildings, except that building permits
shall not be necessary for unenclosed decks up to 200 square feet in size;
         (l)   Drainage work (land alteration subject to the requirements of §§
152.100 through 152.107 of this chapter);
         (m)   Street cuts;
         (n)   Curb cuts;
         (o)   Any project involving a principal or accessory building or
appurtenances thereto (such as decks, porches, and fences), which affect the
structural system, the electrical system, the mechanical or plumbing system,
any fire-safety or fire-resistive standards, or any proposed change in
occupancy classification or use.
      (3)   No improvement location permit (building permit) shall be required
for ordinary repair and maintenance, including painting, papering and
replacement of coverings on walls, ceilings, roofs or floors, and similar
finish work, including the replacement or reglazing of glass, provided that no
items of division (A)(2)(o) are affected and that the work does not include a
potential health or safety hazard.
   (B)   Application for permit. Applications for improvement location permits
(building permits) shall be made on forms provided by the Plan Commission. Each
application shall be accompanied by two copies of a plot plan which is drawn to
scale and shows clearly and completely:
      (1)   The location, dimensions, and nature of the property;
      (2)   The location and dimensions of any existing or proposed structure;
      (3)   All adjoining streets and any existing or proposed access to these
streets;
      (4)   The existing and proposed uses of all structures and land;
      (5)   The location and type of sewage system, including septic permit
from County Health Department, water system and drainage facilities;
      (6)   Estimated cost of construction;
      (7)   Such other information as may be necessary to determine conformance
with this chapter.
      (8)   Erosion plan as per item number 9, page 2 of the Fee Schedule and
      (9)   Whether any portion of the property is within a floodplain.
         (a)   If the property is within a floodplain, the application and/or
plot plan must provide the information required pursuant to § 151.06, which
relates to Flood Damage Prevention, and as such, the application is subject to
the provisions contained therein.
         (b)   In addition, in all construction other than that which is
governed by the One and Two- Family Dwelling Code, a copy of the Design
Release, issued by the State Building Commission and the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3-1, shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator
before issuance of a permit for construction covered by such Design Release.
   (C)   Fees. Fees shall be charged for all applications for permits or
petitions in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the Plan Commission.
Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no
final action shall be taken on any permit application, appeal or petition. Any
person who initiates construction of a structure prior to obtaining an
improvement location permit or any other required permit shall pay twice the
amount of the current permit fee. No fee shall be required for appealing a
decision of the Zoning Administrator.
   (D)   Approval of permits. Within 30 days after receipt of the application,
the Zoning Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the application.
One set of plans shall be returned to the applicant, marked approved or
disapproved. If the application is disapproved, the reasons for the disapproval
shall be stated in writing. All commercial and industrial projects shall be
submitted to the Plan Commission for review prior to receiving an improvement
location permit.
   (E)   Expiration of the permit. If work has not commenced within 90 days
after the date of issuance of the permit, the permit shall expire. If work
described in any permit has not been substantially completed within two years
of the date of issuance thereof, the permit shall expire. Further work shall
not proceed unless a new permit is obtained.
(Ord. 172, §§ 3-400 - 3-403, 3-406, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 188, passed 2-10-
92; Am. Ord. 216, passed 5-8-95; Am. Ord. 320, passed 5-17-04)
§ 152.139 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY PERMIT.
   (A)   Certificate of occupancy. It is unlawful to use or occupy any building
or premises without a certificate of occupancy. An application for an
improvement location permit shall without an additional fee, include and be
deemed an application for a certificate of occupancy. No certificate of
occupancy for any building or structure shall be issued unless such building or
structure was constructed in compliance with the ordinances, rules, and
regulations of the town. A certificate of occupancy shall be obtained before
any person may:
      (1)   Occupy or use any vacant land;
      (2)   Occupy or use any structure hereafter constructed, reconstructed,
moved, enlarged or structurally altered;
      (3)   Change the use of a structure or land to a different use; or,
      (4)   Renew, change, or extend a non-conforming use.
   (B)   Temporary occupancy permit. Pending the issuance of a permanent
certificate of occupancy, a temporary occupancy permit may be issued by the
Building Inspector for a period of not more than six months. Such temporary
certificate shall not be construed in any way to alter the respective rights,
duties or obligations of the owner or of the town relating to the use or
occupancy of the land or building or any other matter covered by this chapter.
The temporary occupancy permit shall not be issued except under such
restrictions and provisions as will adequately insure the safety of the
occupants.
(Ord. 172, §§ 3-404, 3-405, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 320, passed 5-17-04)
§ 152.140 APPEALS; REVIEW BY CERTIORARI.
   (A)   Appeals. It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of
interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning
Administrator. Questions shall be presented to the Board of Zoning Appeals only
on appeal from the decisions of the Zoning Administrator. Recourse form
decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be to the courts as provided by
laws. Appeals the Board of Zoning Appeals concerning interpretation or
administration of this chapter may be taken by any persons aggrieved by any
officer or bureau of the legislative authority of the town affected by any
decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within such
tine as established by the Board of Zoning Appeals by general rule. The Zoning
Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   (B)   Review by certiorari. Every decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall be subject to review by certiorari. Any person aggrieved by a decision of
the Board may present to the court of the county in which the premises affected
are located, a petition duly verified, setting forth that the decision by the
Board is illegal in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the
illegality. The petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after
the entry of the decision of the Board.
(Ord. 172, §§ 3-600, 3-700, passed 4-5-90)
§ 152.141 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to locate, erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge,
change, maintain or use any structure or land in violation of any regulation in
or any provisions of, this chapter or of any regulation enacted hereunder by
the Commission or Board. Violations of the provisions of this chapter or
failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances
and special exception, shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 172, § 3-500, passed 4-5-90; Am. Ord. 320, passed 5-17-04)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter,
including violations of commitments, conditions, restrictions, and safeguards
established pursuant to provisions of the Zoning Code or during proceedings
authorized by or governed by the Zoning Code, for which another penalty is not
specifically provided shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,500 and
payment of reasonable attorney’s fees for the enforcement action. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs
or continues.
(Am. Ord. 320, passed 5-17-04)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Title
   
153.002   Policy
   
153.003   Purposes
   
153.004   Authority and jurisdiction
   
153.005   Interpretation, conflict and separability
   
153.006   Saving provision
   
153.007   Re-subdivision of land
   
153.008   Vacation of plats
   
153.009   Variances
   
153.010   Definitions
Application and Approval Procedures
   
153.020   General procedures
   
153.021   Sketch plan application procedure for major and minor subdivisions
   
153.022   Major subdivisions
   
153.023   Minor subdivisions
   
153.024   Exempt divisions
Standards and Requirements for Improvements
   
153.040   General improvements
   
153.041   Lot improvements
   
153.042   Easements
   
153.043   Building setback lines
   
153.044   Nonresidential subdivision
   
153.045   General street design
   
153.046   Street right-of-way
   
153.047   Minimum standards for street design
   
153.048   Minimum standards for street construction
   
153.049   Shoulders, side slopes and ditches
   
153.050   Street signs
   
153.051   Culverts
   
153.052   Drainage and storm sewers
   
153.053   Water facilities
   
153.054   Sewerage facilities
   
153.055   Utilities
   
153.056   Preservation of natural features and amenities
Assurance for Completion of Improvements
   
153.070   Improvements and performance bond
   
153.071   Inspection of public improvements
   
153.072   Maintenance of public improvements
   
153.073   Waiver of required public improvements
   
153.074   Issuance of building permits
Specifications for Documents to be Submitted
   
153.090   Sketch plan
   
153.091   Preliminary plat
   
153.092   Construction plans
   
153.093   Final subdivision plat
   
153.094   Exempt divisions
Administration and Enforcement
   
153.105   Enforcement
   
153.106   Restraining provisions
 
   
153.999   Penalty
   GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall hereafter be known and cited as the Subdivision
Regulations of the Town of Prince's Lakes, Indiana.
(Ord. 174, § 100, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.002 POLICY.
   (A)   Conformance to applicable rules and regulations.  In addition to the
requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with the
following laws, rules, and regulations:
      (1)   All applicable state and local statutory provisions;
      (2)   The town zoning ordinance, building code, and all other applicable
laws of the town;
      (3)   The comprehensive plan and official map, including all streets,
drainage systems, and parks shown on the official map or comprehensive plan as
adopted;
      (4)   The special requirements of these regulations and any rules of the
state or county health departments and/or other appropriate state agencies;
      (5)   Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity
with the above guides and requirements or with the policies and purposes of
these regulations established in
§ 153.003 and
153.004 of this chapter.
   (B)   Self-imposed restrictions. If the owner places restrictions on any of
the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the zoning
ordinance or these regulations, such restrictions or reference thereto may be
required to be indicated on the subdivision plat, or the Commission may require
that restrictive covenants be recorded with the County Recorder in the form to
be approved by the Town Attorney.
(Ord. 174, § 101, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.003 PURPOSES.
   The following are the purposes of these regulations:
   (A)   To protect, promote and provide for the public health, safety and
general welfare of the town;
   (B)   To guide the future development of the town in accordance with the
comprehensive plan and related policies;
   (C)   To provide for the safety, comfort, and soundness of the built
environment and related open spaces;
   (D)   To protect the compatibility, character, economic stability and
orderliness of all development through reasonable design standards;
   (E)   To guide public and private policy and action to provide adequate and
efficient public and private facilities;
   (F)   To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the town and to
insure appropriate development with regard to these natural features.
(Ord. 174, § 102, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.004 AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.
   (A)   This chapter, which was enacted pursuant to Indiana Home Rule and
Planning Enabling Legislation (I.C. Title 36-1-3-4 and the 36-7-4-700 series,
as amended) authorized the Plan Commission to review and approve or disapprove
plats for subdivision throughout the town, which show lots, blocks, or sites
with or without new streets or highways. This authority extends to the
development or re-subdivision of undeveloped portions of already recorded
plats.
   (B)   No improvement location permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for any parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision after
the effective date of, and not in conformity with, the provisions of these
subdivision regulations, and no excavation of land or construction of any
public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in
conformity with the regulations contained herein and in conformity with
construction standards adopted by the town.
(Ord. 174, § 103, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.005 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The provisions of this chapter shall be
interpreted and applied as minimum requirements.
   (B)   Conflict with public provisions. These regulations are not intended to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule, or regulation,
statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations
impose restrictions different form those imposed by any ordinance, rule, or
regulation, or other provisions of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
   (C)   Conflict with private provisions. These regulations are not intended
to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or
restriction, provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more
restrictive the higher standards shall govern. Where such easement, covenant or
private agreement or restriction, impose duties and obligations that are more
restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of these regulation,
then such private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to these
regulations and determinations and made thereunder.
   (D)   Severability. If any provision of this chapter or application to
particular circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the
application of such provision to other circumstances shall not be affected.
(Ord. 174, § 104, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.006 SAVING PROVISION.
   These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending
under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to
accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, by
lawful action of the town except as shall be expressly provided for in these
regulations.
(Ord. 174, § 105, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.007 RE-SUBDIVISION OF LAND.
   (A)   Procedure for re-subdivision. For any change in a map of an approved
or recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on
such map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it
affects any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any
regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be approved by the
Commission by the same procedures, rules, and regulations as for subdivision.
   (B)   Procedure for subdivision where future re-subdivision is indicated.
Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or
more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that
such lots will eventually be re-subdivided into smaller building sites, the
Commission may require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of
streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing for
the future opening and extension of such streets may be made a requirement of
the plat.
(Ord. 174, § 106, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.008 VACATION OF PLATS.
   (A)   Any recorded plat or any part of any recorded plat may be vacated by
the owners of the premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by
a written instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring
the same to be vacated.
   (B)   Such an instrument shall be approved by the Commission in like manner
as plats of minor subdivisions. The town may reject any such instrument which
abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements,
streets, or alleys.
   (C)   Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and
recorded in the same manner as a deed to land and being duly recorded, shall
operate to terminate the effect of the plat so vacated, and to terminate all
public rights in the public ways and public grounds, and all dedications laid
out or describe in the plat or part of the plat.
(Ord. 174, § 107, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.009 VARIANCES.
   (A)   General. Where the Commission finds that extraordinary hardships or
practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations
or that justice may be served or the public interest may be served to a greater
extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve variances to these
regulations, provided that such variances to these regulations, provided that
such variances shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose
of these regulations; and further provided the Commission shall not approve
variances unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it
in each specific case that:
      (1)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other nearby property;
      (2)   The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property;
      (3)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out;
      (4)   The variance will not in any manner contravene the provisions of
the zoning ordinance, comprehensive plan, or official map as interpreted by the
Commission.
   (B)   Conditions. In approving variances, the Commission may require such
conditions as will, in its judgement, secure substantially the objectives of
the standards or requirements of these regulations.
   (C)   Procedures. A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time when the primary plat is filed for the
consideration of the Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for
the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
(Ord. 174, § 108, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. For the purpose
of this chapter, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms, words, and phrases
shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this section. Whenever
any words and phrases are not defined within this section but are defined in
I.C. 36-7-4 et seq. and in any acts supplemental or amendatory thereto, the
state statutory definition shall be deemed to apply. The masculine includes the
feminine; the present tense includes the past and future tense, and the
singular number includes the plural. The word “shall” is a mandatory
requirement, the word “may” is a permissive requirement, and the word “should”
is a preferred requirement. All other words not defined this section or
elsewhere in this chapter shall be defined according to any recent edition of a
dictionary of the English Language.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate structure, the use of which is incidental
to that of the dominant use of the primary building or land.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The officer appointed by and/or delegated the responsibility
for the administration of these regulations by the Plan Commission.
   ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION. A plan commission serving a single local
government jurisdiction established as defined under I.C. 36-7-4-200 as
amended.
   APPLICANT. The owner(s), legal and equitable, of land within the territorial
limits of the town, who submit an application for plat approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
   BOND. Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form
satisfactory to the Plan Commission. All bonds shall be approved by the
Commission wherever a bond is required by these regulations.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. For any purpose of this chapter, the Building Inspector
shall be synonymous with the term Administrator, and shall refer to that person
delegated the primary responsibility of accepting applications for petitions on
behalf of the Plan Commission for subdivision of any parcel of land within the
jurisdictional area of the Commission.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The line, established by this chapter, beyond which a
building shall not extend unless varied according to the procedures in this
chapter. Also called a building line. Setback lines may be applicable to the
front, side, and/or rear yard.
   CENTRAL WATER SYSTEM. A community water supply system including existing and
new wells and/or surface water sources and intakes, treatment facilities, and
distribution lines and includes such of the above facilities established by the
developer to serve a new subdivision.
   CERTIFICATE. The signed and attested document which indicates that a
subdivision has been granted secondary approval by the Commission subsequent to
proper public notice of its hearing.
   CHECKPOINT AGENCY. A public agency or organization called upon by the
Commission to provide expert council with regard to a specific aspect of
community development or required by law to give its assent before subdivision
may take place.
   COLLECTOR STREET. A street designed, planned and intended to carry vehicular
traffic to and from the town to the major arterial road system of Johnson
County. Access to collector roads from adjacent properties should by carefully
controlled and parking should be prohibited except where additional and
adequate widths are provided.
   COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the town.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The applicable comprehensive plan for the town, or
segment thereof, adopted by the Plan Commission and indicating general
locations recommended for public improvements and land use.
   CONSTRUCTION PLAN(S). The maps of drawing accompanying a subdivision plat
and showing the specific location and design of improvement to be installed for
the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of this chapter as a
condition of the approval of the plat.
   COVENANT. A private legal restriction on the use of land contained in the
deed to the property. Normally applied to all lots in any subdivision.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A street open to vehicular traffic from a thoroughfare,
collector street or local street permanently terminated by a vehicular
turnaround for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement including
public safety vehicles.
   DEAD-END STREET. A street or a portion of a street with only one vehicular
traffic outlet.
   DESIGNATED OFFICIALS. Those officials of the Plan Commission designated in
the subdivision ordinance as required signatories, for the execution of
secondary approval.
   DEVELOPER. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his
representative. Consent for making applications for development approval shall
be required from the legal owner of the premises.
   DEVELOPMENT DENSITY. Number of dwelling units per gross acre.
   DRAIN. Open ditch, tile or pipe or combination thereof.
   DRIVES, PRIVATE. Vehicular streets and driveways which are wholly within
private property except where they intersect with other streets within public
right-of-ways.
   EASEMENT. An authorization or grant by a property owner to a specific person
or to the public to use land for a specific purpose. The title to the land
shall remain in the name of the property owner and shall be subject to the
right of use designated in the easement.
   FINAL PLAT. The map, drawing, or plan described in this chapter of a
subdivision and any accompanying material submitted to the Commission for
secondary approval, and which if approved and signed by the designated
officials, may be submitted to the County Recorder for filing.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Those flood plains which have not been adequately
protected from flooding by the regulatory flood by means of dikes, levees, or
reservoirs, and are shown on the Floodway-Flood Boundary Maps of the Federal
Insurance Administration or maps provided to the Federal Insurance
Administration or maps provided to the Commission from the State Natural
Resources Commission.
   FLOOD PLAIN. The area adjoining the river or stream which has been or may
hereafter be covered by flood water from the regulatory flood.
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE. The elevation of the lowest point around the
perimeter of a building at which flood waters may enter the interior of the
building.
   FLOODWAY. See “Regulatory Floodway.”
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. Those portions of the flood hazard areas lying outside the
floodway, shown on the floodway-flood boundary maps of the Federal Insurance
Administration.
   FOUNDATION. The supporting member of a wall or structure.
   FRONTAGE. All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting
streets, measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended,
then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street
and the dead-end of the street.
   GOVERNING BODY. The body of the relevant local government having the power
to adopt ordinances.
   GRADE. The slope of a street, or other public way, specified in percentage
terms.
   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT. A certificate issued by the Building Inspector
permitting a person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove convert, or demolish any building or structure within the locality, or
cause the same to be done.
   IMPROVEMENTS. See “Lot Improvements” or “Public Improvements.”
   INDIANA CODE. The Burns Indiana Statutes Code Edition which codifies all
Indiana statutes for reference purpose. The latest edition with any amending
supplements must be referred to for the laws “now” in force and applicable.
(Usually abbreviated as I.C. herein.)
   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A septic tank, seepage tile sewage
disposal system, or any other approved sewage treatment device approved by the
Johnson County Health Department.
   INTERESTED PARTIES. Those parties who are the owners of properties adjoining
or adjacent to the proposed subdivision as shown on the sketch plan.
   JOINT OWNERSHIP. Joint ownership among persons shall be construed as the
same owner; “constructive ownership” for the purpose of imposing subdivision
regulations.
   LAND DIVIDER. The owner of a parcel of land to be further divided through
making an exempt division.
   LOCAL ACCESS STREET. A street intended to provide access to other streets
from individual properties and to provide right-of-way for sewer, water, and
storm drainage pipes.
   LOT. A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or of building development.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the interior
angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.
   LOT IMPROVEMENT. Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other
object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a
physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. Certain
lot improvements shall be properly bonded as provided in these regulations.
   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision,
including but not limited to, subdivisions of four or more lots, or any size
subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the local governmental
facilities, or the creation of any public improvements.
   MARKER. A stake, pipe, rod, nail, or any other object which is not intended
to be a permanent point for record purposes.
   MINOR SUBDIVISIONS. Any subdivision containing not more than three lots
fronting on an existing street which is an improved right-of-way maintained by
the town, not involving any new street or the extension of municipal
facilities, or the creation of any public improvements and not adversely
affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in
conflict with any provision or portion of the comprehensive plan, official map,
zoning ordinance, or this chapter.
   MODEL HOME. A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typifies the kind of units that will be constructed in the subdivision. Such
dwelling units may be erected, at the discretion of the Commission, by
permitting a portion of a major subdivision involving no more than two lots to
be created according to the procedures for minor subdivisions, as set out in
these regulations.
   MONUMENT. A physical structure which marks the location of a corner or other
survey point.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. A subdivision whose intended use is other than
residential, such as commercial or industrial. Such subdivision shall comply
with the applicable provisions of these regulations and the zoning ordinance.
   OFF-SITE. Any premises not located within the area of the property to be
subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for
subdivision approval.
   OFFICIAL MAP. The map or maps established by the town pursuant to law
showing the existing and proposed streets, highways, parks, drainage systems
and set-back lines theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law, and
any amendments or additions thereto adopted by the town or additions thereto
adopted by the town or additions thereto resulting from the approval of
subdivision plats by the Commission and the subsequent filing of such approved
plats.
   ORDINANCE. Any legislative action, however denominated, of a local
government which has the force of law, including any amendment or repeal of any
ordinance.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient
proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these
regulations.
   PARCEL. A part or portion of land having a legal description formally set
forth in a conveyance together with the boundaries thereof, in order to make
possible its easy identification.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other legal entity.
   PLAN COMMISSION. The town advisory plan commission established in accordance
with I.C. 36-7-4-200 referred to herein simply as the Commission.
   PLAT. A map indicating the subdivision or re-subdivision of and filed or
intended be filed for record with the County Recorder.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these
regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be
submitted to the Commission for approval.
   PRIMARY APPROVAL. An approval (or approval with conditions imposed) granted
to a subdivision by the Commission after having determined in a public hearing
that the subdivision complies with the standards prescribed in the Ordinance
(per I.C. 36-7-4-700 series: Subdivision Control).
   PRINCIPAL USE BUILDING. A building in which the principal use of the lot or
parcel is conducted. Standards recognized by the Indiana Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission shall be used to determine whether a given structure
constitutes one or more buildings in cases where ambiguities exist.
   PUBLIC AGENCY. An agency or governmental department acting under the aegis
of and representing an elected or appointed council, commission, or other
policy-making or advisory body of federal, state or local government to whom it
is responsible.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any drainage ditch, street, highway, lawn, off-street
parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the local government
may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or
which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is
established. (All such improvements shall be properly bonded.)
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor properly licensed and registered
or through reciprocity permitted to practice in the State of Indiana.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer properly licensed and
registered in the State of Indiana or permitted to practice in Indiana through
reciprocity.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. That flood having a peak discharge which can be equaled or
exceeded on the average of once in a 100-year period, as calculated by a method
and procedure which is acceptable to and approved by the State Natural
Resources Commission; this flood is equivalent to a flood having a probability
of occurrence of 1% in any given year.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION. The maximum elevation reached by the regulatory
flood at the locations in question relevant to approval of a given subdivision
under consideration.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the flood plains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flow of the regulatory flood of any
river or stream shown on the floodway-flood boundary maps of the Federal
Insurance Administration.
   RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS. Limitations of various kinds on the usage of lots
within a subdivision which are proposed by the subdivider, and, in the case of
public health, safety and welfare by the Commission, that are recorded with the
plat and run with the land.
   RE-SUBDIVISION. A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision
plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved
thereon for public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any map or plan
legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivision.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use.
The usage of the term “right-of-way” for land platting purposes shall mean that
every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be
separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and
not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-
way intended for streets, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains or any
other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to the
public use by the subdivider on whose plat such right-of-way is established.
   SALE OR LEASE. Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or any
possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise,
interstate succession, or transfer, of an interest in a subdivision or part
thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease, devise,
interstate-succession, or other written instrument.
   SAME OWNERSHIP. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity,
partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by different
corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations, in
which a stockholder, partner, or associate, or a member of his or her family
owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or
unincorporated association.
   SECONDARY APPROVAL. The stage of application for formal Plan Commission
approval of a final plat of a subdivision the construction of which has been
completed or substantially completed which, if approved and signed by the
designated officials may be submitted to the County Recorder for filing.
   SETBACK. A line parallel to and equidistant from the relevant lot line
(front, back, side) between which no buildings or structures may be erected as
prescribed in the town's zoning ordinance.
   SKETCH PLAN. An informal, informational drawing, as described in this
chapter, preparatory to the drawing of the preliminary plat (or final plat in
the case of minor subdivisions) to enable the subdivider to save time and
expense in reaching general agreement with the Commission as to the form of the
plat and conformance to the objectives of this chapter.
   SOIL SURVEY, GENERAL. A highly detailed analysis of soil characteristics
(e.g. texture, structure, acidity or alkalinity, permeability, moisture
capacity) and identification of kinds of soil as described and named in the
detailed soil maps of the National Cooperative Soil Survey.
   STATE ACTS. Such legislative acts of the State of Indiana as they affect
these regulations.
   STATE PLANE COORDINATES SYSTEM. A system of plan coordinates, based on the
Transverse Mercator Projection or the Western Zone of Indiana, established by
the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey for the State of Indiana.
   STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH. The distance between property lines measured at
right angles to the center line of the street.
   STREETS, CLASSIFICATION. For the purpose of providing for the development of
the streets, highways, and rights-of-way in the governmental unit, and for
their future improvement, reconstruction, realignment, and necessary widening,
including provision for curbs and sidewalks, each existing street, highway, and
right-of-way, and those located on approved and- filed plats, have been
designated on the official map of the town and classified therein. The
classification of each street, highway, and right-of-way is based upon its
location in the respective zoning volume and its relative importance and
function as specified in the town's comprehensive plan and/or its thoroughfare
plan component. The required improvements shall be measured as set forth for
each street classification on the official map.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on or in
the ground.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person who, having proprietary interest in land, causes it,
directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision; or who, directly or
indirectly sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develop, or
advertises for sale, lease or development, any interest, lot parcel site, unit,
or plat in a subdivision; or who, engages directly or through an agent, in the
business of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or
development a subdivision of any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a
subdivision; and who is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct,
or indirect common control with any of the foregoing.
   SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots, parcels,
sites, units, plats, or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease, or
development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms, and conditions, including re-subdivision. Subdivision includes the
division of land zoned for residential and non-residential uses, whether by
deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map, plat, or
other recorded instrument.
      (2)   The following kinds of divisions of existing parcels of land are
herein called “Exempt Divisions” and are exempt from most provisions of this
chapter:
         (a)   A division of land into two or more tracts all of which are at
least ten acres in size;
         (b)   A division of land for the sale or exchange of tracts to correct
errors in an existing legal description, provided that no additional building
sites other than for accessory buildings are created by the division;
         (c)   A division of land pursuant to an allocation off land in the
settlement of a decedent's estate or a court decree for the distribution of
property;
         (d)   A division of land for the acquisition of street right-of-way,
or easement;
         (e)   A division of land for the sale or exchange of tracts between
adjoining land owners, provided that no additional building sites other than
for accessory buildings are created by the division; and
         (f)   A division of land into cemetery plots for the purpose of the
burial of corpses.
      (3)   Exempt divisions are subject only to the provisions of §§ 153.024
and 153.094 of this chapter but shall be exempt from other provisions of this
chapter not specified or referred to in those sections.
   SUBDIVISION AGENT. Any person who represents, or acts for or on behalf of, a
subdivider or developer, in selling, leasing, or developing, or offering to
sell, lease, or develop any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site, or plat in a
subdivision, except an attorney-at-law whose representation of another person
consists solely of rendering legal services.
   TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT. Improvements built and maintained by a subdivider
during construction of the subdivision and intended to be replaced by a
permanent improvement prior to release of the performance bond.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The applicable segment of the comprehensive plan for the
town, adopted by the Town Council, which sets forth the location, alignment,
dimensions, identification and classification of collector roads and local
access roads as a plan for the development, redevelopment, improvement, and
extension and revision thereof.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of Prince's Lakes, Indiana.
   USED or OCCUPIED. Include the words “intended, arranged, or designed to be
used or occupied.”
   ZONING ORDINANCE. That town ordinance setting forth the regulations
controlling the use of land in the incorporated area of the town and adjoining
two mile fringe. (Codified as Chapter 153 of this code.)
(Ord. 174, Art. II, passed 6-11-90)
   APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
§ 153.020 GENERAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Pre-design conference. Prior to submitting any of the materials
required by this chapter, the applicant or his or her representative should
discuss with the Administrator the nature of the land division being proposed.
The applicant will be advised of the classification of his or her subdivision
and the relevant regulatory procedures which must be followed to secure primary
and secondary approval. Where applicable, requirements concerning the general
layout of streets and for reservations of land, street improvements, drainage,
sewerage, fire protection, and similar matters as well as the availability of
existing services should be discussed. The Administrator shall also advise the
applicant, where appropriate, to discuss the proposed land division with those
other officials who must eventually approve those aspects of the subdivision
plat coming within their jurisdiction. The distinction between major and minor
subdivisions and exempt divisions as defined in this chapter, shall be made by
the Administrator when the applicant submits an application for sketch plan
approval in the case of major and minor subdivisions. In the case of exempt
divisions, the applicant will be required to submit adequate information to
enable the Administrator to adequate information to enable the Administrator to
determine that the proposed division is an exempt division.
   (B)   Classification of land divisions.
      (1)   All land to be divided shall be categorized into one of the three
classes of land division:
         (a)   Major subdivision;
         (b)   Minor subdivisions; and
         (c)   Exempt divisions.
      (2)   Exempt divisions are not subject to the requirements of this
chapter beyond the determination by the Administrator that they meet all the
requirements for exempt divisions set forth in
§ 153.024 herein. Before any permit shall be granted for a structure to be
erected on a parcel of land to be created or altered by an exempt division, the
land divider or his or her agent shall certify to the satisfaction of the
Administrator that all requirements for exemption have been met, as detailed in
§ 153.024 of this chapter.
      (3)   Before any permit shall be granted for a structure to be erected on
land to be subdivided into a major or minor subdivision, the subdividing owner
or his or her subdivision agent shall apply for and secure approval of the
proposed subdivision in accordance with
§ 153.021 and either
§ 153.022 or
§ 153.023 of this chapter as appropriate.
(Ord. 174, § 300, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.021 SKETCH PLAN APPLICATION PROCEDURE FOR MAJOR AND MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Application requirements. In order to begin the subdivision process
the applicant shall file an application for review of sketch plan and
certificate with the Administrator and be entitled to a signed receipt for
same. This application shall:
      (1)   Be made on forms available at the Office of the Commission;
      (2)   Include indication of all contiguous holdings of the owner
including land in the same ownership, with an indication of the portion which
is proposed to be subdivided, accompanied by an affidavit of ownership, which
shall include the dates the respective holdings of land were acquired, together
with the book and page of each conveyance to the present owner as recorded in
the County Recorder's office. The affidavit shall advise as to the legal owner
of the property, the contract owner of the property, optionee of the property,
and the date on which the contract of sale was executed. If any corporations
are involved, the Administrator may request a complete list of all directors,
officers, and a listing of stockholders of less than ten in number;
      (3)   Be accompanied by a minimum of three copies of the sketch plan;
      (4)   Be accompanied by a fee of $50 plus $5 per lot in excess of four
lots;
      (5)   Include an address and telephone and telephone number of an agent
located within the territory of the Commission who shall be authorized to
receive all notices required by this chapter.
      (6)   Include a listing signed by the checkpoint agencies indicating that
they have received a copy of the proposed sketch plan or a certification that
it has been sent.
   (B)   Checkpoint submission. A copy of the proposed plan shall be submitted
to each of the checkpoint agencies for review and comment. The Administrator
shall request that all officials and agencies to whom a request for review has
been made submit a written report to him or her within 15 days after receipt of
the request. No response from an agency shall be interpreted as meaning “no
objection.” The checkpoint agencies which may have a jurisdictional review
function for a proposed plat are as follows:
      (1)   Town Road Superintendent;
      (2)   Town Water and Sewer Superintendent;
      (3)   Fire Department;
      (4)   Town Marshal;
      (5)   Drainage Board;
      (6)   Johnson County Department of Highways;
      (7)   Soil and Water Conservation District;
      (8)   Johnson County Board of Health.
   (C)   Classification of subdivision. After an application for sketch plan
approval has been submitted, and at the time of sketch plan review the
Administrator shall classify the proposed subdivision as either major or minor
as defined in this chapter. The required procedures and approvals for major
subdivisions are described in
§ 153.022; corresponding information concerning the minor subdivision approval
process is provided in
§ 153.023.
(Ord. 174, § 301, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.022 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General procedures for primary and secondary approval. Should the
Administrator, during sketch plan review, classify the proposed land division
as a major subdivisions, the subdivider shall follow the procedures and be
subject to the processes outlined and detailed in this section. In addition to
sketch plan which is reviewed by the Administrator and checkpoint agencies, the
applicant seeking approval of a major subdivision shall submit a preliminary
subdivision plat to be approved, conditionally approved, or rejected by the
Commission at a public meeting, and a final subdivision plat which must be
found in compliance with the preliminary plat as approved by the Commission or
otherwise approved in order to be signed and recorded.
   (B)   Official submission dates. The deadline for submittal of a sketch plan
and application for certificate of approval shall be 61 calendar days prior to
the date of the public meeting at which the subdivider intends to have his
preliminary plat submission heard, and 31 calendar days prior to the deadline
for the submission of the preliminary plat. Thus, as a minimum, sketch plan
submission shall precede preliminary plat submission by no less than 31
calendar days, which in turn shall precede the public meeting at which it is
intended to be heard by no less than 30 calendar days.
   (C)   Sketch plan review process. Within 20 calendar days of the
subdivider's sketch plan application submittal, the Administrator shall have
studied the proposal, reviewed checkpoint reports received, and met with the
subdivider to discuss pertinent aspects of the proposed subdivision and
possible modifications and/or changes that may be suggested or required by this
chapter. The Administrator shall request that a representative of each
checkpoint agency wishing to be involved in a sketch plan review be present to
participate in the sketch plan review meeting. In taking into consideration the
requirements of this chapter, particular attention shall be given to the
arrangement, location, and width of streets, their relation to the topography
of the land, sewage disposal, drainage, lot size and arrangement, the further
development of adjoining lands as yet un-subdivided, and the requirements of
the official map and comprehensive plan. Subsequent to the meeting the
Administrator shall provide the participants with a written record of the
proceedings of that meeting.
   (D)   Major subdivision procedures for preliminary plat approval. 
      (1)   Submission requirements. Following the submission, review and
report on the sketch plan application, the subdivider may file for primary
approval of a preliminary plat. The submission shall:
         (a)   Be made on forms available at the office of the Commission and
be submitted with a fee of $5 per lot for each lot which was not included in
the sketch plan;
         (b)   Show all land which the applicant proposes to subdivide and all
adjacent land within 100 feet with the names and addresses of the owners as
shown in the Auditor's files. This information may be shown on a separate plat
map reproduction from the Auditor's Office showing the boundaries of the
subdivision's superimposed thereon;
         (c)   Be presented to the Administrator no later than 30 calendar days
prior to the regular meeting of the Commission at which it is intended to be
heard;
         (d)   Be accompanied by ten copies of the preliminary plat as
described in this chapter;
         (e)   Generally comply with the sketch plan as reviewed.
      (2)   Placement on the Commission agenda. Subsequent to the submission
for primary approval, the Commission shall place the matter on its next regular
meeting agenda for formal action.
      (3)   Administrative review. Subsequent to placement on the agenda, and
prior to the date of public hearing, the Administrator and other individuals
serving the Commission in an advisory capacity shall review the proposal and
prepare a report to the Commission.
      (4)   Public hearing notification. The Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the preliminary plat and notice of such hearing shall be a local
newspaper of general circulation ten days prior to the hearing (per I.C. 5-3-1)
at the applicant's expense. At the time of the public hearing, the applicant
shall submit proof of publication that the notice of public hearing were
published at least ten days prior to the public hearing. Interested parties
shall be notified by the applicant of the date, time, place and purpose of the
public hearing on the subdivision at least ten days in advance of the hearing
by certified mail. The applicant shall file with the Commission at the time of
the public hearing an affidavit so testifying.
      (5)   Primary approval of the preliminary plat. The Commission shall at a
public meeting, grant primary approval, or disapprove the preliminary plat. One
copy of the preliminary plat shall be returned to the applicant with the date
of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval and the reasons therefore
accompanying the plat within 15 days of the public hearing. Primary approval by
the Commission is subject to review by certiorari.
      (6)   Effective period of primary approval. Unless extended, the primary
approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of five years at
the end of which time secondary approval of the subdivision must have been
obtained and certified by the designated officials. Any plats not receiving
secondary approval within the period of time set forth herein shall be null and
void, and the developer shall be required to submit a new application for
sketch plan review and certificate subject to all the zoning restrictions and
subdivision regulations in effect at the time of resubmission. Upon request of
the applicant the Commission may extend the primary approval of a preliminary
plat in increments of two years beyond an expiration date without further
notice and public hearing.
   (E)   Approval of construction plans.
      (1)   Submission procedure and requirements. Following the review of the
sketch plan and prior to submission of the final plat for secondary approval,
the applicant shall file three sets of detailed plans and specifications with
the Administrator.
      (2)   Review process. The Administrator shall immediately refer the plans
to the appropriate agencies for their review. If the agencies approve the
construction plans, or 14 working days elapse following their distribution
without a written response, the Administrator shall mark the plans approved and
return one set to the applicant. In no event shall secondary approval (of the
final plat) be given prior to approval of the construction plans.
      (3)   Installation of improvements. No work shall proceed on the
installation of improvements prior to approval of the construction plans. The
installation of improvements shall be inspected by a representative of the town
as directed by the Plan Commission. Such inspections are required in all
instances regardless of whether the work is performed before or after secondary
approval.
   (F)   Final plat procedure (secondary approval).
      (1)   Submission requirements. Following approval of the preliminary plat
and construction plans, the applicant shall file a request for secondary
approval of the final plat with the Administrator. The application shall:
         (a)   Be submitted on forms available at the Office of the Town Clerk-
Treasurer;
         (b)   Include the entire subdivision, or section thereof which derives
access from an existing county, or town roadway;
         (c)   Be accompanied by five copies of the final plat as described in
this chapter;
         (d)   Comply with this chapter and the terms and conditions of primary
approval;
         (e)   Be accompanied by a performance bond, if required, in a form
satisfactory to the Town Attorney. The bond shall be in an amount equivalent to
110% of the estimated cost of installing public improvements and shall
guarantee the completion of all required subdivision and off-site public
improvements;
         (f)   Be accompanied by any restrictive covenants in a form approved
by the Commission, where they have been proposed by the subdivider or required
by the Commission.
      (2)   Determination of conformance (secondary approval). In order to
secure secondary approval, a final plat must conform with the preliminary plat
approved by the Plan Commission. If the final plat deviates from the
preliminary plat that received primary approval, the plat shall be submitted to
the Commission at a public meeting for a new primary approval. The Plan
Commission may delegate authority to grant secondary approval to the
Administrator.
         (a)   If the Administrator is delegated authority to grant secondary
approval, the Administrator shall review the items submitted as per division
(F)(1) above within ten work days and shall determine conformance with all
conditions and requirements imposed as part of the primary approval. If the
plat is found to be in conformance and complete, the Administrator shall
recommend the signing of the certificate granting secondary approval.
         (b)   If the Plan Commission reviews a plat for secondary approval,
the subdivider shall request Commission review in writing no less than 30
calendar days prior to the date of the public meeting at which the final plat
is to be reviewed. The matter shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular
meeting of the Plan Commission. The Administrator shall review the proposal and
submit a written report and recommendations to the Commission and the
applicant. The Commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat. If
granted secondary approval it shall be signed by the designated officials. If
not granted secondary approval, then the subdivider shall be informed as to the
insufficiency of his submittal.
      (3)   Sectioning plats. Prior to granting secondary approval of a major
subdivision, the Commission may permit the plat to be divided into two or more
sections and may impose such conditions upon the filing of the sections as it
may deem necessary to assure the orderly development of the plat. Such sections
must contain at least 20 lots or 10% of the total number of lots contained in
the approved plat, whichever is less. The approval of all remaining sections
not filed with the Administrator shall automatically expire after five years
from the date of primary approval of the preliminary plat, unless the
expiration date has been extended.
   (G)   Signing a plat. 
      (1)   When a performance bond is required, the designated officials of
the Commission shall endorse secondary approval of the plat by signing the
certificate of approval after the bond has been approved, and all the
conditions of the primary approval have been satisfied. The certificate of
approval shall be part of the tracing cloth or reproducible mylar of the
subdivision plat. The subdivider shall provide the Town Clerk a mylar print of
the approved and fully executed plat.
      (2)   When, at the discretion of the Plan Commission, installation of
improvements is permitted in lieu of performance bonds the designated officials
of the Commission shall endorse secondary approval of the plat by signing the
certificate after all conditions of the primary approval have been satisfied
and all improvements satisfactorily completed. The developer shall provide
certified as built drawings of completed public improvements and such other
written evidence as necessary to verify that the required public facilities
have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the town.
      (3)   If the subdivider is permitted to install all improvements before
the secondary approval and it is shown that the conditions of this chapter have
been met, and if the final plat completely conforms to the primary approval,
the Commission shall have no other recourse than to grant secondary approval.
   (H)   Recording a plat. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider in
the presence of the Administrator or his or her designate to file the plat with
the County Recorder within 30 days of the date of signature.
(Ord. 174, § 302, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.023 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General procedures for primary approval. Should the Administrator,
upon examination of the sketch plan application, classify the proposed land
division as a minor subdivision, the subdivider shall follow the procedures and
be subject to the process outlined and detailed in the section. In addition to
a sketch plan which is reviewed by the Administrator and any required
checkpoint agencies for primary approval by the Commission, the applicant
seeking approval of a minor subdivision shall submit for secondary approval a
final subdivision plat which must be found in compliance with the sketch plan
or otherwise approved in order to be signed and recorded.
   (B)   Official submission date and placement on the agenda. An application
for sketch plan approval for a minor subdivision shall be placed on the agenda
of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission to occur at least 30
days after the date the application is submitted.
   (C)   Sketch plan review process. Within 20 calendar days of the submittal
of a sketch plan application, the Administrator shall have studied the
proposal, reviewed checkpoint reports received, and meet with the subdivider to
discuss pertinent aspects of the proposed subdivision and possible
modifications and/or changes that may be suggested or required by this chapter.
The Administrator shall request that a representative of each checkpoint agency
involved in a sketch plan review be present to participate in the sketch plan
review meeting. In taking into consideration the requirements of this chapter,
particular attention shall be given to sewage disposal, lot size and
arrangement, the further development of adjoining lands and any applicable
requirements of the town's comprehensive plan. Subsequent to the meeting the
Administrator shall provide the participants with a written record of the
proceedings of that meeting.
   (D)   Administrative review. Subsequent to placement on the agenda, and
prior to the date of public hearing, the Administrator and other appropriate
representatives of the Commission shall review the proposal and prepare a
written report to the Commission and applicant indicating a recommendation with
regard to the subdivision being proposed.
   (E)   Public hearing notification. The Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the sketch plan. Notice of such hearing shall be in a local
newspaper of general circulation ten days prior to the hearing (per I.C. 5-3-1)
at the applicant's expense. At the time of the public hearing, the applicant
shall submit proof of publication that the notice of public hearing was
published at least ten days prior to the public hearing. Interested parties
shall be notified by the applicant of the date, time, place, and purpose of the
public hearing on at least ten days in advance of the hearing by certified
mail. The applicant shall file an affidavit with the Commission at the time of
the public hearing verifying compliance with all notice requirements.
   (F)   Primary approval of the sketch plan. The Commission shall, at a
regularly scheduled meeting, approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the
sketch plan. One copy of the sketch plan shall be returned to the applicant
with the date of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval and the reasons
therefor accompanying the sketch plan within 15 days after the public meeting.
Primary approval by the Commission is subject to review by certiorari.
Secondary approval of a subdivision cannot occur until the minimum of ten days
has elapsed since the granting of primary approval per I.C. 36-7-4-708(d).*
* Editor’s note:
   The statute cited in the last sentence of division (F) of this section, I.C.
36-7-4-708(d), has been repealed.
   (G)   Final subdivision plat procedure for secondary approval.
      (1)   Submission requirements. Following approval of the preliminary
plat, the applicant shall file a request for secondary approval of the final
plat with the Administrator. The application shall:
         (a)   Be submitted on forms available at the office of the Town Clerk-
Treasurer;
         (b)   Include the entire subdivision;
         (c)   Be accompanied by five copies of the final plat as described in
this chapter;
         (d)   Comply with this chapter and the terms and conditions for
primary approval;
         (e)   Be accompanied by any restrictive covenants in a form approved
by the Commission, where they have been proposed by the subdivider or required
by the Commission.
      (2)   Determination of conformance (secondary approval). In order to
secure secondary approval, a final plat must conform with the preliminary plat
approved by the Plan Commission. If the final plat deviates from the
preliminary plat that received primary approval, the plat shall be submitted to
the Commission at a public meeting for a new primary approval. The Plan
Commission may delegate authority to grant secondary approval to the
Administrator.
         (a)   If the Administrator is delegated authority to grant secondary
approval. The Administrator shall review the items submitted as per § 153.022
(F)(1) within ten work days and shall determine conformance with all conditions
and requirements imposed as part of the primary approval. If the plat is found
to be in conformance and complete, the Administrator shall recommend the
signing of the certificate granting secondary approval.
         (b)   If the Plan Commission reviews a plat for secondary approval.
The subdivider shall request Commission review in writing no less than 30
calendar days prior to the date of the public meeting at which the final plat
is to be reviewed. The matter shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular
meeting of the Plan Commission. The Administrator shall review the proposal and
submit a written report and recommendations to the Commission and the
applicant. The Commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat. If
granted secondary approval it shall be signed by the designated officials. If
not granted secondary approval, then the subdivider shall be informed as to the
insufficiency of his submittal.
   (H)   Signing a plat. The designated officials of the Commission shall
endorse secondary approval of the plat by signing the certificate of approval
after all the conditions of the primary approval have been satisfied. The
certificate of approval shall be part of the tracing cloth or reproducible
mylar of the subdivision plat. The subdivider shall provide the Town Clerk-
Treasurer a mylar print of the approved and fully executed plat.
   (I)   Recording a plat. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider in
the presence of the Administrator or the person designated by the Administrator
to file the plat with the County Recorder within 30 days of the date of
signature.
(Ord. 174, § 303, passed 6-11-90; Am. Ord. 320, passed 5-17-04)
§ 153.024 EXEMPT DIVISIONS.
   (A)   General procedure for exempt divisions. In order for a land division
to be considered an exempt division the information prescribed under
§ 153.094 shall be submitted to the Administrator. Upon the determination that
the division meets the requirements for an exemption the Administrator shall
issue a statement of compliance. Both the subdivider and the Administrator
shall hold copies of the statement of compliance. When the parcel so exempted
by this statement is conveyed to another party a copy of the statement of
compliance may also be conveyed as proof of exemption.
   (B)   Exempt division review process. The Administrator shall review an
application for classification as an exempt division within 15 working days of
receiving the information required in
§ 153.094 of this chapter. If the division is not classified as exempt, the
land divider shall be notified to file an application for a major or minor
subdivision.
(Ord. 174, § 304, passed 6-11-90)
   STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS
§ 153.040 GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Boundary improvements.
      (1)   The subdivider shall have placed, under the supervision of a
registered land surveyor, concrete monuments four inches square or four inches
in diameter and 40 inches long with an iron pole cast in the center, at each
corner or angle of the ultimate outside boundary. They shall be set following
grading of each phase of the subdivision.
      (2)   The subdivider shall have placed, under the supervision of a
registered land surveyor, pipes or steel rods, ¾ of an inch in diameter by 30
inches in length at the corners of each lot. They shall be set prior to the
issuance of any improvement location permit.
   (B)   Character of the land. Land which the Commission finds to be
unsuitable for subdivision or development because of flooding, improper
drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or
topography, utility easements, or other features which might reasonably be
harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future
inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be
subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer
and approved by the Commission, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable
land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for such uses permitted by the
zoning ordinance as shall not involve any such danger.
   (C)   Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not
duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other
subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. The Commission shall have
final authority to designate the name of the subdivision which shall be
determined at the time of primary approval.
(Ord. 174, § 400, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.041 LOT IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be
no foreseeable difficulties for reasons of topography or other conditions in
securing building permits to build on each of the created lots in compliance
with the zoning ordinance and health regulations and in providing driveway
access to buildings on such lots from the appropriate approved street.
   (B)   Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards
in the zoning ordinance. Where lots are more than double the minimum required
area for the zoning district, the Commission may require that such lots be
arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets
where they would be necessary to serve all such potential lots in compliance
with the zoning ordinance and these regulations. In general, side lot lines
shall be at right angles to the street lines (or radial to curving street
lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan.
Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of
buildings, observing the minimum front-yard setback from both streets. Depth
and width of properties reserved or laid out for business or commercial
purposes shall be adequate to provide for all of the off-street parking and
loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated,
as established in the zoning ordinance.
   (C)   Double frontage lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall
be avoided except where necessary to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation affecting the subdivision lots.
   (D)   Access collector roads. Lots shall not, in general, derive access from
a collector road. If the area proposed to be platted abuts upon or contains an
existing or proposed collector, the street plan shall provide vehicular access
to each lot abutting upon the collector by one of the following means:
      (1)   A parallel street, supplying frontage for lots backing onto, but
separated from the collector right-of-way by a screen planting or buffer strip;
      (2)   A cul-de-sac, or series of cul-de-sacs, entered from a street
paralleling the collector with the terminal lots of the cul-de-sac backing onto
the collector right-of-way by a screen planting or buffer strip;
      (3)   A marginal access street separated from the thoroughfare by a
screen planting or a buffer strip, access to the collector being provided at
points suitably spaced;
      (4)   Any other reasonable means necessary to control the number and
location of intersections with such thoroughfare and provide adequate
separation of through and local vehicular traffic.
(Ord. 174, § 401, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.042 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   All proposed plats submitted for Commission approval under the
provisions of this chapter, shall allocate areas of suitable size and location,
wherever necessary, for utility easements. As a general principle, such
easements shall be centered on rear or side lot lines and shall be at least
seven feet wide on both sides of the property lines. Easements shall be
continuous to the street.
   (B)   If any stream or necessary surface drainage course is located in the
area proposed to be platted, adequate areas for easements along the sides of
such stream or surface drainage course shall be allocated for the purpose of
widening, deepening, sloping, improving or protecting the stream or surface
drainage course. (See § 153.052(C)(2)).
(Ord. 174, § 402, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.043 BUILDING SETBACK LINES.
   Building setback lines shall be regulated by the setback provisions of the
zoning ordinance applicable to the area proposed to be platted, with the
exception that front building setback lines shall be as follows:
   (A)   Collector road. No part of any structure (except an eave or cornice
overhang not exceeding four feet) shall be built closer than 40 feet to any
right-of-way line of any collector street.
   (B)   Local access road. No part of any structure (except an eave or cornice
overhang not exceeding four feet) shall be built closer than 25 feet to any
right-of-way line of any local street, marginal access street or cul-de-sac.
(Ord. 174, § 403, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.044 NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   General. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for
commercial purposes the layout of the subdivision shall meet such special
provisions as the Commission finds appropriate and may require. A non-
residential subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements set forth
in the zoning ordinance. Site plan approval and non-residential plat approval
may precede simultaneously at the discretion of the Plan Commission. A non-
residential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these
regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the Commission
and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards established in the
comprehensive plan, official map, and zoning ordinance. All shopping centers
and other nonresidential subdivisions of buildings for leasehold shall be
subject to the relevant provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in these
regulations the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Commission that the street and parcel pattern proposed are appropriate for the
uses anticipated and adequately take into account other uses in the vicinity.
The following principles and standards shall be observed:
      (1)   Proposed commercial parcels shall be suitable in minimum area and
dimensions to the types of development anticipated. Proposals for incremental
lot by lot subdivision must be made clear in a statement on the plat which is
satisfactory to the Commission;
      (2)   Street rights-of-way and pavement construction shall be adequate to
accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated
thereupon;
      (3)   Special requirements may be imposed by the Commission upon
recommendation of the town with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk
design and construction;
      (4)   Special requirements may be imposed by the Commission with respect
to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and storm
water drainage and preprocessing of sewage. Special requirements may also be
imposed regarding the storage and disposal of toxic materials;
      (5)   Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas
from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial subdivision, including the
provision of extra depth in parcels backing onto existing or potential
residential development and provision of a permanently landscaped buffer strip
where necessary;
      (6)   Street carrying non-residential traffic, especially truck traffic,
shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or
potentially residential areas.
(Ord. 174, § 404, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.045 GENERAL STREET DESIGN.
   (A)   The plan, arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of
streets within and on the perimeter of the plat shall be logically related to
the public convenience and safety, existing and planned streets in conformity
with the comprehensive plan and thoroughfare plan, and existing and proposed
topographical and other conditions, so as to:
      (1)   Produce reasonable grades and suitable sites for the uses proposed;
      (2)   Serve vehicular and pedestrian traffic adequately and provide ease
of circulation within, ingress to and egress from said proposed platted area;
      (3)   Create a desirable local subdivision plan consistent with the
proposed uses.
   (B)   Such street plan shall provide for logical extension, continuation, or
completion of all properly located existing streets, either constructed or
appearing on any validly recorded plat or survey, or valid plat previously
approved by the Commission.
(Ord. 174, § 405, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.046 STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   All proposed plats submitted for Commission approval under the provisions of
this chapter shall allocate adequate areas for streets, in conformity with the
comprehensive plan, and thoroughfare plan, and shall designate and label all
such streets thereon in accordance with the following definitions,
specifications and requirements regarding platted width, right-of-way and
control of access thereto.
   (A)   Collector street. Any street designated and labeled as a “collector
street” shall be designed, planned and intended to serve as a collector and
distributor of vehicular traffic in conformance with the comprehensive plan, to
carry vehicular traffic to and from the major arterial road system of the
county, with partial control of access thereto, and shall include but not be
limited to entrance streets of residential subdivisions. Minimum width of
right-of-way for a collector street shall be 50 feet. Partial control of access
to collector streets shall be exercised so as to permit access to each lot
abutting thereon.
   (B)   Local access street. Any street designated and labeled as a “local
access street” shall be designed, planned, and intended, in conformance with
the comprehensive plan, to provide access to abutting lots. Minimum width of
right-of-way for a local access street shall be 50 feet.
(Ord. 174, § 406, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.047 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN.
   All streets, as designated and labeled upon the proposed plat, shall be
graded, constructed and surfaced in accordance with the construction plans and
specifications submitted by the applicant as required by § 153.022(E) of this
chapter and in accordance with the following specifications and requirements.
   (A)   Minimum pavement width.
      (1)   Collector roads. The minimum pavement width for collector roads
shall be 24 feet with shoulders on each side of the road a minimum of six feet
in width.
      (2)   Local access roads. The minimum pavement width for local access
roads shall be 18 feet with shoulders on each side of the road a minimum of six
feet in width.
   (B)   Maximum grades.
      (1)   Collector roads. The maximum grade of collector roads shall not
exceed 4%.
      (2)   Local access roads. The maximum grade for local access roads shall
not exceed 7%.
   (C)   Minimum grades. The minimum grade for all types of streets and for
ditches shall be 0.4%.
   (D)   Street alignment.
      (1)   The minimum radii of center curvature for streets shall be 125 feet
or 46 degrees on collector streets, marginal access streets and cul-de-sacs.
      (2)   The minimum tangent between reversed curves shall be 100 feet on
collector roads and as required by the Plan Commission on all other streets.
   (E)   Visibility requirements.
      (1)   Minimum vertical visibility measured from 4½ feet (eye level) to 18
inches (tail light) height, within traveled lanes shall be:
         (a)   300 feet on collector streets;
         (b)   200 feet on local access streets; and,
         (c)   100 feet on streets shorter than 500 feet.
      (2)   Minimum horizontal visibility measured on center line shall be:
         (a)   200 feet on collector streets; and,
         (b)   100 feet on all other streets.
   (F)   Intersections.
      (1)   Street edges shall be rounded by radii of sufficient length to
permit smooth flow of traffic. Minimum allowable radius for street edges will
be 20 feet.
      (2)   Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is
possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees.
      (3)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not
be permitted.
   (G)   Sight distances at intersections. The following paragraph shall be
required as a provision of the covenants of all final plats: No fence, wall,
hedge, or shrub planting which obstructs sight lines at elevations between two
and six feet above the street, shall be placed or permitted to remain on any
corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street property lines and
any line connection points 25 feet form the intersection of the street lines,
or in the case of a rounded property corder, from the intersection of the
street lines extended. The same sight line limitations shall apply to any lot
within ten feet from the intersection of a street line with the edge of a
driveway pavement or alley line. No tree shall be permitted to remain within
such distances of such intersections unless the foliage line is maintained at
sufficient height to prevent obstruction of such lines.
   (H)   Minimum pavement design standards.
      (1)   Where streets are designed to serve residential subdivisions or
sites, the minimum pavement thickness shall be as follows:
 
   Type of Pavement        Street Designation
                              Collect   Local
Concrete uniform thickness 7"           6"
Flexible H.A.C. surface    1½”       1½”
H.A.C. base or binder      11½”      9½”
Total H.A.C. thickness     13"          11"
 
      (2)   Special requirements for non-residential subdivisions shall be as
follows: Where streets are designed to serve commercial subdivisions or sites,
or other developments requiring service by many heavy commercial vehicles, the
minimum thicknesses will be appropriate for the anticipated traffic.
(Ord. 174, § 407, passed 6-11-90; Am. Ord. 320, passed 5-17-04)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.048 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   General requirements. Minimum requirements for street construction
shall be in accordance with Standard Specification of the State Highway
Commission of Indiana, 1978 Edition, or subsequent superseding edition
hereafter referred to as the Standard Specification, unless otherwise required
by this chapter.
   (B)   Preparation of sub-grade for street pavements.
      (1)   After all earth work is substantially complete and all drains
installed, the sub-grade shall be brought to the lines and grades shown on the
plans or as may be otherwise approved in accordance with these standards. Such
portions shall be known as “Sub-grades.”
      (2)   Unless otherwise provided, the upper six inches of all sub-grade
shall be uniformly compacted to at least 95% standard density as determined by
the provisions of AASHO, T99, Compaction and Density of Soils. During sub-grade
preparation and after its completion, adequate drainage shall be provided at
all times to prevent water from standing on the sub-grade. Sub-grades shall be
so constructed that it will have as nearly as possible uniform density
throughout. After compaction and final grading, the sub-grade shall be finished
with a three-wheel roller weighing not less than ten tons. At areas not
accessible to the roller, the required compaction shall be obtained with
mechanical tamps or vibrators.
      (3)   All soft yielding or otherwise unsuitable material which will not
compact properly shall be removed. All rock encountered shall either be removed
or broken off to conform with the required cross section. Any holes or
depressions resulting from the removal of such unsuitable material shall be
filled with satisfactory material and compacted to conform with the surrounding
sub-grade surface. No placement of pavement shall be permitted on uninspected
or unapproved sub-grade and at no time when the sub-grade is frozen or muddy.
No hauling shall be done not equipment moved over the subgrade when its
condition is such that undue distortion results. If these conditions are
present the sub-grade shall be protected with adequate plank runways, mats or
other satisfactory means if hauling is done thereon. The sub-grade shall be
prepared sufficiently in advance to permit proper inspection so that the final
elevation may be checked with a scratch template and compaction checked. All
utility excavations under the pavement shall be back-filled with Grade “B”
borrow and construction shall conform to Section 211 of the Standard
Specifications or compacted thoroughly by other means. These locations shall be
shown on the construction drawings as submitted to the Plan Commission.
   (C)   Rigid (plain concrete) pavement construction.
      (1)   At the time of placement of the concrete, the sub-grade shall be
properly dampened just prior to the placement where it has become dry, where
the surface has been removed by final grading or for any other reason it has
not been properly dampened. Plain cement pavement shall be in accordance with
Section 501 of the Standard Specifications or any subsequent amendments
thereto.
      (2)   Materials shall comply with requirements of the Standard
Specifications. Minimum cement content shall be 6.0 bags per cubic yard of
concrete mixture. No cement reduction below the minimum shall be finished by
machine or vibratory screed except on widened portions, intersections or other
places where hard-finishing will be permitted.
      (3)   Weakened plane or dummy, transverse, contraction joints shall be
placed not to exceed 20 foot spacing. Closer spacing to average 15' will be
encouraged. Transverse contraction joints may either be formed or sawed dummy
grove, ribbon or pre-molded strip type, and shall be ¼ the pavement depth.
      (4)   When transverse joints are to be formed by sawing, care must be
taken to saw the grooves soon after placing the concrete to prevent the
formation of cracks due to contraction of the slab. All transverse joints shall
be sawed within eight hours after the placing of the concrete unless
authorization is given for sawing at a later time. One of the above named
joints shall be placed at every catch basin and manhole in line of pavement.
The location of manholes, etc., in the pavement shall determine the exact
location of the joints. All joints shall extend throughout curbs to fill width
of pavement.
      (5)   Transverse expansion joints shall be placed at tee intersections
and wherever else shown on the plans.
      (6)   Whenever the width between forms of the pavement under construction
is greater than 13½ feet each, this may be accomplished by sawing or by
constructing a slot or groove as herein described for dummy construction
joints, or by a deformed key plate installed prior to the depositing of the
concrete.
      (7)   Curing with white membrane curing compound AASHO Number type 2 - M
- 14B will be properly applied to give complete coverage.
   (D)   Flexible pavement construction.
      (1)   Pavement shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements
of Section 401 of the Standard Specifications. Pavement shall be full depth hot
asphaltic concrete unless otherwise approved by the Plan Commission on the
recommendation of a qualified engineer.
      (2)   Where the Commission allows collector streets or local streets to
be constructed with compacted aggregate base, the base shall be placed on the
prepared sub-grade, compacted, primed, and covered with binder before being
contaminated by construction traffic.
      (3)   Materials and construction procedures shall comply with the
requirements of Sections 303 and 403 of the Standard Specifications.
(Ord. 174, § 408, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.049 SHOULDERS, SIDE SLOPES AND DITCHES.
   (A)   All shoulders, side slopes and ditches shall be prepared in accordance
with Section 208 of the Standard Specifications or any subsequent amendments
thereto, and construction plans required to be submitted by the applicant.
   (B)   All shoulders, side slopes and ditches shall be protected from erosion
by either sodding or seeding as set forth in Section 621 of the Standard
Specifications, as shown on the erosion control plan, which plan shall be a
part of the required construction plans to be submitted by the applicant.
   (C)   Side slopes having a grade in excess of 2 to 1 shall be protected by
hand-laid riprap in accordance with Section 616.02 (c) of the Standard
Specifications, or any subsequent amendments thereto, as required construction
plans to be submitted by the applicant.
   (D)   Ditches having a grade of 3%, 4%, or 5% slope shall have a gutter
consisting of sod, or if in excess of 5% shall have a gutter consisting of
concrete or stone as shown on the construction plans to be submitted by the
applicant.
(Ord. 174, § 409, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.050 STREET SIGNS.
   The subdivider shall provide street signs to meet the following standards:
   (A)   At least one street sign shall be installed at each street
intersection within or on the perimeter of the proposed plat, to be located on
the N.E. corner thereof, whenever possible, and on the parkstrip, as
hereinafter referred to in this chapter, between the street and sidewalk at a
point approximately six inches from the sidewalk.
   (B)   Street signs shall be of aluminum, six inches by 24 inches, shall be
double faced with letters of scotchlite or the equivalent, four inches in
height, and shall be mounted upon a galvanized pipe post, ten feet in length
and two inches inside diameter and approximately 2½ inches outside diameter,
set in concrete to a depth of 2½ feet. All street signs shall have a minimum
height above finished grade of 7½ feet.
(Ord. 174, § 411, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.051 CULVERTS.
   (A)   Culverts shall be constructed and installed wherever necessary, to
provide adequate drainage, in accordance with the satisfactory construction
plans and specifications therefore submitted by the applicant.
   (B)   The location and size of driveway culverts shall be determined at the
time of the improvement location permit application. However, the minimum size
of such culverts shall be no less than that specified by the satisfactory
construction plans and specifications therefore submitted by the applicant.
(Ord. 174, § 412, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.052 DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   General requirements. The Commission shall not recommend for approval
any subdivision plat which does not make adequate provision for storm or flood
water runoff channels or basins. The storm water drainage system shall be
separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where
required, shall be designed by the rational method, or other methods as
approved by the Commission and a copy of all computations shall be submitted
along with the plans. All computations shall be based upon a ten year frequency
storm. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot
block.
   (B)   Nature of storm water facilities.
      (1)   Location. The applicant may be required by the Commission to carry
away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist, either
previously to, or as result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall
be located in the street right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual,
unobstructed easements of appropriate width.
      (2)   Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other
drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential
run-off from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the
subdivision. The applicant with subsequent approval of the Plan Commission
shall determine the necessary size of the facility based on the provisions of
the required constructions standards and specifications assuming conditions of
maximum potential watershed development permitted by the zoning ordinance.
      (3)   Effect on downstream drainage areas.  The Plan Commission shall
require the applicant to adequately determine the effect of each proposed
subdivision on existing drainage facilities outside the area of the
subdivision. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the
development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage
facility, the Commission may withhold secondary approval of the subdivision
until provision (such as a storage facility) has been made for the improvement
of said potential condition in such sum as the Commission shall determine. No
subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage from it will be provided
to an adequate drainage water course or facility.
      (4)   Areas of high seasonal water tables. In areas characterized by
soils having a high seasonal water table as determined by the Johnson County
Soil and Water Conservation District, lots shall be limited to slab type
construction unless the Commission determines that appropriate engineering
techniques will be applied to alleviate the subsurface problem.
      (5)   Floodway areas. If a subdivision of land is proposed within the
flood plain, floodway shall be preserved and not diminished in capacity by
filling or obstruction, except as approved by the Natural Resources Commission
in writing. No residential building site may be located within the floodway.
      (6)   Floodway fringe areas. Where a subdivision is proposed in an area
of the flood plain designated as a floodway fringe, the Commission may approve
such subdivision provided that: all lots for residential usage have a flood
protection grade three feet above the regulatory flood elevations; where
provided, water and sanitary sewer contamination of or by, flood water; and,
approval to fill the area from the Natural Resources Commission has been
obtained in writing. Lands below the regulatory flood elevation shall not be
used for computing the area requirement for any lot.
      (7)   Flood plain areas. Where a subdivision is proposed within an area
of the flood plain for which floodway and floodway fringe designations have not
been made, and Commission shall not approve such a subdivision unless all
streets are raised sufficiently to be above the regulatory flood elevation; all
lots for residential usage have a flood protection grade of three feet above
the regulatory flood elevation; where provided, public water and sanitary sewer
facilities are constructed to eliminate contamination of or by flood water;
and, filling to achieve the above will not raise the level of the regulatory
flood elevation more than 1/10 of one foot for that reach of the stream. All
filling in the flood plain must be approved in writing by the State Natural
Resources Commission. Lands below the regulatory flood elevation shall not be
used for computing the area requirement for any lot.
      (8)   Recording of plats in the flood plain and floodway fringe. All
final plats having within their boundaries areas whose elevation is below that
of the regulatory flood elevation shall show and label the regulatory flood
boundary and elevation, as of the date the final plat is drawn, on the final
plat for recording.
   (C)   Dedication of drainage easements.
      (1)   General requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
drainage course, drainage way, channel, or stream, a storm water easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such
watercourse, and of such width and construction or both as will be adequate for
the purpose shall be provided. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the
drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate
width for maximum potential volume of flow.
      (2)   Drainage easements.
         (a)   Where topography or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within street right-of-ways,
perpetual unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for such drainage
facilities shall be provided across property outside the right-of-way lines and
with satisfactory access to the street. Easements shall be indicated on the
plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the street to a natural
watercourse or to other drainage facilities.
         (b)   The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or
conservation easement land on both sides of existing watercourses of a width to
be determined by the Commission and the County Drainage Board in the case of
legal drains.
         (c)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private
land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and
indicated on the plat.
         (d) Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or
overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for
dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage
ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be included in
the computations for determining the number of lots allowable under average
density procedures nor for computing the area requirement for any individual
lot.
(Ord. 174, § 413, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.053 WATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Where a public water main is accessible (within 200 feet of any
boundary of the proposed subdivision) the subdivider shall install adequate
water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the specifications of the
state or town authorities. All water mains shall be at least six inches in
diameter.
      (2)   Water main extensions shall be approved by the Commission or its
officially designated representative.
      (3)   To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, water
supply improvements, and the boundary lanes of proposed subdivision, indicating
all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the preliminary plat,
and the cost of installing same shall be included in the performance bond to be
furnished by the subdivider.
      (4)   The design of all water facilities shall conform to or exceed the
standards described in the latest edition of Recommended Standards for Water
Works as published by Health Education Service, Inc., Albany, New York.
   (B)   Individual wells and central water systems.
      (1)   Where a public water system is not available, (within 200 feet of
any boundary of the proposed subdivision) at the discretion of the Commission,
individual wells may be used or a central water system provided in such a
manner that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to every lot
in the subdivision. Water sample test results shall be submitted to the Indiana
State Board of Health for its approval, and individual wells and central water
systems shall be approved by the appropriate state health authorities. Orders
of approval shall be submitted to the Commission.
      (2)   If the Commission requires that a connection to a public water main
be eventually provided as a condition for approval of an individual well or
central water system, the applicant shall make arrangements for future water
service at the time the plat receives secondary approval. Performance or cash
bond may be required to insure compliance.
      (3)   Fire hydrants should be provided at each street intersection and at
intermediate points between intersections as recommended by the State Insurance
Services Office and the Nineveh Township Fire Department. Generally, hydrant
spacing may range from 350 to 600 feet depending on the area being served.
(Ord. 174, § 414, passed 6-11-90; Am. Ord. 320, passed 5-17-04)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.054 SEWERAGE FACILITIES.
   If individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform
to the requirements of the zoning ordinance and any ordinance of the Johnson
County Health Department establishing lot areas for individual sewerage
disposal systems.
(Ord. 174, § 415, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.055 UTILITIES.
   All utility lines, including but not limited to gas, electric power,
telephone and CATV cables shall be located underground throughout the
subdivision. Wherever existing lines are located above ground, except on public
roads and right-of-ways, they shall be removed and placed underground. All
utility lines and other facilities existing and proposed throughout the
subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat or sketch plan in the case
of a minor subdivision. Underground service connections to the street property
line of each platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider's expense. At the
discretion of the Commission, the requirement for service connections to each
lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single
ownership intended to be developed for the same primary use.
(Ord. 174, § 416, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
§ 153.056 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES.
   Existing features which would add value to the type of intended development
or to the town as a whole, such as trees, as herein defined, watercourses and
falls, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in
the design of the subdivision. No tree shall be removed from any subdivision
nor any change of grade of the land affected until primary approval of the
preliminary plat has been granted. All trees in the plat which are required to
be retained shall be preserved, and all trees, where required, shall be welled
and protected against change of grade. The trees, as required by these
regulations and shall further indicate all those marked for retention, and the
location of all proposed shade trees required by these regulations.
(Ord. 174, § 417, passed 6-11-90)
Penalty, see § 153.999
   ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
§ 153.070 IMPROVEMENTS AND PERFORMANCE BOND.
   (A)   Completion of improvements. Before the plat is signed by the
designated officials all applicants shall be required to completed, in
accordance with the Commission's decision and to the satisfaction of the
Administrator, all the streets, sanitary, and other public improvements
including lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision as
required in this chapter, specified in the approved construction plans and on
the final subdivision plat, and as approved by the Commission and to dedicate
the public improvements to the town, free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances on the property and public improvements thus dedicated.
   (B)   Performance bond.
      (1)   The Commission at its discretion may waive the requirement that the
applicant complete all public improvements prior to the approval of the final
subdivision plat, and that in lieu thereof, the applicant shall post bond
securable to the town hereinafter referred to as performance bond, in an amount
equivalent to 110% of the estimated cost of completion of the required public
improvements, which shall be sufficient to secure to the town the satisfactory
construction and installation of the uncompleted portion of required public
improvements.
      (2)   In lieu of such a bond the subdivider may submit a certified check
made payable to the town in an amount equivalent to 110% of the estimated cost
of completion of the uncompleted portion of required public improvements. Any
such check shall be held by the Clerk-Treasurer.
      (3)   In lieu of such a bond the subdivider may submit irrevocable
letters of credit in behalf of the subdivider and securable by the town in an
amount equivalent to 110% of the estimated cost of completion of the
uncompleted portion of required public improvements. In the event an
irrevocable letter of credit is used it shall be written for a maximum length
of two years and the Commission, two months prior to the expiration of the
letter of credit, shall determine if the public improvements have been accepted
for maintenance by the town, and if they have not been accepted shall so notify
the subdivider of intent to secure the funds pledged by such letter of credit,
or at the discretion of the Commission, to grant an extension for such period
fixed by the Commission not to exceed one year, and the subdivider filing with
the Commission a new letter of credit for the period so fixed.
      (4)   In lieu of such a bond the subdivider may submit a certificate of
deposit made out to either the town and/or the subdivider, to be held by the
Clerk-Treasurer and in an amount equivalent to 110% of the cost of completion
of the uncompleted portion named singly or jointly on such certificate, then
the subdivider must endorse it before submitting it to the Commission so that
the town may secure the funds.
      (5)   Such performance bond shall comply with all statutory requirements
and shall be satisfactory to the Town's Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and
manner of execution as set forth in this chapter. The period within which
required public improvements must be completed shall be specified by the
Commission in the primary approval of the preliminary plat and shall be
incorporated into the bond and shall not in any event exceed two years from
date of secondary approval. Such bond shall be approved by the Commission as to
amount. The Commission may upon proof of difficulty, grant an extension of the
completion date set forth in such bond for a maximum period of one additional
year, provided that the bond submitted for this extension period meets all
other requirements herein. The Commission may at any time during the period of
such bond accept a substitution of principal or sureties on the bond.
   (C)   Temporary public improvements. The applicant shall build and pay for
all costs of temporary public improvements required by the Commission and shall
maintain same for the period specified by the Commission. Prior to construction
of any temporary public facility or improvement, the subdivider shall file with
the Commission a separate suitable bond for temporary facilities, which bond
shall insure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed,
maintained, and removed (except for turnaround intended for connection into
adjacent future subdivisions).
   (D)   Cost of public improvements. All required public improvements shall be
made by the applicant at his expense without reimbursement, unless sharing of
expenses is agreed upon by the town.
   (E)   Failure to complete public improvements. For subdivisions for which no
performance bond has been posted, if the public improvements are not completed
within the period specified by the Commission in the primary approval of the
preliminary plat, or the sketch plan in the case of a minor subdivision, the
approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where a performance
bond has been posted and the required public improvements have not been
installed within the terms of such performance bond, the town may declare the
bond to be in default and cause all public improvements to be the extent of the
building development at the time the bond is declared to be in default.
   (F)   Acceptance of dedication offers. The approval by the Commission of a
subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by
the town of any street, easement, or other improvement shown on said plat. The
Commission may require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this
effect. Public improvements shown on the plat, or otherwise, must be presented
to and accepted by the Council.
(Ord. 174, § 500, passed 6-11-90; Am. Ord. 320, passed 5-17-04)
§ 153.071 INSPECTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   General procedure. If the Administrator finds upon inspection per §
153.022(F)(2)(a) and § 153.023(G)(2)(a) that any of the improvements have not
been constructed in accordance with the approved construction plans, the
applicant shall be responsible for completing the public improvements according
to such plans. Where the cost of the public improvements is covered by a
performance bond, the applicant and the bonding company shall be severally and
jointly liable for completing the public improvements according to
specifications.
   (B)   Release or reduction of performance bond.
      (1)   Certificate of satisfactory completion. The town shall not accept
required public improvements, nor the Commission release nor reduce a
performance bond, until the town has submitted a certificate stating that all
required public improvements or a pro rate parti in the case of a reduction
have been satisfactorily completed. The applicant engineer or surveyor shall
provide the town with detailed “as built” construction plans of the public
improvements, indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other information
required by the Commission. Upon such certification, the town shall thereafter
accept the public improvements for maintenance in accordance with the
established procedures.
      (2)   Reduction of performance bond. A performance bond shall be reduced
upon actual acceptance of public improvements and then only by the amount
originally estimated for the completion of the public improvements.
(Ord. 174, § 501, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.072 MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The applicant shall be required to maintain all public improvements on
the individual sub-divided lots and provide for snow removal on streets and
sidewalks (where required) until acceptance of the public improvements by the
town.
   (B)   The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance bond with the
Commission, prior to acceptance, in an amount not to exceed 25% of the cost of
all public improvements, and in a form satisfactory to the town's attorney, in
order to assure the satisfactory condition of the required public improvements,
for a period of three years after the date of their acceptance by the town.
(Ord. 174, § 502, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.073 WAIVER OF REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   The Commission may defer or waive at the time of primary approval, subject
to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all such public improvements
as in its judgement, are not requisite in the interest of the public health,
safety, and general welfare, or which are inappropriate because of inadequacy
or lack of connecting facilities.
(Ord. 174, § 503, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.074 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permit shall be issued for the last 10% of lots in a final
subdivision plat or section thereof, or if 10% is less than two, for the last
two lots of a subdivision or section thereof, until all public improvements
required by the Commission for the plat have been fully completed and accepted
for maintenance by the town.
(Ord. 174, § 504, passed 6-11-90)
   SPECIFICATIONS FOR DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED
§ 153.090 SKETCH PLAN.
   Sketch plans submitted to the Commission, prepared in pen or pencil shall be
drawn to a convenient scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch and shall show
the following information.
   (A)   Name.
      (1)   Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision.
      (2)   Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The
proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any subdivision plat previously
recorded.
      (3)   Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen. (This is
commonly the name by which the property is locally known.)
   (B)   Ownership.
      (1)   Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner or
agent of property, and citation of last instrument conveying title to each
parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantor,
grantee, date, and land records reference.
      (2)   Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting
the property.
      (3)   Existing covenants on the property, if any.
      (4)   Name and address, including telephone number, of the professional
persons responsible for the subdivision design, for the design of the public
improvements, and surveys.
   (C)   Description. Location of property, name of local jurisdiction, lot,
section, township, range, county, graphic scale, north arrow, and date.
   (D)   Features.
      (1)   Location of property lines, existing easements, burial grounds,
rail road rights-of-way, watercourses, and existing wooded areas or trees eight
inches or more in diameter, measured four feet above ground level; location,
width, and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within
or immediately adjacent to the tract, names of adjoining property owners (from
the latest assessment rolls) within 300 feet of any perimeter boundary of the
subdivision.
      (2)   Location, sizes, elevations, and slopes of existing sewers, water
mains, culverts, and other underground structures within the tract and
immediately adjacent thereto; existing permanent buildings and utility poles on
or immediately adjacent thereto; existing permanent buildings and utility poles
on or immediately adjacent to the site and utility rights-of-way.
      (3)   Approximate topography, at the same scale as the sketch plan.
(Normally showing two foot contour intervals but the Administrator may require
one foot intervals on very flat land or permit five foot intervals on very
steep slopes.)
      (4)   The approximate location and widths of proposed streets.
      (5)   Preliminary proposals for connection with existing water supply and
sanitary sewage systems, or alternative means of providing water supply and
sanitary waste treatment and disposal; preliminary provisions for collecting
and discharging surface water drainage.
      (6)   The approximate location, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or
existing lots.
      (7)   The approximate location, dimensions, and areas of all parcels of
land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public use,
or for the use of property owners in the proposed subdivision.
      (8)   The location of temporary stakes to enable the Commission to find
and appraise features of the sketch plan in the field.
      (9)   Whenever the sketch plan covers only a part of an applicant's
contiguous holdings, the applicant shall submit, at the scale of no more than
200 feet to the inch, a sketch in pen or pencil of the proposed subdivision
area, together with its proposed street system, and an indication of the
probable future street and drainage system of the remaining portion of the
tract.
      (10)   A vicinity map showing streets and other general development of
the surrounding area. The sketch plan shall show all school and improvement
district lines with the zones properly designated.
(Ord. 174, § 600, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.091 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)    General. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed land
surveyor at a convenient scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch. The plat
may be prepared in pen or pencil and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence
if more than one sheet is used. It shall be of such size as is acceptable for
filing in the office of the County Recorder, but shall not be larger than 24 x
36 inches. (It should be noted that the map prepared for the preliminary plat
may also be used for the final subdivision plat, and, therefore, should be
drawn on tracing cloth or reproducible mylar; preparation in pencil will make
required changes and additions easier.)
   (B)   Features. The preliminary plat shall show the following:
      (1)   The location of the property with respect to surrounding property
and streets, the names of all adjoining property owners of record, or the names
of adjoining developments, and the names of adjoining streets.
      (2)   The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property
to be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot.
      (3)   The location of existing streets, easements, water bodies, streams,
and other pertinent features such as swamps, flood plains, railroads,
buildings, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, and bridges.
      (4)   The location and width of all existing and proposed streets,
alleys, and other public ways, and their rights-of-way, and of easements and
building set-back lines.
      (5)   The locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing
lots.
      (6)   The location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set
aside for park or playground use of other public or private reservation, with
designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication
or reservation.
      (7)   The name and address of the owners of land to be subdivided; the
name and address of the subdivider if other than the owner, and the name of the
land surveyor.
      (8)   The date of the map, approximate true north point, scale, and title
of the subdivision.
      (9)   Sufficient data acceptable to the Administrator to determine
readily the location, bearing; and length of all lines, and to reproduce such
lines upon the ground; also the location of all proposed monuments.
      (10)   Names of the subdivision and all new streets to be approved by the
Commission.
      (11)   Indication of the use of any lot (single-family, two-family,
multi-family, townhouse) and all uses other than residential proposed by the
subdivider.
      (12)   Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical
order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name
shall be numbered or lettered consecutively throughout the several additions.
      (13)   All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered. Outlets
shall be lettered in alphabetical order. If blocks are numbered or lettered,
outlets shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each block.
      (14)   All information required on the sketch plan should also be shown
on the preliminary plat, and the following notation shall also be shown.
         (a)   Explanation of drainage easements, if any.
         (b)   Explanation of site easements, if any.
         (c)   Explanation of site reservations, if any.
         (d)   Endorsements of owner, as follows:
            Owner          Date         
(Ord. 174, § 601, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.092 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   General construction plans shall be prepared for all required improvements.
Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than one inch equals 50 feet, and
map sheets shall be of the same size as the preliminary plat. The following
shall be shown:
   (A)   Profiles showing existing and proposed elevation along center lines of
all streets. Where a proposed street intersects an existing street or streets,
the elevation along the center line of the existing street or streets within
100 feet of the intersection, shall be shown. Approximate radii of all curves,
lengths of tangents, and central angles on all streets.
   (B)   The Commission may require, where steep slopes exist, that cross-
sections of all proposed streets at 100-foot stations shall be shown at a
minimum of five points as follows: on a line at right angles to the center line
of the street, and the elevation points shall be at the center line of the
street, each property line, and points 25 feet inside each property line.
   (C)   Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross-section of
street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements,
servitude, rights-of-way, manholes, and catch basins; the locations of street
trees, street lighting standards, and street signs; the location, size, and
invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, storm water drain,
and fire hydrants, showing connection to any existing or proposed utility
system; and exact location and size of all water, gas, or other underground
utilities or structures.
   (D)   Location, size, elevation, and other appropriate description of any
existing facilities or utilities, including, but not limited to, existing
streets, sewers, drains, water mains, easement, water bodies, streams, flood
plains, and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings,
features noted on the official map or comprehensive plan, at the point of
connection to proposed facilities and utilities within the subdivision, and
each tree with a diameter of eight inches or more, measured four feet above
ground level. The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of
the survey, and the approximate high-low water elevations shall be referred to
the U.S.G.S. datum plane. If the subdivision borders a lake, river, or stream,
the distances and bearings of a meander line established not less than 20 feet
back from the ordinary high-water mark of such waterways.
   (E)   Topography at the same scale as the sketch plan with a contour
interval of two feet, referred to sea-level datum. All datum provided shall be
latest applicable U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey datum and should be so noted
on the plat.
   (F)   All specifications and references required by the town's construction
standards and specifications, including a site-grading plan for the entire
subdivision.
   (G)   Notation of approval as follows:
      Owner                   Date         
      Plan Commission Chairman          Date         
   (H)   Title, name, address, and signature of the professional engineer and/
or surveyor, and date, including revision dates.
(Ord. 174, § 602, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.093 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT.
   (A)   General. The final subdivision plat shall be presented in India ink on
tracing cloth or reproducible mylar at an appropriate scale and contain the
same information, except for any changes or additions required by the
conditions of primary approval. The preliminary plat may be used as the final
subdivision plat if it meets these requirements and is revised in accordance
with the Commission's approval. All revision dates must be shown as well as the
following:
      (1)   Notation of any self-imposed restrictions, and locations of any
building lines proposed to be established in this manner, if required by the
Commission in accordance with these regulations.
      (2)   All monuments erected, corners, and other points to be made shall
be noted at the representation thereof or by legend. Metal monuments shall
indicate the kind of metal, the diameter, length, and weight per lineal foot of
the monuments.
   (B)   Preparation. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a land
surveyor licensed by the state.
(Ord. 174, § 603, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.094 EXEMPT DIVISIONS.
   The information that must be provided in order for the decision to be made
that a division is an exempt division varies as follows according to the
definition for each type of exempt division listed under Subdivision in
§ 153.010 of this chapter. Thus:
   (A)   For the divisions defined in (2)(a) a metes and bounds legal
description of the exempt division and the land from which it is being divided
must be provided.
   (B)   For divisions defined in (2)(b) the old legal and new legal
descriptions must be provided.
   (C)   For divisions defined in (2)(c) a copy of the court decree showing by
legal description how the land is to be divided must be provided.
   (D)   For divisions defined in (2)(d) a legal description and plot plan
showing the parcel and the location of the street right-of-way or easement must
be provided.
   (E)   For divisions defined in (2)(e) a legal description and plot plan
showing the tract to be divided and the tracts to be added must be provided.
   (F)   For divisions defined in (2)(f) a plat of the cemetery showing the
layout of the private drives, parking areas, and size of burial lots must be
provided.
(Ord. 174, § 604, passed 6-11-90)
   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.105 ENFORCEMENT; RESTRAINING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Administrator to enforce these regulations
and to bring any violations or lack of compliance to the attention of the
Commission.
   (B)   No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a
proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such a parcel before a plat of
such subdivision has been approved by the Commission, in accordance with the
provisions of these regulations, and filed with the County Recorder.
   (C)   The division of any lot or any parcel of land into subdivision, as
defined in this chapter, by the use of metes and bounds description for the
purpose of sale, or transfer, or lease resulting in the creation of one or more
new building sites shall not be permitted. All such described divisions shall
be subject to all of the appropriate requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   No improvement location permit (building permit) required under the
Uniform Building Code, the zoning ordinance or this chapter shall be issued on
any property subject to this chapter until the provisions of this chapter have
been set.
(Ord. 174, § 109, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.106 RESTRAINING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Any land within the Commission's jurisdiction subdivided in violation
of the terms of this chapter after the effective date hereof, is hereby
declared to be a common nuisance, which may be restrained, enjoined or abated
in any appropriate action or proceeding.
   (B)   The Commission may institute an injunction suit requesting an
individual or governmental unit be directed to remove a structure erected in
violation of this chapter, or to make the same comply with its terms. If the
Commission is successful in its suit, the respondent shall bear the cost of the
action.
   (C)   The Commission may institute a suit for mandatory injunction
requesting an individual or governmental unit be directed, where such
individual or governmental unit has violated any provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 174, § 109, passed 6-11-90)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,500. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ACCEPTANCES AND DEDICATIONS
      
II.   AGREEMENTS
      
III.   ANNEXATIONS
      
IV.   FRANCHISES
      
V.   VACATIONS
      
VI.   BUDGET
      
VII.   SALARIES
      
VIII.   FINANCES
      
IX.   BONDS
TABLE I: ACCEPTANCES AND DEDICATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Accepting and approving the dedication to the town for
                     passage, drainage, and utilities, certain lands and
218      6-26-95     roadways as public roads, as set forth in an instrument
                     entitled Dedication of Rights-of-Way for Public Roads in
                     Prince's Lakes, Indiana and Vicinity of the Brown County
                     Lake Development Corporation
 
TABLE II: AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
162      7-11-88     Pursuant to I.C. 36-8-11-4(b), consenting to be included
                     as a part of the Nineveh Township Fire Protection District
 
TABLE III: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Annexation of Tract RY-30 owned by Brown County Lake
                     Development Corporation, being a part of the Northwest
200      4-11-94     Quarter of Section 32, Township 11 North, Range 4 East of
                     the Second Principal Meridian, Nineveh Township,
                     containing 1.396 acres
207      7-25-94     Annexation of Lot KV-2, owned by James Stillabower
                     Annexation of Lot ST 2A, on Stopek Road, owned by James D.
212      11-28-94    and Donna Stillabower, being part of the southwest quarter
                     of the southwest quarter of Section 29, Township 11 North,
                     Range 4 East, containing 11.78 acres
                     Annexation of certain real estate owned by Elmer and Sue
215      4-24-95     Perkins, being approximately 6.02 acres at the west end of
                     Lakeview Drive
217      7-10-95     Annexation of certain real estate owned by the Water and
                     Sewer Utility, consisting of approximately six acres
225      3-25-96     Annexation of certain real estate owned by Russell A.
                     Johnson, containing approximately 25 acres
                     Annexation of certain real estate owned by Russell A.
226      3-25-96     Johnson, containing approximately 5 acres, commonly known
                     as 2 Westportion St.
227      3-25-96     Annexation of certain real estate owned by John Catt,
                     containing approximately 16 acres
228      3-25-96     Annexation of certain real estate owned by John Catt,
                     containing approximately 3 acres
255      4-27-98     Annexation of 3 tracts of territory containing
                     approximately 35 acres owned by Hippocampus Dev. Inc. LLC
                     Annexation of approximately 18 acres of land located at
260      10-26-98    the north end of Dyson Drive and commonly known as the
                     Garnet and Freida Gaines property
 
TABLE IV: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Granting a franchise to Blue River Cablevision, Inc. or
                     its assigns for the purpose of transmitting television and
144      10-24-84    other electronic signals to homes and businesses in the
                     town for a term of 15 years with an additional 15-year
                     option
 
TABLE V: VACATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
186      2-10-92     Vacating a part of Bergman Drive
 
TABLE VI: BUDGET
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
251      1-12-98     1998 Budget Ordinance
251A     4-13-98     1998 Budget Ordinance
257      7-13-98     1998 Budget Ordinance
263      12-14-98    1999 Budget Ordinance
 
TABLE VII: SALARIES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
233      12-9-96     1997 Salary Ordinance
250      12-9-97     1998 Salary Ordinance
261      11-23-98    1999 Salary Ordinance
274      7-12-99     1999 Salary Ordinance
277      - -99       2000 Salary Ordinance
277      11-9-99     2000 Salary Ordinance
280      5-8-00      2000 Salary Ordinance
296      12-4-00     2001 Salary Ordinance
296-A    1-16-01     2001 Salary Ordinance
308      10-12-01    2002 Salary Ordinance
 
TABLE VIII: FINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Approving the sum of $10,000 from the Water and Sewer
209      10-24-94    Utilities in payment in lieu of property taxes to be
                     divided between the Water and Sewer Utility
242      2-24-97     Acquiring, constructing or rehabilitating the sewage works
                     system in an amount not to exceed $7,000,000
242      5-26-98     Acquiring, constructing or rehabilitating the sewage works
                     system in an amount not to exceed $7,470,000
 
TABLE IX: BONDS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
196  11-11- Refunding of the waterworks revenue bonds of 1987 and authorizing the
     93     issuance of waterworks refunding revenue bonds of 1993
            Issuing revenue bonds to provide the cost thereof, the collection,
     5-11-  segregation, and distribution of the revenues of the sewage works, the
253  98     safeguarding of the interests of the owners of the revenue bonds, other
            matters connected therewith, including the issuance of notes in anticipation
            of bonds
298  12-30- Authorizing the remortization of the sewage works revenue bonds of 1998
     00
            Concerning the construction of certain additions, extensions, and
            improvements to the sewage works of the town; the issuance of revenue bonds
     10-19- to provide the cost thereof; the collection, segregation, and distribution of
342  09     the revenues of he works; the safeguarding of the interests of the owners of
            the revenue bonds; and other matters connected therewith, including issuing
            notes in anticipation of bonds and repealing ordinances inconsistent
            therewith
            Concerning the refunding by the town of Prince's Lakes of its Sewage Works
            Revenue Bonds of 1998, Series A; authorizing the issuance of sewage works
     8-20-  refunding revenue bonds for such purpose; providing for the collection,
359  12     segregation, and distribution of the revenues of the sewage works, and the
            safeguarding of the interests of the owners of the sewage works refunding
            revenue bonds authorized herein; other matters connected therewith; and
            repealing ordinances inconsistent therewith
            Authorizing the acquisition, construction, installation and equipping by the
            town of certain improvements and extensions to the town’s sewage works, the
     10-22- issuance and sale of revenue bonds to provide funds for the payment of the
409  18     costs thereof, the issuance and sale of bond anticipation notes in
            anticipation of the issuance and sale of such bonds, and the collection,
            segregation and distribution of the revenues of such sewage works and other
            related matters
            Authorizing the acquisition, construction and installation by the town of
            certain extensions and improvements to the town’s waterworks utility, the
419  1-7-20 issuance and sale of revenue bonds to provide funds for the payment of the
            costs thereof, and the collection, segregation and distribution of the
            revenues of such waterworks and other related matters
           
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Section Code Section
I.C. Section              Code Section
1-1-1-5                   10.04
1-1-1-7                   10.12
1-1-1-8                   10.06
1-1-4-5                   10.05
1-1-5-1                   10.11
1-1-6-1                   10.08
1-1-7-1                   50.59,
                          92.03
3-8-5-2                   30.03
3-10-7-4                  30.03
4-21.5-3-7                150.18
                          32.19,
5-3-1                     153.022,
                          153.023
5-11-1-27                 32.31
5-11-1-27(1)              32.31
5-13                      32.06
5-13-4-2                  32.31
5-14-1.5                  30.17
5-14-1.5-5                30.17
5-22                      32.15
5-22-10                   32.18
6-1.1-17                  32.06
6-1.1-41                  32.09
6-2.5-5-26                110.02
6-3.5-1.1-21.1 (repealed) 32.06
6-3.5-6-17.3 (repealed)   32.06
6-3.5-7-17.3 (repealed)   32.06
6-7-1-30.1                32.01
6-7-1-31.1                32.01
8-1.5-2                   51.01
8-1.5-3-8                 51.01
8-1.5-3-9.1               50.05
8-14-1-5                  32.11
Ch. 9-13-2                92.17
9-13-2-1                  92.17
9-13-2-164                70.02
9-13-2-180                70.02
Ch. 9-22-1                92.17
10-5-12-1                 110.03
10-5-13-1                 110.03
11-10-6                   32.16
12-12-3-1                 32.16
14-28-1                   151.34,
                          152.008
14-28-1-26                151.34
16-19-3-4                 150.50
22-9.5-1 et seq.          96.01
22-9.5-2-2                96.02
22-9.5-2-3                96.02
22-9.5-2-4                96.02
22-9.5-2-6                96.02
22-9.5-2-8                96.02
22-9.5-2-9                96.02
22-9.5-2-11               96.02
22-9.5-2-13               96.02
22-9.5-3                  96.03
22-9.5-3 et seq.          96.10
22-9.5-4-8                96.11
22-9.5-5                  96.02
22-9.5-5-1                96.03
22-9.5-6                  96.11
22-12                     150.18
22-12-1-4                 150.03
22-12-1-7                 150.03
22-12-1-14                150.03
22-12-1-16                150.03
22-12-1-17                150.03
22-12-1-18                150.03
22-12-1-22(b)(12)         150.20
22-12-1-26                150.03
22-12-7                   150.05
22-12-14-4                150.03
22-13                     150.18
22-13-2-3(b)              150.05,
                          150.19
22-13-2-6                 150.04
22-13-2-7(b)              150.19
22-13-2-7                 150.18
22-13-2-9                 150.04
22-13-2-11                150.05
22-14                     150.18
22-15                     150.18
22-15-3                   150.08
22-15-3-1                 152.138
Ch. 22-15-4               150.04
22-15-4                   150.04
25-4-1                    152.081
25-6.1                    110.02
25-25-2-1 et seq.         110.03
25-31-1                   152.081
27-4-5-2                  31.15
32-25-2-9                 150.03
33-36-2-1                 34.01,
                          34.02
33-37                     34.06
33-37-4                   34.06
33-37-7-5                 34.06
33-37-7-6                 34.06
Ch. 34-28-5               Ch. 71, Sch. V
35-43-4-2                 32.31
35-44-2-4 (repealed)      33.02
35-46-3                   91.13
36-1-3-4                  153.004
36-1-3-8(a)(10)           10.99
36-1-5-4                  150.19,
                          150.20
36-1-6-2                  92.16,
                          92.99
36-1-6-4                  91.12,
                          150.16
36-1-6-9                  150.18
36-1-8-5                  32.06
36-1-20.2                 33.04
36-1-21                   33.05
36-5-2-4.2                30.18
36-5-2-9.2                30.18
36-5-2-10                 10.18
36-7 et seq.              30.18
36-7-4                    151.01,
                          152.120
                          152.002,
36-7-4 et seq.            152.004,
                          152.008,
                          153.010
36-7-4-200                153.010
36-7-4-604                152.120
36-7-4-700                153.004,
                          153.010
36-7-4-708(d) (repealed)  153.023
36-7-4-1012               92.16,
                          92.17
36-7-8-9                  150.18
36-7-9-1 - 36-7-9-28      150.30
36-7-9-2                  150.31
36-7-9-4                  150.32,
                          150.33
36-7-9-7                  150.32
36-7-9-14                 150.36
36-7-9-14(c)              150.36
36-7-10.1-3               92.03
36-8-3-20                 31.02
36-8-17                   150.12
36-9-15.5                 32.09
36-9-15.5-6(b)            32.09
36-9-23                   50.59
36-9-23-16                50.58
39-9-23-21                50.58
36-9-23-30(d)             50.75
36-9-23-31                50.58
36-9-23-32                50.58
36-10-3                   93.01
36-10-3-4.1               93.01
36-10-3-10                93.01
36-10-3-11                93.01
                          
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
2012-1   4-12-12     33.01
2012-2   5-21-12     33.04
2012-3   5-21-12     33.05
2012-4   6-18-12     33.01
2012-5   10-15-12    33.01
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.                 Date Passed Code Section
1                        4-10-57     150.37
3                        6-12-57     130.06
37                       6-23-65     32.01
                                     30.35 -
59                       2-25-70     30.37,
                                     130.01 -
                                     130.05
98                       3-9-77      94.15 -
                                     94.19
111                      2-27-80     31.01
                                     70.01,
                                     70.03,
113                      6-18-01     70.99; Ch. 71,
                                     Schs. I -
                                     V
                                     70.03,
113                      8-20-01     70.99; Ch. 71,
                                     Schs. I -
                                     V
141                      8-8-84      94.01
144                      10-24-84    T.S.O. IV
152                      12-11-85    70.02,
                                     70.99
                                     150.01,
161                      9-11-89     150.02,
                                     150.05,
                                     150.99
162                      7-11-88     T.S.O. II
170                      12-27-89    32.04
172, § 1-100            4-5-90      152.001
172, § 1-200            4-5-90      152.002
172, § 1-300            4-5-90      152.003
172, § 1-400            4-5-90      152.004
172, § 1-500            4-5-90      152.005
172, § 1-600            4-5-90      152.006
172, § 1-700            4-5-90      152.007
172, § 2-100            4-5-90      152.008
172, § 2-200            4-5-90      152.008
172, §§ 3-100 - 3-104  4-5-90      152.135
172, §§ 3-200 - 3-205  4-5-90      152.136
172, §§ 3-400 - 3-403  4-5-90      152.138
172, § 3-406            4-5-90      152.138
172, § 3-500            4-5-90      152.141
172, § 3-300            4-5-90      152.137
172, § 3-301            4-5-90      152.137
172, § 3-404            4-5-90      152.139
172, § 3-405            4-5-90      152.139
172, § 3-600            4-5-90      152.139
172, § 3-700            4-5-90      152.140
172, §§ 4-100 - 4-107  4-5-90      152.120
172, § 4-200            4-5-90      152.121
172, §§ 4-300 - 4-309  4-5-90      152.122
172, §§ 4-400 - 4-407  4-5-90      152.123
172, §§ 4-500 - 4-503  4-5-90      152.124
172, §§ 5-100 - 5-103  4-5-90      152.020
172, §§ 5-201 - 5-205  4-5-90      152.021
172, § 5-300            4-5-90      152.022
172, § 6-100            4-5-90      152.035
172, §§ 6-200 - 6-203  4-5-90      152.036
172, §§ 6-300 - 6-302  4-5-90      152.037
172, §§ 6-400 - 6-402  4-5-90      152.038
172, §§ 7-100 - 7-107  4-5-90      152.050
172, §§ 7-200 - 7-202  4-5-90      152.051
172, § 7-300            4-5-90      152.052
172, § 7-400            4-5-90      152.053
172, § 7-500            4-5-90      152.054
172, §§ 7-600 - 7-602  4-5-90      152.055
172, §§ 7-700 - 7-702  4-5-90      152.056
172, § 7-800            4-5-90      152.057
172, §§ 7-900 - 7-905  4-5-90      152.058
172, § 7-1000           4-5-90      152.059
172, §§ 7-1100 - 7-11034-5-90      152.060
172, §§ 7-1200 - 7-12034-5-90      152.061
172, §§ 7-1300 - 17-1304-5-90      152.062
172, §§ 7-1400 - 7-14034-5-90      152.063
172, §§ 7-1500 - 7-15034-5-90      152.064
172, § 7-1600           4-5-90      152.065
172, § 7-1700           4-5-90      152.066
172, § 7-1800           4-5-90      152.067
172, § 7-1900           4-5-90      152.068
172, § 8-100            4-5-90      152.080
172, § 8-200            4-5-90      152.081
172, § 8-300            4-5-90      152.082
172, § 8-400            4-5-90      152.083
172, § 8-500            4-5-90      152.084
172, § 8-600            4-5-90      152.085
172, § 8-800            4-5-90      152.087
172, § 8-900            4-5-90      152.086,
                                     152.088
172, § 8-1000           4-5-90      152.089
172, § 9-100            4-5-90      152.100
172, § 9-200            4-5-90      152.101
172, § 9-300            4-5-90      152.102
172, § 9-400            4-5-90      152.103
172, § 9-500            4-5-90      152.104
172, § 9-600            4-5-90      152.105
172, § 9-700            4-5-90      152.106
172, § 9-800            4-5-90      152.107
174, § 100              6-11-90     153.001
174, § 101              6-11-90     153.002
174, § 102              6-11-90     153.003
174, § 103              6-11-90     153.004
174, § 104              6-11-90     153.005
174, § 105              6-11-90     153.006
174, § 106              6-11-90     153.007
174, § 107              6-11-90     153.008
174, § 108              6-11-90     153.009
174, § 109              6-11-90     153.105
174, § 109              6-11-90     153.106
174, Art. II             6-11-90     153.010
174, § 300              6-11-90     153.020
174, § 301              6-11-90     153.021
174, § 302              6-11-90     153.022
174, § 303              6-11-90     153.023
174, § 304              6-11-90     153.024
174, § 400              6-11-90     153.040
174, § 401              6-11-90     153.041
174, § 402              6-11-90     153.042
174, § 403              6-11-90     153.043
174, § 404              6-11-90     153.044
174, § 405              6-11-90     153.045
174, § 406              6-11-90     153.046
174, § 407              6-11-90     153.047
174, § 408              6-11-90     153.048
174, § 409              6-11-90     153.049
174, § 411              6-11-90     153.050
174, § 412              6-11-90     153.051
174, § 413              6-11-90     153.052
174, § 414              6-11-90     153.053
174, § 415              6-11-90     153.054
174, § 416              6-11-90     153.055
174, § 417              6-11-90     153.056
174, § 500              6-11-90     153.070
174, § 501              6-11-90     153.071
174, § 502              6-11-90     153.072
174, § 503              6-11-90     153.073
174, § 504              6-11-90     153.074
174, § 600              6-11-90     153.090
174, § 601              6-11-90     153.091
174, § 602              6-11-90     153.092
174, § 603              6-11-90     153.093
174, § 604              6-11-90     153.094
186                      2-10-92     T.S.O. V
                                     152.036 -
                                     152.038,
                                     152.050,
                                     152.051,
188                      2-10-92     152.059,
                                     152.061,
                                     152.063,
                                     152.135,
                                     152.138
191                      5-24-93     30.15 -
                                     30.21
191                      1-16-01     30.15 -
                                     30.21
196                      11-11-93    T.S.O. IX
200                      4-11-94     T.S.O. III
201                      4-25-94     30.21
207                      7-25-94     T.S.O. III
209                      10-24-94    T.S.O. VIII
210                      11-14-94    51.02
212                      11-28-94    T.S.O. III
215                      4-24-95     T.S.O. III
                                     152.050,
216                      5-8-95      152.122,
                                     152.135,
                                     152.138
217                      7-10-95     T.S.O. III
218                      6-26-95     T.S.O. I
223                      2-26-95     34.01,
                                     34.02
225                      3-25-96     T.S.O. III
226                      3-25-96     T.S.O. III
227                      3-25-96     T.S.O. III
228                      3-25-96     T.S.O. III
229                      3-25-96     94.18
231                      3-11-96     30.17
233                      12-9-96     T.S.O. VII
234                      12-9-96     32.05
236                      6-23-97     94.30 -
                                     94.37
237                      7-14-97     93.03
239                      7-14-97     30.17
239-A                    5-11-98     32.05
240                      7-14-97     93.02
241                      9-3-97      51.01
242                      2-24-97     T.S.O. VIII
242                      5-26-98     T.S.O. VIII
244                      10-27-97    31.15
                                     50.01 -
                                     50.04,
                                     50.15 -
                                     50.23,
248                      10-28-98    50.35 -
                                     50.43,
                                     50.75 -
                                     50.77,
                                     50.99
249                      5-11-98     50.55 -
                                     50.62
250                      12-9-97     T.S.O. VII
251                      1-12-98     T.S.O. VI
251A                     4-13-98     T.S.O. VI
252                      3-5-01      32.02
253                      5-11-98     T.S.O. IX
255                      4-27-98     T.S.O. III
256                      6-22-98     32.15 -
                                     32.19
257                      7-13-98     T.S.O. VI
258                      6-22-98     30.18
260                      10-26-98    T.S.O. III
261                      11-23-98    T.S.O. VII
262                      12-14-98    30.01
263                      12-14-98    T.S.O. VI
264                      12-28-98    33.02
265                      12-28-98    30.02
                                     152.061,
267                      6-28-99     152.120,
                                     152.135
269                      6-28-99     92.99
272                      7-12-99     32.03
273                      7-26-99     31.01
274                      7-12-99     T.S.O. VII
                                     50.02,
275                      2-15-00     50.03,
                                     50.18
276                      11-8-99     150.30 -
                                     150.37
277                      11-9-99     T.S.O. VII
278                      3-13-00     50.02
280                      5-8-00      T.S.O. VII
281                      5-8-00      50.02
283                      5-22-00     50.18
284                      6-26-00     50.75
                                     50.56,
286                      11-13-00    50.58,
                                     50.59,
                                     50.61
                                     50.15,
                                     50.17,
287                      11-13-00    50.18,
                                     50.56,
                                     50.58
289                      8-28-00     91.99
290                      8-28-00     50.99
                                     152.020,
291                      6-18-01     152.035 -
                                     152.037
296                      12-4-00     T.S.O. VII
296-A                    1-16-01     T.S.O. VII
297                      12-4-00     32.04
298                      12-30-00    T.S.O. IX
299                      3-5-01      50.56,
                                     50.58
301                      2-20-01     50.18
302                      5-21-01     33.01
303                      6-18-01     92.99
308                      10-12-01    T.S.O. VII
309                      8-19-02     33.01
311                      2-18-02     152.069,
                                     152.120
316                      7-21-03     95.01 -
                                     95.05
318                      11-17-03    Adopting Ordinance
                                     150.11,
                                     152.036,
                                     152.060,
                                     152.105,
                                     152.138,
320                      5-17-04     152.139,
                                     152.141,
                                     152.999,
                                     153.023,
                                     153.047,
                                     153.053,
                                     153.070
322                      9-20-04     150.05,
                                     150.33
325                      12-20-04    32.06
332                      7-16-07     32.07
333                      7-16-07     32.08
                                     151.01-
                                     151.13,
                                     151.20 -
                                     151.22,
334                      7-16-07     151.30-
                                     151.36,
                                     151.40 -
                                     151.46,
                                     151.99
338                      8-18-08     33.06
339                      7-21-08     32.09
341                      9-21-09     50.05
342                      10-19-09    T.S.O. IX
345                      4-19-10     50.59,
                                     50.61
352                      3-19-12     33.07
353                      3-19-12     32.20
355                      7-16-12     50.58,
                                     50.59
                                     51.01,
356                      7-16-12     51.03 -
                                     51.08
                                     70.15 -
357                      8-20-12     70.24,
                                     70.99
358                      8-20-12     34.01 -
                                     34.07
359                      8-20-12     T.S.O. IX
360                      11-19-12    50.61
363                      11-19-12    152.050
366                      1-22-13     33.03
                                     96.01 -
367                      1-22-13     96.08,
                                     96.10 -
                                     96.12
368                      4-15-13     30.17
372                      12-16-13    95.01,
                                     95.05
377                      3-16-15     51.09
378                      9-21-15     70.02
382                      3-21-16     32.09
383                      5-16-16     32.10
384                      6-20-16     51.10
385                      7-18-16     32.30
386                      7-18-16     32.31
                                     51.01,
389                      3-20-17     51.03,
                                     51.04
390                      3-20-17     50.58
                                     151.01 -
                                     151.13,
                                     151.20 -
                                     151.22,
393                      3-20-17     151.30 -
                                     151.37,
                                     151.40 -
                                     151.46,
                                     151.99
                                     92.15 -
394                      5-15-17     92.21,
                                     92.99
                                     92.01 -
395                      5-15-17     92.06,
                                     92.99
396                      5-15-17     96.01 -
                                     96.12
397                      6-19-17     32.11
399                      8-21-17     150.01 -
                                     150.21
400                      10-15-17    152.008,
                                     152.035
                                     91.01 -
402                      11-20-17    91.14,
                                     91.99
405                      4-16-18     32.09
407                      11-19-18    50.06,
                                     51.11
409                      10-22-18    T.S.O. IX
410                      11-19-18    50.58
413                      1-22-19     Ch. 71, Sch. V
                                     51.01,
418                      1-7-20      51.03 -
                                     51.08
419                      1-7-20      T.S.O. IX
420 (2020-1)             6-29-20     32.09
2020-2                   9-21-20     32.20
2020-3                   9-21-20     32.15
2020-4                   11-16-20    32.21
2021-1                   3-15-21     32.09
2021-2                   3-15-21     32.32
2021-4                   4-19-21     32.12
2022-2                   4-18-22     32.09
2022-3                   6-20-22     51.01,
                                     51.04
2022-5                   11-21-22    93.01
2022-9                   12-19-22    30.03
2022-10                  12-19-22    50.58,
                                     50.59
                                     51.03,
2022-11                  12-19-22    51.09,
                                     51.12
                                    
 
