Rochester, Indiana
Code of Ordinances
2026 S-14 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 47-2024, passed 12-17-24,
and Res. 30-2024, passed 10-7-24; and
State legislation current through 2025 Indiana Legislative Service, Pamphlet
No. 33
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
OF
ROCHESTER, INDIANA
MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS
MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS
MAYOR                          Trent Odell
CLERK-TREASURER                E. Beth Stocking
LAW DIRECTOR                   T. Andrew Perkins
CLERK OF COUNCIL               E. Beth Stocking
POLICE CHIEF                   Andrew Shotts (312 Main Street)
ASSISTANT CHIEF OF POLICE (Lt) Gerard Ostrom
FIRE CHIEF                     Thomas J. DuBois
ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEF           Jamie Gagnon (2006 e. St. Rd. 14)
FIRE CAPTAIN                   Brandon Cody
FIRE CAPTAIN                   Alec Descoteaux
 
 
COUNCIL MEMBERS
Robert Cannedy  Ruth Gunter
Brian Fitzwater Martin Smith
John Garrett    Amy Roe
               Brian Goodman
                
 
 
CONTACT INFORMATION
                   City of Rochester
Municipal Address: 320 Main St.
                   Rochester, IN 46975
Phone Number:      574-223-2510
Fax Number:        574-223-6509
Website:           Rochester.in.us
Email:             Email:   mayor@rochester.in.us
                      clerk@rochester.in.us
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Ordinance Number 10-1999
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF ROCHESTER, INDIANA AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the first supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Political
Subdivision, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of this Political Subdivision; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Indiana code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Indiana; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF THE CITY OF ROCHESTER, INDIANA:
Section 1. That the first supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Political
Subdivision as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Political Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office
of the Clerk.
Section 3.This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for
the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of
the people of this municipality.
Section 4: That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage as provided by law and the filing thereof in the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer.
Passed by the Common Council of the City of Rochester, Fulton County, Indiana,
this 13th day,
April, 1999.
Robert L. Forney /s/        Robert P. Lowe /s/  
ROBERT FORNEY          ROBERT LOWE
Burns S. Becht /s/        Gary West /s/  
BURNS BECHT          GARY WEST
                                             Marcia Wenrick /s/  
WILLIAM SCHROER       MARCIA WENRICK
Mike Whirledge /s/  
MIKE WHIRLEDGE
Presented by me to the Mayor of the City of Rochester on the day of April 14,
1999 at the hour
of 8 o'clock A.M.
               Freda Miller /s/
               FREDA MILLER
               Clerk-Treasurer
               City of Rochester
This Ordinance approved and signed by me on the 14th day of April 1999 at the
hour of 9:00 A.M.
               Philip E. Thompson /s/
               Philip E. Thompson, Mayor
               City of Rochester
ORDINANCE NO. 08-2013
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF ROCHESTER AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2013 S-6 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Political
Subdivision, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of this Political Subdivision; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Indiana code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Indiana; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED by the Common Council of the City of Rochester as
follows:
Section l.   That the 2013 S-6 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Political Subdivision as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Political Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office
of the Clerk.
Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
Passed by the Common Council of Rochester, Indiana the 24th day of September
2013.
   ROCHESTER COMMON COUNCIL
Burns Becht /s/                   Thomas Butler /s/
BURNS BECHT                      THOMAS BUTLER
Martin J. Smith /s/                   John Garrett /s/
MARTIN J. SMITH                     JOHN GARRETT
Brian Goodman /s/                   Chayse Thompson /s/
BRIAN GOODMAN                     CHAYSE THOMPSON
Mark McCall /s/
MARK MCCALL
   Approved this  24th  day of  September , 2013.
                                 Mark J. Smiley /s/
                                 Mark J. Smiley, Mayor of Rochester
               
               
ATTEST:
Shoda D. Beehler /s/
Shoda D. Beehler, Clerk Treasurer
ORDINANCE NO. 11-2014
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF ROCHESTER AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2014 S-7 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Political
Subdivision, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of this Political Subdivision; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Indiana code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Indiana; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED by the Common Council of the City of Rochester as
follows:
Section l.   That the 2014 S-7 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Political Subdivision as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Political Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office
of the Clerk.
Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
Passed by the Common Council of Rochester, Indiana the 25th day of November
2014.
   ROCHESTER COMMON COUNCIL
Burns Becht /s/                       —
BURNS BECHT                         THOMAS BUTLER
John Garrett /s/                         Brian Goodman /s/
JOHN GARRETT                        BRIAN GOODMAN
Mark McCall /s/                         Chayse Thompson /s/
MARK McCALL                        CHAYSE THOMPSON
Martin J. Smith /s/
MARTIN J. SMITH
   Approved this  25th  day of  November , 2014.
                              Mark J. Smiley /s/
                              Mark J. Smiley, Mayor of Rochester
               
               
ATTEST:
 
Shoda D. Beehler /s/
Shoda D. Beehler, Clerk Treasurer
ORDINANCE NO. 04-2017
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF ROCHESTER
AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2017 S-8 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Political
Subdivision, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of this Political Subdivision; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Indiana code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Indiana; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED by the Common Council of the City of Rochester as
follows:
      Section 1.   That the 2017 S-8 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of
the Political Subdivision as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation
of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.
      Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Political Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office
of the Clerk-Treasurer.
      Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at
the earliest date provided by law.
Passed by the Common Council of Rochester, Indiana the 22nd day of August 2017.
   ROCHESTER COMMON COUNCIL
/s/                            /s/
Brian Fitzwater                           Karen Miller
/s/                                                                
John Garrett                              Martin J Smith
/s/                            /s/
Brian Goodman                           Chayse Thompson
/s/
Mason Heyde
Approved this 22nd day of August, 2017.
                           /s/
                           Theodore J Denton, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/
Shoda D. Beehler, Clerk-Treasurer
ORDINANCE NO. 06-2019
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF ROCHESTER AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2019 S-10 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Political
Subdivision, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of this Political Subdivision; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Indiana code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Indiana; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED by the Common Council of the City of Rochester as
follows:
Section 1.   That the 2019 S-10 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Political Subdivision as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Political Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office
of the Clerk-Treasurer.
Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
Passed by the Common Council of Rochester, Indiana the 27th day of August,
2019.
 
ROCHESTER COMMON COUNCIL
/s/                   /s/
Gary Clevenger, Jr.                     Mason Heyde
/s/                                                       
Brian Fitzwater                     Martin J Smith
/s/                   /s/
John Garrett                        Chayse Thompson
/s/
Brian Goodman
 
   Approved this 27th day of August, 2019.
                              /s/
                              Theodore J Denton, Mayor
 
ATTEST:
/s/
Shoda D. Beehler, Clerk-Treasurer
ORDINANCE 17-2024
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF ROCHESTER AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2024 S-13 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Political
Subdivision, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of this Political Subdivision; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Indiana code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Indiana; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance takes effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Common Council of the City of Rochester
as follows:
   Section 1.   That the 2024 S-13 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Political Subdivision as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Political Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office
of the Clerk-Treasurer.
   Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
Passed by the Common Council of Rochester, Indiana the 27th day of August,
2024.
   ROCHESTER COMMON COUNCIL
/s/                /s/
Robert Cannedy                  Ruth Gunter
/s/                                                    
Brian Fitzwater                     Martin J Smith
/s/                /s/
John Garrett                     Amy Roe
/s/
Brian Goodman
               Approved this 27th day of August, 2024.
                     /s/
                     Trent Odell, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/
E. Beth Stocking, Clerk-Treasurer
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of construction
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.19   Recordation and publication
   
10.20   Offenses punishable under separate provisions
   
10.21   Officers and employees not to be punished
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the city of Rochester, Indiana
shall be designated as the Code of Rochester Indiana and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
   (B)   All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in
this code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and
meaning of the Common Council may be fully carried out.
   (C)   In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this code,
they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any
provision of this code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter
than another more general provision imposed by the code or other law, the
provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be
controlling.
('79 Code, § 1-2)
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Rochester,
Indiana.
   COMMON COUNCIL or COUNCIL. The Common Council of the City of Rochester.
   CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This City Code of Rochester
Indiana as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles,
chapters, or sections.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed
by this code of ordinances, by order of the court, or by any applicable
ordinance or statute, the day of the act, event, or default from which the
designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of
the period so computed is to be included unless it is: a Saturday; a Sunday; a
legal holiday as defined by state statute; or a day the office in which the act
is to be done is closed during regular business hours. In any event, the period
runs until the end of the next day that is not a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the office is closed. When the period of time
allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, legal
holidays, and days on which the office is closed shall be excluded from the
computation.
(Indiana Rules of Trial Procedure, Rule 6(A))
   CORPORATE LIMITS, CITY LIMITS. The legal boundaries of the City of
Rochester, except as otherwise provided by law.
   COUNTY. Fulton County, Indiana.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons
or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Rochester.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   NUMBER. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied
to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing, and a word
importing the plural may extend to the singular.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
   OWNER. Any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership,
joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
   PERSON. Extends and applies to associations, clubs, societies, firms,
partnerships, bodies politic and corporate or any other group acting as a unit
as well to natural persons.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property except real property,
as herein described.
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Shall include real and personal property.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street or highway, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard
or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream.
   QUORUM. A majority of the members of a board, commission or committee
holding office, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code.
   REAL PROPERTY. Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of Indiana.
   STREET. Shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads,
alleys, viaducts and all other public highways in the city.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   TENANT OR OCCUPANT. Shall include any person holding a written or oral lease
or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or
with others.
   WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words
YEAR OF OUR LORD.
('79 Code, § 1-2)
§ 10.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following
rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
Common Council or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)    AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this city for the transaction of all city business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable
time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall
be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of such
act or the giving of such notice.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the Common Council requiring publication shall take
effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly
provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the Common Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1979 and subsequently amended, the 1979
code section number shall be indicated in the history by “('79 Code, §
       ).”
   (B)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (C)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (I.C. 36-4-5-3) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85).
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see I.C.
5-14-3-1 et seq.
§ 10.19 RECORDATION AND PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Common Council shall be
recorded by the Clerk-Treasurer in the minute books of the Council, and a copy
kept in an ordinance file. Due proof of publication of all ordinances requiring
publication together with the affidavit of the printer or publisher shall be
obtained by the Clerk-Treasurer and attached to the original of each ordinance
adopted by the Common Council in the minute book of the Council. ('79 Code, §
1-7)
   (B)   Within a reasonable time after an ordinance of the Common Council is
adopted, the Clerk-Treasurer shall record it in a book kept for that purpose.
The record must include: the signature of the Mayor; the attestation of the
Clerk-Treasurer; the Mayor's approval or veto of the ordinance; if applicable,
a memorandum of the passage of the ordinance over the veto; and the date of
each recorded item. The record or a certified copy of it constitutes
presumptive evidence of the adoption of the ordinance. (I.C. 36-4-6-17)
   (C)   (1)   An ordinance, order, or resolution passed by the Common Council
is considered adopted when it is: signed by the Mayor and either approved by
the Mayor or passed over his veto by the Council, under I.C. 36-4-6-16. If
required by statute, an adopted ordinance, order, or resolution must be
promulgated or published before it takes effect.
      (2)   An ordinance prescribing a penalty or forfeiture for a violation
must, before it takes effect, be published in a manner prescribed by I.C. 5-3-
1, unless it is published under division (C)(3) below, or there is an urgent
necessity requiring its immediate effectiveness, the Mayor proclaims the urgent
necessity, and copies of the ordinance are posted in three public places in
each of the districts from which members are elected to the Council.
      (3)   Except as provided in division (C)(5) below, if a city publishes
any of its ordinances in book or pamphlet form, no other publication is
required. If an ordinance prescribing a penalty or forfeiture for a violation
is published under this section, it takes effect two weeks after the
publication of the book or pamphlet. Publication under this subdivision, if
authorized by the Council, constitutes presumptive evidence of the ordinances
in the book or pamphlet, of the date of adoption of the ordinance, and that the
ordinances have been properly signed, attested, recorded and approved.
      (4)   This division (C) does not apply to a zoning ordinance or amendment
to a zoning ordinance, or a resolution approving a comprehensive plan, that is
adopted under I.C. 36-7
      (5)    An ordinance increasing a building permit fee on new development
must be published one time in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 and not later than 30
days after the ordinance is adopted by the legislative body in accordance with
I.C. 5-3-1 and delay the implementation of the fee increase for 90 days after
the date the ordinance is published as provided above. (I.C. 36-4-6-14)
Statutory reference:
   Recording, publishing city ordinances, see I.C. and 36-4-6-17
§ 10.20 OFFENSES PUNISHABLE UNDER SEPARATE PROVISIONS.
   In all cases where the same offenses may be made punishable or may be
created by different clauses or sections of the ordinances of the city, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.
('79 Code, § 1-12)
§ 10.21 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES NOT TO BE PUNISHED.
   Except as specifically provided otherwise, no city officer or employee shall
be subject to fine or punishment under the provisions of this code for his
failure to do any act required by this code.
('79 Code, § 1-13)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Wherever in this code or in any ordinance of the city, or rule or regulation
promulgated by an officer or agency thereof under the authority invested by law
or ordinance, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code, ordinance, rule or regulation is
declared to be a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$2,500. Every day any violation of this code or any such ordinance, rule or
regulation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In any
prosecution based upon this section it shall be necessary to allege only the
first day with respect to which any forfeiture is assessable, and upon
conviction, the offender shall be assessed for that day and each day subsequent
thereto with respect to which it is proven and found that the person did commit
the violation.
('79 Code, § 1-10)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   COMMON COUNCIL
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
33.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
34.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
35.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; FUNDS
      
36.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
37.    CITY POLICIES
      
38.   ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
CHAPTER 30: COMMON COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Composition of Common Council
   
30.02   Councilmanic districts
Meetings
   
30.10   Regular meetings
   
30.11   Continuous sessions
   
30.12   Calling special meetings
   
30.13   Quorum
   
30.14   Appointment of standing and special committees
   
30.15   Meetings to be public
Procedure; Rules of Order
   
30.25   Adoption of Robert's Rules
   
30.26   Order of business
   
30.27   Duties of Mayor at meetings
   
30.28   Presiding officer pro tempore
   
30.29   Voting by Mayor
   
30.30   Right of Mayor to speak on points of order
   
30.31   Appeal from ruling of Mayor
   
30.32   Reading of ordinances; procedure
   
30.33   Majority vote required to pass ordinance
   
30.34   Approval and veto of ordinances and resolutions by Mayor; overriding
veto
Virtual Meeting Policy
   
30.40   Definitions
   
30.41   Declared emergency meetings
   
30.42   Non-emergency meetings
Cross-reference:
   
Filling of vacancies, see § 31.04
   
Oath of officers, see §§ 31.01 and 31.03
   
Turning over of effects of office, see § 31.05
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 COMPOSITION OF COMMON COUNCIL.
   The city shall be governed by I.C. 36-4-6-4 governing the makeup and method
of selection of members of the Common Council.
('79 Code, § 2-19) (Ord. 870, passed 10-13-81; Am. Ord. 36-1990, passed 12-24-
90)
Statutory reference:
   Common Council generally, see I.C. 36-4-6-1 et seq. 
   Authority, see I.C. 36-4-6-5
§ 30.02 COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS.
   By reason of the provisions of I.C. 36-4-6-4, the territory of the city is
divided into five districts for the selection of members of the Common Council;
and the Common Council shall consist of seven members, one of whom shall be
elected from each of the districts hereafter described, and two shall be
elected at large by the voters of the city. The Council districts shall consist
as follows:
   (A)   District 1. District 1 shall consist of the territory incorporated in
Rochester Township Precinct Number 1 as that territory is described in the maps
and descriptions prepared by the County Election Board and on file in the
Office of the Clerk of the Fulton Circuit Court.
   (B)   District 2. District 2 shall consist of the territory incorporated in
Rochester Township Precinct Number 2 as that territory is described in the maps
and descriptions prepared by the County Election Board and on file in the
Office of the Clerk of the Fulton Circuit Court. In addition to the territory
incorporated in Precinct 2, District 2 shall include the territory annexed by
the city in Ordinance 19-1990, which additional territory is described in that
ordinance, and which additional territory is presently a part of Rochester
Township Precinct Number 6.
   (C)   District 3. District 3 shall consist of the territory incorporated in
Rochester Township Precinct Number 3 as that territory is described in the maps
and descriptions prepared by the County Election Board and on file in the
Office of the Clerk of the Fulton Circuit Court.
   (D)   District 4. District 4 shall consist of the territory incorporated in
Rochester Township Precinct Number 4 as that territory is described in the maps
and descriptions prepared by the County Election Board and on file in the
Office of the Clerk of the Fulton Circuit Court.
   (E)   District 5. District 5 shall consist of territory incorporated in
Rochester Township Precinct Number 5 as that territory is described in the maps
and descriptions prepared by the County Election Board and on file in the
Office of the Clerk of the Fulton Circuit Court.
('79 Code, § 2-124) (Ord. 903, passed 6-8-82; Am. Ord. 36-1990, passed 12-24-
90)
Statutory reference:
   Councilmanic districts generally, see I.C. 36-4-6-3 through 36-4-6-5
MEETINGS
§ 30.10 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The regular and stated meetings of the Common Council shall be held in the
Council chamber at 6:00 p.m. on the fourth Tuesday evening of every month;
provided, however, the first regular meeting of any newly elected Council shall
be held on the first Monday in January after the election of officers at 6:00
p.m.
(‘79 Code, § 2-20) (Am. Ord. 08-2012, passed 7-10-12)
Statutory reference:
   Similar requirements, see I.C. 36-4-6-7
§ 30.11 CONTINUOUS SESSIONS.
   Any regular Common Council meeting may be adjourned to a future day or hour,
and at that time it shall be lawful to transact any business which might have
been transacted at the regular meeting of which it is a continuation, and the
Council shall not be limited to completing particular items of business which
had actually been entered upon and left unfinished, at the regular meeting,
unless the order of adjournment of such regular meeting so limits the work of
the adjourned meeting.
('79 Code, § 2-21)
§ 30.12 CALLING SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings of the Common Council may be called by the Mayor or in
accordance with the rules of Common Council.
('79 Code, § 2-22)
Statutory reference:
   Calling of special Council meetings, see I.C. 36-4-5-3
§ 30.13 QUORUM.
   A majority of all the members-elect of the Common Council shall constitute a
quorum.
('79 Code, § 2-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-4-6-10
§ 30.14 APPOINTMENT OF STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
   Subject to the approval of the Common Council, the Mayor shall appoint such
standing and special committees of the Common Council as he deems necessary.
('79 Code, § 2-24)
§ 30.15 MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC.
   All meetings of the Common Council shall be public.
('79 Code, § 2-25)
Statutory reference:
   Similar requirement, see I.C. 5-14-1.5-1 et seq.
PROCEDURE; RULES OF ORDER
§ 30.25 ADOPTION OF ROBERT'S RULES.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing the procedure
to be followed by the Common Council and committees thereof, that certain
publication known as Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised.
   (B)   In the event of a conflict between Robert's Rules and the other
provisions of this subchapter, the other provisions of this subchapter shall
prevail.
('79 Code, § 2-32)
Statutory reference:
   Power of Council to prescribe rules, see I.C. 36-4-6-6
§ 30.26 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Unless suspended by a two-thirds vote of the members of the Common
Council the business of the Council shall be taken up in the following order:
      (1)   Minutes of last meeting.
      (2)   Communications.
      (3)   Petitions, remonstrances and memorials.
      (4)   Reports of committees.
      (5)   Reports of officers.
      (6)   Ordinances and resolutions.
      (7)   Unfinished business.
      (8)   New business.
      (9)   Review of the most recently generated claims docket at the last
meeting of each month.
      (10)    Adjournment.
   (B)   The Common Council shall cause a copy of the agenda to be posted at
the entrance to the meeting.
('79 Code, § 2-33) (Ord. 41-1997, passed 12-23-97)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 5-14-1.5-4
§ 30.27 DUTIES OF MAYOR AT MEETINGS.
   The Mayor shall preside and preserve order and decorum at all meetings of
the Common Council, and shall decide questions of order, according to the
Council's rules.
('79 Code, § 2-34)
Statutory reference:
   Similar requirement, see I.C. 36-4-6-8
§ 30.28 PRESIDING OFFICER PRO TEMPORE.
   At the first regular meeting of the Common Council and on the first Monday
of every succeeding January, the Common Council shall choose from its members a
President pro tempore. In the absence of the Mayor, the President pro tempore
shall preside over the meeting of the Common Council.
('79 Code, § 2-35)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-4-6-8
§ 30.29 VOTING BY MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall not have the right to vote in meetings of the Common
Council, except that in the event of a tie vote, he shall be able to vote.
('79 Code, § 2-36)
Statutory reference:
   Similar requirements, see I.C. 36-4-6-8
§ 30.30 RIGHT OF MAYOR TO SPEAK ON POINTS OF ORDER.
   The Mayor shall be entitled to speak on all points of order at meetings of
the Common Council in preference to Councilmembers.
('79 Code, § 2-37)
§ 30.31 APPEAL FROM RULING OF MAYOR.
   An appeal from the Mayor's decision on any point of order to the Common
Council may be had upon the request of any member of the Council.
('79 Code, § 2-38)
§ 30.32 READING OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Every ordinance introduced before the Common Council shall be read
three times before its passage, but no ordinance shall be read the third time
at the same meeting at which it is introduced, except by unanimous consent and
then only in case there are present and voting at least two-thirds of the
members-elect.
('79 Code, § 2-39)
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   When an ordinance is introduced to the Common Council, it shall be
read by title, and the Chair [i.e., the Mayor or the Presiding Officer pro
tempore] shall state "This is the first reading of the ordinance; if there be
no objection it will go on to the second reading." If no objection be made or a
motion to reject fails, then the ordinance shall go to its second reading
without a question.
      (2)   The second reading of an ordinance shall be in full, except by
unanimous consent, and then only in case there are present and voting at least
two-thirds of the members-elect, the second reading may be by title only. Chair
shall state "This is the second reading of the ordinance."
      (3)   The third reading of an ordinance shall be by title. A motion for
passage must be made and seconded for a vote to be taken.
('79 Code, § 2-40) (Am. Ord. 19-2002, passed 9-10-02)
Statutory reference:
   Similar requirement, see I.C. 36-4-6-13
§ 30.33 MAJORITY VOTE REQUIRED TO PASS ORDINANCE.
   (A)   It shall require a majority vote of all the members-elect of the
Common Council to pass an ordinance.
   (B)   In the event that an ordinance is considered on the same day or at the
same meeting at which it is introduced, a two-thirds vote of all the elected
members is required to pass an ordinance.
('79 Code, § 2-41)
Statutory reference:
   Similar requirement, see I.C. 36-4-6-12 and 36-4-6-13
§ 30.34 APPROVAL AND VETO OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS BY MAYOR; OVERRIDING
VETO.
   Every ordinance, resolution or order of the Common Council shall,
immediately upon its passage, enrollment, attestation and signature by the
Clerk-Treasurer be presented by the Clerk-Treasurer to the Mayor and a record
of the time of such presentation made by the Clerk-Treasurer, and if the Mayor
approves it, he shall enter his approval thereon and sign the same and file it,
so signed in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer; if the Mayor does not approve
it, he shall return it to the Clerk-Treasurer with his objections in writing
within ten days after receiving it, and the Clerk-Treasurer shall then present
it to the Common Council at its next regular meeting. If the Mayor should fail
to discharge his duty by approving or disapproving such ordinance, resolution
or order within ten days, such failure shall be deemed a disapproval. In all
cases of disapproval by the Mayor such ordinance, resolution or order shall not
become a law, unless at the next Council meeting after the time named for the
Mayor's action, the Common Council again passes it by a two-thirds vote of all
the members-elect.
('79 Code, § 2-42)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-4-6-16
VIRTUAL MEETING POLICY
§ 30.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MEMBERS. Members of the Rochester Common Council.
   VIRTUAL MEETING. A meeting in which one or more Council members meet by any
means of electronic communication, so long as (a) at least a quorum of the
members participate, (b) members can simultaneously communicate with each
other, and (c) the public is able to attend and observe the meeting (except for
executive session meetings). It includes meetings with a mix of electronic and
in-person attendance by members, but may include 100% electronic communication.
The minutes or memoranda for a virtual meeting must identify which members
attended and by which method, which were absent, and the means of electronic
communication used by members and the public. All votes taken in such a meeting
must be by roll call vote.
(Res. 04-2022, passed 4-26-22)
§ 30.41 DECLARED EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
   Whenever a disaster has been declared by either: the Indiana Governor
declaring a disaster emergency under I.C. 10-14-3-12; or the executive of the
city declaring a local disaster emergency under I.C. 10-14-3-29; the members of
the Council may meet in a virtual meeting.
(Res. 04-2022, passed 4-26-22)
§ 30.42 NON-EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
   This section shall apply whenever §
30.41 is not applicable.
   (A)   A member may attend a Council meeting using a virtual meeting, subject
to the conditions of this section. If doing so, a member is present for
purposes of establishing a quorum, and may participate in any final action so
long as the member can be seen and heard by other members and public attendees.
   (B)   A member should notify the President or Clerk-Treasurer at least 48
hours in advance of the meeting, if possible.
   (C)   At least 50% of the members must be physically present at the meeting.
This means no more than one member may participate virtually at any single
meeting.
   (D)   A member may not attend more than 50% of the meetings using a virtual
meeting format, or attend two consecutive meetings virtually, unless use of the
virtual meeting format is due to military service, illness or other medical
condition, death of a relative, or an emergency involving actual or threatened
injury to persons or property.
   (E)   A member may not participate in a meeting virtually if the Council is
attempting to take final action: to adopt a budget, make a reduction in
personnel; initiate a referendum; establish or increase a fee; establish or
increase a penalty; use the city’s eminent domain authority; or establish,
raise or renew a tax.
(Res. 04-2022, passed 4-26-22)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Oath of officers and employees
   
31.02   Bond of officers and employees
   
31.03   Vacancy in offices for failure to file oath and/or bond
   
31.04   Filling vacancy in elective office
   
31.05   Duty of officers and employees to turn over effects of office
Mayor
   
31.15   Election
   
31.16   Powers of Mayor
City Attorney
   
31.30   Position established
   
31.31   Appointed by Mayor
   
31.32   Qualifications
   
31.33   Duties
Clerk-Treasurer
   
31.45   Election
   
31.46   Powers and duties
   
31.47   Powers relative to the Internal Revenue Service
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 OATH OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Every city officer before entering upon the duties of his office shall take
and subscribe an oath, to be indorsed on his certificate of election, and every
appointive office shall likewise take such oath, to be indorsed on his
certificate of appointment, before the Clerk-Treasurer, or some other officer
authorized to administer oaths, that he will support the Constitution of the
United States and the constitution of the state, and that he will faithfully
discharge all his official duties. The oath shall be filed with the Clerk-
Treasurer.
('79 Code, § 2-3)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 5-4-1-1 and 5-4-1-8
§ 31.02 BOND OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, every city officer, except the Mayor
and the members of the Common Council, shall execute a bond to the approval of
the Mayor, payable to the city, in such penal sum as the Common Council may
provide by ordinance conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of
his office and for the payment to the proper person of moneys received by him
as such officer.
('79 Code, § 2-4)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 5-4-1-5.1 and 5-4-1-8
§ 31.03 VACANCY IN OFFICES FOR FAILURE TO FILE OATH AND/OR BOND.
   Any city officer or employee who shall not file the oath and/or bond
required of him by law with the proper office within ten days after the
beginning of the term for which he shall have been elected or appointed, shall
be deemed to have refused to serve and the office shall be deemed to be vacant.
('79 Code, § 2-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 5-4-1-1.2
§ 31.04 FILLING VACANCY IN ELECTIVE OFFICE.
   Any vacancy which occurs in any elective city office shall be filled in the
manner provided by law.
('79 Code, § 2-6)
Statutory reference:
   Filling of vacancies in elective offices, see I.C. 3-13-8-1 et seq.
§ 31.05 DUTY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO TURN OVER EFFECTS OF OFFICE.
   Upon the termination of his employment or service with the city, every city
officer and employee shall surrender to the city the effects of his office.
('79 Code, § 2-7)
MAYOR
§ 31.15 ELECTION.
   The Mayor shall be elected in the manner provided by law.
('79 Code, § 2-54)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor required, see I.C. 36-4-5-2
   Indiana Election Code, see I.C. 3-5-1-1 et seq.
   City primaries and elections, see I.C. 3-10-6-1 et seq.
§ 31.16 POWERS OF MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall have the powers and duties provided by law.
('79 Code, § 2-55)
Statutory reference:
   Powers of mayor generally, see I.C. 36-4-5-3
Cross-reference:
   
Mayor, member of Board of Public Works, see § 32.01
CITY ATTORNEY
§ 31.30 POSITION ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established the Department of Law, with the head of the
department to be the City Attorney.
('79 Code, § 2-84)
Statutory reference:
   City Attorney required, see I.C. 36-4-9-4 and 36-4-9-11
Cross-reference:
   
Bond of officers and employees, § 31.02
§ 31.31 APPOINTED BY MAYOR.
   The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor.
('79 Code, § 2-85)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor to appoint City Attorney, see I.C. 36-4-9-8
§ 31.32 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The City Attorney shall have the qualifications provided by law.
('79 Code, § 2-86)
Statutory reference:
   Qualifications of City Attorney, see I.C. 36-4-9-11
§ 31.33 DUTIES.
   The City Attorney shall have the duties provided by law.
('79 Code, § 2-88)
Statutory reference:
   Powers and duties of law department head, see I.C. 36-4-9-12
Cross-reference:
   
City Attorney, member of Board of Public Works, see § 32.01
CLERK-TREASURER
§ 31.45 ELECTION.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall be elected in the manner provided by law.
('79 Code, § 2-99)
Statutory reference:
   Clerk-Treasurer to be elected, see I.C. 36-4-10-2
   Indiana Election Code, see I.C. 3-5-1-1 et seq.
   City primaries and elections, see I.C. 3-10-6-1 et seq.
§ 31.46 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall have the powers and duties provided by law.
('79 Code, § 2-100)
Statutory reference:
   Powers of Clerk-Treasurer generally, see I.C. 36-4-10-4 and 36-4-10-4.5
§ 31.47 POWERS RELATIVE TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE.
   (A)   The following express powers with respect to the Internal Revenue
Service are delegated to the Clerk-Treasurer:
      (1)   To give and receive information;
      (2)   To discuss any inquiries presented;
      (3)   To disagree with any and all proposed additions to tax;
      (4)   To appoint others to discuss specific issues with the IRS
personnel; and
      (5)   Represent the entity at all levels of IRS appeals, with direction
from the City Attorney and/or a certified public accountant.
   (B)   The Common Council reserves the following express powers with respect
to the Internal Revenue Service:
      (1)   To agree to and legally bind the entity to any and all proposed
additions to tax (settlements,etc.); and
      (2)   To sign documents to extend the statute of limitations.
(Res. 25-2005, passed 12-13-05)
CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS,
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Board of Public Works and Safety
   
32.01   Composition of Board
   
32.02   Powers and duties
   
32.03   Consideration of claims
Department of Development
   
32.15   Creation
   
32.16   Composition of Commission
Plan Commission
   
32.25   Establishment of Commission
   
32.26   Composition
   
32.27   Membership of Commission
   
32.28   Qualifications of citizen members
   
32.29   Terms of citizen members; removal
   
32.30   Vacancies among members
   
32.31   Certification of members
   
32.32   Quorum; majority required for official action
   
32.33   Offices and property of Commission
   
32.34   Regular meetings
   
32.35   Special meetings
   
32.36   President and vice-president
   
32.37   Secretary and other employees
   
32.38   Duties of the Plan Commission
   
32.39   Fees
   
32.40   Comprehensive Plan
Redevelopment Commission
   
32.50   Established
   
32.51   Redevelopment district
   
32.52   Commissioners
Arts Commission
   
32.65   Creation
   
32.66   Composition
   
32.67   Purpose
   
32.68   Authority
Department of Stormwater Management
   
32.75   Authority
   
32.76   Creation
   
32.77   Special taxing district
   
32.78   Finances
   32.79   Stormwater user fees
Fulton County Area Plan Commission
   
32.90   Adoption
   
32.91   Commission membership
Cross-reference:
   
Board of Park Commissioners, see §§ 95.16 et seq.
   
Board of Zoning Appeals, see §§ 152.148 et seq.
   
Department of Public Parks, see §§ 95.15 et seq.
   
Fire Department, see Ch. 33
   
Police Department, see Ch. 34
   
Tree Board, see §§ 97.25 et seq.
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY
§ 32.01 COMPOSITION OF BOARD.
   The members of the Board of Public Works and Safety are the Mayor and two
persons appointed by the Mayor. I.C. 36-4-4-2 notwithstanding, a member may
hold other appointive or elective positions in city government during the
member’s tenure. I.C. 36-4-11-2 applies to Board member appointments under this
section. The City Clerk is the clerk of the Board.
(I.C. 36-4-9-8(c))
Statutory reference:
   Similar requirements, see I.C. 36-4-9-8
§ 32.02 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall have the powers and duties
provided by law.
('79 Code, § 2-112)
§ 32.03 CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS
   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall have the duty to consider claims
of the city at each bi-weekly meeting.
(Ord. 42-19997, passed 12-23-97)
DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT
§ 32.15 CREATION.
   There is created a Department of Development under the control of a
commission to be known as “Rochester Development Commission.”
('79 Code, § 2-161)
§ 32.16 COMPOSITION OF COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Rochester Development Commission shall have five members to be
appointed in the manner provided under I.C. 36-7-12-5.
   (B)   No person shall be appointed as a Commissioner, who is not either a
resident of the city, employed in the city, or owner of a business in the city.
If any Commissioner shall cease to qualify in one of the above categories, his
appointment on the Board shall thereby terminate and his office shall become
vacant.
('79 Code, § 2-162) (Ord. 611, passed 2-25-75; Am. Ord. 833, passed 12-9-80)
PLAN COMMISSION
§ 32.25 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.
   The Rochester City Plan Commission is hereby established.
('79 Code, § 2-136)
§ 32.26 COMPOSITION.
   The Plan Commission shall be composed of seven members.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93; Am. Ord. 18-1999, passed 8-24-99)
Statutory references:
   Membership of Commission, see I.C. 36-7-4-207
   Additional members to Commission, see I.C. 36-7-4-214
§ 32.27 MEMBERSHIP OF COMMISSION.
   The Plan Commission shall consist of the following members:
   (A)   The municipal legislative body shall appoint three persons, who must
be elected or appointed municipal officials or employees in the municipal
government, as members.
   (B)   The municipal executive shall appoint four citizen members, of whom no
more than two may be of the same political party.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93; Am. Ord. 18-1999, passed 8-24-99)
Statutory references:
   Membership of Commission, see I.C. 36-7-4-207
   Additional members to Commission, see I.C. 36-7-4-214
§ 32.28 QUALIFICATIONS OF CITIZEN MEMBERS.
   Each citizen member shall be appointed because of the member's knowledge and
experience in community affairs, the members awareness of the social, economic,
agricultural, and industrial problems of the area, and the member's interest in
the development and integration of the area. A citizen member may not hold
other elective or appointive office in municipal, county, or state government.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93)
Statutory reference:
   Qualifications of citizen members, see I.C. 36-7-4-216
§ 32.29 TERMS OF CITIZEN MEMBERS; REMOVAL.
   When an initial term of office of a citizen member expires, each new
appointment of a citizen member shall be for a term of four years. A member
serves until his successor is appointed and qualified. A member is eligible for
re-appointment. The appointing authority may remove a member from the Plan
Commission for cause. The appointing authority must mail notice of the removal,
along with written reasons for the removal, to the member at his residence
address. A member who is removed may, within 30 days after receiving notice of
the removal, appeal the removal to the Circuit or Superior Court of Fulton
County.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93)
Statutory reference:
   Appointments, terms and removal of members, see I.C. 36-7-4-218
§ 32.30 VACANCIES AMONG MEMBERS.
   If a vacancy on the Plan Commission occurs by resignation or otherwise, the
appointing authority shall appoint a member for the unexpired term of the
vacating member.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93)
Statutory reference:
   Vacancies, see I.C. 36-7-4-220
§ 32.31 CERTIFICATION OF MEMBERS.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall certify the appointment of the member appointed to
the Plan Commission by the Common Council. The Secretary of the Park Board
shall certify the member appointed to the Plan Commission by the Park Board.
The Secretary of the Board of Commissioners of Fulton County shall certify the
appointment by the members to the Plan Commission made by that body. The Mayor
shall certify his or her appointments to the membership of the Plan Commission.
The certificates shall be sent to and made part of the records of the Plan
Commission.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93)
Statutory reference:
   Certification of members, see I.C. 36-7-4-212
§ 32.32 QUORUM; MAJORITY REQUIRED FOR OFFICIAL ACTION.
   A majority of members of the Plan Commission shall constitute a quorum. No
action of the Commission is official, however, unless authorized by a majority
of the Commission at a regular or properly called special meeting.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93)
Statutory references:
   Quorum, see I.C. 36-7-4-301
   Official actions, see I.C. 36-7-4-302
§ 32.33 OFFICES AND PROPERTY OF COMMISSION.
   The city shall provide suitable offices for the holding of Plan Commission
meetings and for preserving the plans, maps, accounts, and other documents of
the Commission.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93)
Statutory reference:
   Offices and availability of records, see I.C. 36-7-4-305
§ 32.34 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The Plan Commission shall fix the time for holding regular meetings each
month, or as necessary. The Commission shall keep minutes of its meetings. The
minutes of Commission meetings and all records shall be filed in the office of
the Commission and are public records.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93)
Statutory reference:
   Regular meetings and minutes, see I.C. 36-7-4-306
§ 32.35 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings of the Plan Commission may be called by the President or by
two members of the Commission upon written request to the Secretary. The
Secretary shall send to all members, at least three days before the special
meeting, a written notice fixing the time and place of the meeting. A written
notice of a special meeting is not required if the date, time, and place of the
special meeting was fixed at a regular meeting at which all members of the
Commission were present.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93)
Statutory reference:
   Special meetings, see I.C. 36-7-4-307
§ 32.36 PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT.
   At its first regular meeting in each year the Plan Commission shall elect
from its members a President and Vice-President. The Vice-President shall have
authority to act as President of the Commission during the absence or
disability of the President.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93)
Statutory reference:
   Election; Vice-President as acting President, see I.C. 36-7-4-303
§ 32.37 SECRETARY AND OTHER EMPLOYEES.
   The Plan Commission may appoint and prescribe the duties and fix the
compensation of the Secretary, and such employees as are necessary for the
discharge of the duties and responsibilities of the Commission. All such
compensation, however, shall be in conformity to and in compliance with
salaries and compensation theretofore fixed by the Common Council.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment of Secretary, see I.C. 36-7-4-304
§ 32.38 DUTIES OF THE PLAN COMMISSION.
   The Plan Commission shall:
   (A)   Supervise, and make rules for, the administration of the affairs of
the Commission;
   (B)   Prescribe uniform rules pertaining to investigation and hearings;
   (C)   Keep a complete record of all proceedings;
   (D)   Record and file all bonds and contracts and assume responsibility for
the custody and preservation of all papers and documents of the Commission;
   (E)   Prepare, publish, and distribute reports, ordinances and other
material relating to its activities;
   (F)   Adopt a seal and certify to all official acts; and
   (G)   Exercise any and all powers and duties provided by state law and the
Common Council, even though not enumerated herein.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of Plan Commission, see I.C. 36-7-4-401
§ 32.39 FEES.
   The Plan Commission shall establish a schedule of reasonable fees to defray
the administrative costs connected with processing and hearing administrative
appeals and petitions for re-zoning, special exceptions, special uses,
contingent uses, variances, issuing permits, and any other official action.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93)
Statutory reference:
   Establishment of fee schedule, see I.C. 36-7-4-411
§ 32.40 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The Plan Commission shall prepare a Comprehensive Plan to promote the public
health, safety, morals, convenience, order, and general welfare of the city to
enable efficient and economical development of the city. The Plan Commission
shall periodically review the Comprehensive Plan to ascertain the need, if any,
for amendment of the Plan.
(Ord. 3-1993, passed 1-26-93)
Statutory reference:
   Comprehensive Plan required, see I.C. 36-7-4-501
REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 32.50 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Common Council hereby establishes the Department of Redevelopment of the
city. The Department will be controlled by a board of five members known as the
Rochester Redevelopment Commission.
('79 Code, § 2-176) (Ord. 9-1990, passed 4-10-90)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 36-7-14-1 through 36-7-14-40
§ 32.51 REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-14-1 et seq. (i.e., the “state act”), all of the
territory within the corporate boundaries of the city will be a taxing district
to be known as the Redevelopment District of the city for the purpose of
levying and collecting special benefit taxes for redevelopment purposes as
provided in the state act. The Common Council finds and determines that all of
the taxable property within this special taxing district will be considered to
be benefitted by the redevelopment projects and economic development projects
carried out under the state act to the extent of the special taxes levied under
the state act.
('79 Code, § 2-177) (Ord. 9-1990, passed 4-10-90)
§ 32.52 COMMISSIONERS.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-14-3 and I.C. 36-7-14-6.1, the Redevelopment
Commission shall consist of five commissioners, three of whom shall be
appointed by the Mayor and two of whom shall be appointed by the Common
Council, each of whom shall serve until January 1, 1992, or until their
successors are duly appointed and qualified.
('79 Code, § 2-178) (Ord. 9-1990, passed 4-10-90)
ARTS COMMISSION
§ 32.65 CREATION.
   There is created the Rochester Arts Commission.
('79 Code, § 2-191) (Ord. 6-1991, passed 4-23-91)
§ 32.66 COMPOSITION.
   The Rochester Arts Commission shall be composed of 16 to 21 members who
shall be appointed by the Mayor. Three members shall be appointed for a four-
year term, four members shall be appointed for a three-year term, four members
shall be appointed for a two-year term, and four members shall be appointed for
a one-year term. Other first-term members up to and including five such first-
term members may be appointed for terms of four years or less, at the
discretion of the Mayor. After the initial terms of the members, all subsequent
members shall be appointed for terms of four years.
('79 Code, § 2-192) (Ord. 6-1991, passed 4-23-91)
§ 32.67 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Rochester Arts Commission shall be to encourage, promote,
develop and program the still and performing arts for the benefit of the
community and its citizens.
('79 Code, § 2-193) (Ord. 6-1991, passed 4-23-91)
§ 32.68 AUTHORITY.
   The Rochester Arts Commission will have such lawful authority as may be
necessary to perform those acts and fulfill those duties as may be required to
fulfill the purposes of the Commission.
('79 Code, § 2-194) (Ord. 6-1991, passed 4-23-91)
DEPARTMENT OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 32.75 AUTHORITY.
   I.C. 8-1.5-5 addressing the matter of stormwater management is hereby
adopted, making that chapter and any and all amendments thereto effective and
operative as to the city. The Board shall have the authority to exercise all
powers provided by I.C. 8-1.5-5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 22-2001, passed 11-27-01)
§ 32.76 CREATION.
   Pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-5-1 et seq., a Department of Stormwater Management
shall be and is hereby created for the purpose of providing for the collection,
disposal and drainage of storm and surface water and relieving of sanitary
sewers of such water in the special taxing district which is also hereby
created pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-5-1 et seq. The Department shall be administered
with the city municipal utilities. The Board of Directors shall be the Board of
Public Works and Safety that controls the city’s municipally owned utilities
pursuant to I.C. 8-2.5-5-4(g) and I.C. 8-1.5-3-3.
(Ord. 22-2001, passed 11-27-01; Am. Ord. 08-2011, passed 5-24-11)
§ 32.77 SPECIAL TAXING DISTRICT.
   The territory initially included in the special taxing district shall be and
is all of the territory now and hereafter included within the corporate limits
of the city.
(Ord. 22-2001, passed 11-27-01)
§ 32.78 FINANCES.
   The acquisition, construction, installation, operation and maintenance of
facilities and land for the stormwater system may be financed through the
proceeds of special taxing district bonds for the stormwater district; the
assumption of liability incurred to construct the stormwater system being
acquired; service rates; revenue bonds; or any other available funds. The
Board, after approval by the Common Council, may assess and collect user fees
from all of the property of the stormwater district for the operation and
maintenance of the stormwater system.
(Ord. 22-2001, passed 11-27-01; Am. Ord. 08-2011, passed 5-24-11)
§ 32.79 STORMWATER USER FEES.
   The City Common Council, acting under the authority granted to the city's
fiscal body by I.C. 8-1.5-5-7(b) to approve a stormwater user fee, adopts and
approves the stormwater user fees proposed by the City Board of Public Works
and Safety (acting as the Storm Water Board) in the resolution for the city.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, an equivalent residential unit ("ERU")
is defined as the amount of impervious area included upon an average
residential property. An "impervious area" refers to those surface areas of
residential and non-residential properties which water will not penetrate and
from which stormwater runoff will be produced. An impervious area of not more
than 3,700 square feet shall constitute one ERU.
   (B)   The monthly storm water user fees shall be uniform for all residential
properties located in the city, and the same shall be assigned one ERU.
   (C)   The monthly storm water user fees for all non-residential properties,
located in the city shall be determined by using a two-step ERU multiplier,
which shall be:
      (1)   The quotient obtained by dividing the total square feet of
impervious surface area within a non-residential property by a divisor of 3,700
square feet; multiplied by,
      (2)   The multiplier based on property class type as detailed on the
following table.
Property Class ERU Multiplier
Property Class      ERU Multiplier
Agricultural U      0.33
Commercial          1.00
Commercial U        0.33
Exempt              0.50
Exempt U            0.33
Industrial          1.00
Industrial U        0.33
Municipal           0.00
Municipal U         0.00
Municipal School    0.50
Municipal School U  0.33
Residential condo   1.00
Residential duplex  1.00
Residential other   1.00
Residential SFR     1.00
Residential triplex 1.00
Residential U       0.33
Utility             1.00
Religious           0.50
Religious U         0.33
Charitable          0.50
Charitable U        0.33
Notes:
-“U” indicates unimproved
-“SFR” indicates single family residential
-When adjusting multipliers, “residential SFR” should remain at 1.00
 
The product of the two-step multiplier will then be multiplied by the rate per
ERU to obtain the storm water user fee, except that the monthly storm water
user fee for a non-residential property located in the city shall not be less
than one ERU.
   (D)   The annual fee per ERU shall be $64.
(Ord. 47-2024, passed 12-17-24)
FULTON COUNTY AREA PLAN COMMISSION
§ 32.90 ADOPTION.
   (A)   The City Council hereby adopts the Area Planning Law Establishing
Ordinance as contained in I.C. 36-7-4.
   (B)   The establishment of the planning department shall be fixed effective
the date of enactment of this section.
   (C)   The Fulton County Area Plan Commission is hereby established, whose
membership shall be appointed pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4.
(Ord. 17-2004, passed 11-23-04)
§ 32.91 COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-211, the legislative bodies of the Fulton County
Area Plan participants hereby change the representation of the Area Plan
Commission to consist of thirteen members as follows:
   (A)   One citizen member appointed by the County Commissioners, being the
executive body of thecounty:
      (1)   Who does not hold other elective or appointed office, except as
permitted in I.C. 36-7-4-902, in municipal, county, or state government.
      (2)   Who is a resident of the unincorporated area of the county.
   (B)   One citizen member appointed by the County Council, being the fiscal
body of the county:
      (1)   Who does not hold other elective or appointed office, except as
permitted in I.C. 36-7-4-902, in municipal, county, or state government.
      (2)   Who is a resident of the unincorporated area of the county.
   (C)   One member of the County Council, being the fiscal body of the county,
appointed from and by its membership.
   (D)   Two citizen members appointed by the Common Council of the city of
Rochester:
      (1)   Who do not hold other elective or appointed office, except as
permitted in I.C. 36-7-4-902, in municipal, county, or state government.
      (2)   Who are residents of the incorporated area of the city of
Rochester.
   (E)   One member of the Common Council of the city of Rochester, appointed
from and by its membership.
   (F)   Two citizen members appointed by the Town Council of the town of
Akron:
      (1)   Who do not hold other elective or appointed office, except as
permitted in I.C. 36-7-4-902, in municipal, county, or state government.
      (2)   Who are residents of the incorporated area of the Town of Akron.
   (G)   One citizen member appointed by the Town Council of the town of
Kewanna:
      (1)   Who does not hold other elective or appointed office, except as
permitted in I.C. 36-7-4-902, in municipal, county, or state government.
      (2)   Who is a resident of the incorporated area of the town of Kewanna.
   (H)   One citizen member appointed by the Town Council of the town of
Fulton:
      (1)   Who does not hold other elective or appointed office, except as
permitted in I.C. 36-7-4-902, in municipal, county, or state government.
      (2)   Who is a resident of the incorporated area of the town of Fulton.
   (I)   One member of the County Commissioners, being the executive body of
the county, appointed from and by its membership.
   (J)   The County Surveyor.
   (K)   The County Agricultural Extension Educator.
(Ord. 06-2005, passed 6-14-05)
CHAPTER 33: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Establishment
   
33.02   Membership
   
33.03   Appointment of members
   
33.04   Classification and advancement of members
   
33.05   Suspension or dismissal of members
   
33.06   Pension fund and Board of Trustees established
Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief
   
33.15   Powers of Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief
   
33.16   Arrest powers
   
33.17   Duties
Cross-reference:
   
False fire alarms, see § 92.03
   
Inspections, see § 92.05
   
Removal of menaces, see § 92.06
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established a Fire Department.
('79 Code, § 5-19)
§ 33.02 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Chief, one Assistant Fire Chief,
and such additional members as may be required by the Common Council.
('79 Code, § 5-20)
Statutory reference:
   Power of Common Council to determine size of Fire Department, see I.C. 36-8-
2-3
§ 33.03 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   All members of the Fire Department, including the Fire Chief and the
Assistant Fire Chief, shall be appointed by the Mayor.
('79 Code, § 5-21)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor to appoint firefighters, see I.C. 36-4-9-8
§ 33.04 CLASSIFICATION AND ADVANCEMENT OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall have the following membership
classifications:
      (1)   Probationary members.
      (2)   Second class members.
      (3)   First class members.
   (B)   Upon first being appointed, a firefighter shall serve at least 12
months in the probationary class before becoming eligible for promotion. In
addition the candidate must successfully complete the required schooling for a
second class or first class firefighter prior to promotion.
   (C)   Any advancement in classification or increase in compensation shall
become effective on January 1 or July 1, whichever comes first after the
firefighter becomes eligible for such advancements.
('79 Code, § 5-22)
Statutory reference:
   Probationary appointments, see I.C. 36-8-4-12
§ 33.05 SUSPENSION OR DISMISSAL OF MEMBERS.
   All firefighters, including the Fire Chief and the Assistant Fire Chief,
shall be suspended or dismissed from their positions in the manner provided by
state law.
('79 Code, § 5-27)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension or dismissal of firefighters, see I.C. 36-8-3-4
§ 33.06 PENSION FUND AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-8-7-3 there is established a 1937 Firefighter's Pension
Fund and a local Board of Trustees to manage, use, and disburse the fund for
the benefit of those firefighters, either active or retired, who were hired
prior to May 1, 1977 and are not otherwise members of the 1977 Police Officers'
and Firefighters' Pension and Disability Fund.
FIRE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEF
§ 33.15 POWERS OF FIRE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEF.
   The Fire Chief has exclusive control of the fire department subject to the
rules and orders of the Board of Public Works and Safety. However, in times of
emergency, the Fire Chief is, for the time being, subordinate to the Mayor and
shall obey his orders and directions.”
§ 33.16 ARREST POWERS.
   Both the Fire Chief and the Assistant Fire Chief shall, while in attendance
at any fire within the city limits have the power to arrest any person who is
interfering in any way with the functions of the Fire Department or its
equipment.
('79 Code, § 5-25)
§ 33.17 DUTIES.
   In addition to all other duties provided by law, the Fire Chief and the
Assistant Fire Chief during their respective hours of duty shall:
   (A)   Be in constant attendance upon their respective duties.
   (B)   Keep the fire station and all firefighting apparatus clean and in a
good condition at all times.
   (C)   Promptly answer all fire alarms occurring within the city limits.
   (D)   Promptly answer all fire alarms occurring outside of the city limits
when directed to do so by the Mayor.
   (E)   Be responsible for the care, custody and control of all firefighting
equipment.
('79 Code, § 5-26)
CHAPTER 34: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Establishment
   
34.02   Composition of Department
   
34.03   Appointment of Chief of Police and other members
   
34.04   Classification of police officers
   
34.05   Advancement and compensation
   
34.06   Duties performed under supervision of Mayor
   
34.07   Special police
   
34.08   Uniforms
   
34.09   Display of police insignia
   
34.10   Power of Chief to direct police
   
34.11   Duties of police officers
   
34.12   Reports to Chief of Police
   
34.13   Suspending or discharging members
   
34.14   Fee for furnishing accident reports
Records
   
34.25   Records concerning police
   
34.26   Records concerning criminals
   
34.27   Property records
   
34.28   Copies of communications
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established a Police Department.
('79 Code, § 12-1)
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to establish Police Department, see I.C. 36-8-2-2
§ 34.02 COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT.
   The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police and as many
additional officers and persons as required by law.
('79 Code, § 12-2)
§ 34.03 APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF OF POLICE AND OTHER MEMBERS.
   The Chief of Police and any other employee of the police department who
holds an upper level policy making position shall be appointed by the Mayor.
All other members and employees of the police department are appointed by the
Board of Public Works and Safety.
('79 Code, § 12-3)
Statutory references:
   Appointment of police officers, see I.C. 36-8-3-3
   Appointment of Police Chief, see I.C. 36-4-9-8
§ 34.04 CLASSIFICATION OF POLICE OFFICERS.
   The classifications of probationary, second class and first class are
established in the Police Department.
('79 Code, § 12-4)
§ 34.05 ADVANCEMENT AND COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Upon first being appointed, a police officer with no experience must
serve at least 12 months in the probationary class before becoming eligible for
promotion to police officer.
   (B)   With prior experience before appointment to the Police Department, a
police officer starting the probationary class may receive a pay raise prior to
promotion to first class officer, at the discretion of the Board of Public
Works.
('79 Code, § 12-5) (Ord.25-1997, passed 8-26-97)
§ 34.06 DUTIES PERFORMED UNDER SUPERVISION OF MAYOR.
   The Chief of Police has exclusive control of the police department subject
to the rules and orders of the Board of Public Works and Safety. However, in
times of emergency, the Chief of Police is, for the time being, subordinate to
the Mayor and shall obey the Mayor’s orders and directions, notwithstanding any
law or rule to the contrary.
(I.C. 36-8-3-3)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-8-3-3
§ 34.07 SPECIAL POLICE.
   (A)   Whenever the public safety requires an increase of the police force,
in the judgment of the Board of Public Works and Safety or, in the case of
emergency, the Mayor shall appoint as many suitable persons as may be necessary
to act as special police, who shall be sworn in and furnished with police
equipment. They shall be under the control of the Chief of Police when they are
on duty.
   (B)   The city may grant authority to the Rochester Community School
Corporation to provide security/school resource officer(s) under the authority
of the special police.
      (1)   The officer(s) are to be provided at the expense and liability of
the Rochester Community School Corporation.
      (2)   The officer(s) are to provide primary police service to the
Rochester Community School Corporation and its grounds at the direction of the
School Superintendent and School Board.
('79 Code, § 12-7) (Am. Ord. 22-2000, passed 10-24-00)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-8-3-3
§ 34.08 UNIFORMS.
   While on duty all members of the Police Department shall wear the standard-
type police uniform. ('79 Code, § 12-8)
§ 34.09 DISPLAY OF POLICE INSIGNIA.
   The Chief of Police and every police officer, while on duty, shall wear in
some conspicuous place on the breast a star with the word “police” written or
engraved thereon. It shall be exhibited whenever required.
('79 Code, § 12-9)
§ 34.10 POWER OF CHIEF TO DIRECT POLICE.
   The Chief of Police shall direct any or all members of the police force to
any place where their services are deemed necessary.
('79 Code, § 12-10)
§ 34.11 DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS.
   Each police officer shall be a conservator of public peace and shall enforce
all laws.
('79 Code, § 12-11)
Statutory reference:
   Powers of police, see I.C. 36-8-3-6
§ 34.12 REPORTS TO CHIEF OF POLICE.
   It shall be the duty of each police officer to report to the Chief of Police
or his designated representative on his scheduled period of duty.
('79 Code, § 12-12)
§ 34.13 SUSPENDING OR DISCHARGING MEMBERS.
   The members of the Police Department may not be suspended or discharged
without a hearing by the Board of Public Works and Safety as provided by law.
('79 Code, § 12-17)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension or discharge of police officers, see I.C. 36-8-3-4
§ 34.14 FEE FOR FURNISHING ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   Directed. The Police Department is directed to charge $12 for every
accident report it furnishes to anyone, other than another law enforcement
agency.
   (B)   Monthly Deposit Required. The Police Department is directed to deposit
said fees with the Clerk-Treasurer on a monthly basis, which the Clerk-
Treasurer is to deposit into the local law enforcement continuing education
fund.
('79 Code, § 12-18) (Ord. 873, passed 10-27-81; Am. Ord. 07-2002, passed 4-9-
02; Am. Ord. 11-2007, passed 7-24-07)
RECORDS
§ 34.25 RECORDS CONCERNING POLICE OFFICERS.
   The Chief of Police shall keep in his office a book in which he shall enter
the names and addresses of every police officer together with the date of their
appointment.
('79 Code, § 12-13)
§ 34.26 RECORDS CONCERNING CRIMINALS
   The Chief of Police shall keep in his office a book in which he shall enter
the name and alias of every person against whom a criminal charge is preferred,
and the disposition made thereof.
('79 Code, § 12-14)
§ 34.27 PROPERTY RECORDS.
   The Chief of Police shall keep in his office a book in which shall be
entered a detailed account of all property which may have come into his
possession, or in the possession of the Police Department, in whose possession
it was found, and by whom, and whether the property was stolen or otherwise,
and also how such property was disposed of. ('79 Code, § 12-15)
§ 34.28 COPIES OF COMMUNICATIONS.
   The Chief of Police shall keep a copy of all official communications issued
from his office.
('79 Code, § 12-16)
CHAPTER 35: FINANCE AND REVENUE; FUNDS
Section
Funds
   
35.01   General Improvement Fund
   
35.02   Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund
   
35.03   Parks and Recreation Capital Fund
   
35.04   Parks and Recreation Operating Fund
   
35.05   Community Host Fee Fund
   
35.06   Police Crime-Prevention Fund
   
35.07   Rainy Day Fund
   
35.08   Riverboat Wagering Tax Revenue Sharing Fund
   
35.09   Cumulative Capital Development Fund
   
35.10   Lake Manitou Watershed Management Plan Account
   
35.11   Court Fees Account
   
35.12   Drug Interdiction and Investigation Account
   
35.13   Cumulative Fire Fund
   
35.14   Special LOIT Fund
   
35.15   State Grants Fund
   
35.16   Federal Grants Fund
   
35.17   ARP Fiscal Recovery Fund
   
35.18   Water Utility Cash Reserve Fund
Requirements for Public Purchases
   
35.20   Establishment of purchasing agency
   
35.21   Purchasing policy and procedures
Capital Asset Policy
   
35.30   Purpose; classification of assets
   
35.31   Capitalization thresholds
   
35.32   Historical cost or estimated historical costs
   
35.33   Estimated useful lives of depreciable assets; depreciation method/
convention
   
35.34   Assets purchased with federal or state grants
   
35.35   Retirements
   
35.36   Responsibility for property record maintenance; property control
Materiality Threshold for Reporting Irregular Material Variances,
Losses, Shortages and Thefts
   
35.40   Policy adopted
   
35.41   Materiality threshold
   
35.42   Materiality variances
   
35.43   Oversight and resolution
   
35.44   Enforcement; report to State Board of Accounts
Uniform Internal Control Standards
   
35.50   Policy adopted
   
35.51   Certification of adoption
Cost Principles for Spending Federal Funds
   
35.60   Implementation
   
35.61   Cost principles
   
35.62   Selected items of cost
   
35.63   Cost compliance
   
35.64   Determining whether a cost is direct or indirect
   
35.65   Timely obligation of funds
   
35.66   Period of performance
   
35.67   Validity
FUNDS
FUNDS
§ 35.01 GENERAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   (A)   There is established a fund to be known as the General Improvement
Fund.
   (B)   This fund shall be used as a fund to pay for the construction, repair
or improvement of streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters and sewers.
   (C)   This fund shall consist of funds realized from the collection of all
special assessments for benefit to property from the construction, repair or
improvement of streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters and sewers, together
with any appropriation made from the General Fund of the city, or from taxes
levied by the Common Council for such purposes; provided, however, that no
money received from the collection of special assessments assessed for benefits
to property under provisions of the Barrett Law and special assessments as are
now or may hereafter be provided by law shall be deposited in this fund, except
as otherwise provided by state law.
   (D)   The aggregate sum which will be appropriated or levied shall not
exceed the equivalent of $.50 on each $100 net taxable valuation of the real
and personal property in the city.
('79 Code, § 2-1)
Statutory reference:
   General Improvement Fund, see I.C. 36-9-17-1 et seq.
§ 35.02 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   (A)   There is established a special fund to be known as the Cumulative
Capital Improvement Fund into which the cigarette taxes allotted to the city by
state law shall be deposited. This fund shall be a cumulative fund and all of
the monies deposited into the fund shall be appropriated and used solely for
capital improvements, and none of such monies shall revert to the General Fund
of the city or be used for any purposes other than capital improvements.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply.
      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. The construction or improvement of any property
owned by the city, including but not limited to streets, thoroughfares and
sewers and the retirement of the city's general obligation bonds, and the
proceeds used for the purpose of constructing capital improvements; it shall
not include salaries of any public officials or employees except those which
are directly chargeable to a capital improvement.
('79 Code, § 2-2) (Ord. 311, passed 5-11-65)
Statutory reference:
   Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund required, see I.C. 6-7-1-31.1
   Allocation of monies by state to city, see I.C. 6-7-1-30.1
§ 35.03 PARKS AND RECREATION CAPITAL FUND.
   (A)   A special non-reverting capital fund, which has been established in
addition to the general park fund, which is created for the purpose of
acquiring land or making specific capital improvements from which expenditures
may be made upon appropriation by the Council. The non-reverting park capital
improvement fund shall be funded in the following manner:
      (1)   By monies and fees procured from the sale and/or disposition of
land, property, facilities, and equipment that is no longer of use to the
Board.
      (2)   From all profit of the Round Barn Golf Course at Mill Creek, 10% of
the amount in excess of the anticipated gross revenues of the Round Barn Golf
Course at Mill Creek, as set forth in the annual budget calculations for any
given year.
      (3)   All monies acquired from the rental of picnic shelters and picnic
sites.
      (4)   Monies received from donations or grants received from the general
public or governmental agencies which are designated for use in the
construction of a particular capital improvement, as well as donations and
grants which are not designated for any particular purpose.
      (5)   Monies from the general park fund which the Council may, from time
to time, appropriate for such purpose.
      (6)   Seventy percent of the income from the rental of golf carts at the
Round Barn Golf Course at Mill Creek.
   (B)   Disbursements shall be made from the special non-reverting park
capital improvement fund on approved claims allowed and signed by the president
and the secretary of the Board following appropriation by the Council.
(Ord. 37-1994, passed 11-22-94; Am. Ord. 05-1999, passed 3-9-99; Am. Ord. 11-
2011, passed 9-27-11; Am. Ord. 04-2021, passed 3-23-21)
§ 35.04 PARKS AND RECREATION OPERATING FUND.
   (A)   A special non-reverting park operating fund, in addition to the
general park fund, is also hereby established for the purpose of the operation
and maintenance of parks and for recreation programs and activities.
Expenditures from the special non-reverting park operating fund shall be made
by appropriation of the Board and disbursed only on approved claims allowed and
signed by the president and secretary of the Board. The special non-reverting
park operating fund shall be funded in the following manner:
      (1)   Monies and fees procured from summer park and recreation programs
and activities, other than those collected from the operation of the swimming
pool.
      (2)   Monies and fees procured from concessions, either by direct sales,
rentals or leases, as well as money derived from the rental of any park
property, either real or personal, other than picnic shelters and sites.
      (3)   Donations or grants from the general public or other governmental
agencies which are specifically designated for the purpose of operating a park
recreation program or activity.
      (4)   Monies from the general park fund which the Council may, from time
to time, appropriate for such purpose.
      (5)   Thirty percent of the income from the golf cart rental of the Round
Barn Golf Course at Mill Creek for the maintenance of the carts.
   (B)   The Board may, from time to time, direct the transfer of funds from
the special non-reverting park operating fund to the non-reverting park capital
improvement fund or from the non-reverting park capital improvement fund to the
non-reverting park operating fund.
(Ord. 37-1994, passed 11-22-94; Am. Ord. 11-2011, passed 9-27-11)
§ 35.05 COMMUNITY HOST FEE FUND.
   (A)   A non-reverting Community Host Fee Fund is hereby established.
   (B)   The Clerk/Treasurer shall deposit all funds received pursuant to any
host fee agreement into this fund.
   (C)   This cumulative fund shall remain in effect until the county line
landfill is closed.
(Ord. 11-1999, passed 4-27-99)
§ 35.06 POLICE CRIME-PREVENTION FUND.
   The Common Council hereby establishes a non-reverting fund for the receipt
of donations to thePolice Crime-Prevention Fund, accruing all earnings upon
investment to the fund, in compliance withrules and regulations of the state
Board of Tax Commissioners, the fund to be a non-reverting cumulative fund to
be used for projects such as public relations for the Police Department and
advertising, including but not limited to stickers, hats, children’s
fingerprint kits, and the like.
(Ord. 03-2000, passed 2-22-00; Am. Ord. 11-2004, passed 7-13-04)
§ 35.07 RAINY DAY FUND.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall establish a Rainy Day Fund to receive
transfers of unused and unencumbered funds raised by a general or special tax
levy on taxable property within the city whenever the purpose of such levy has
been fulfilled and an unused and unencumbered balance remains.
   (B)   The funds on deposit in the Rainy Day Fund may be used for the
operation of the city and its various departments when the city does not have
sufficient levies or funds to pay such costs, including, but not limited to,
purchase of equipment, payment of operating expenses of any department or
office of the civil city, or for any other purpose for which property taxes may
be imposed.
   (C)   The Common Council shall determine the amount, if any, of any unused
and unencumbered prior year funds available to be transferred to the Rainy Day
Fund, which transfer may not exceed more than 10% of the city’s total budget
for said fiscal year.
   (D)   The Common Council may authorize the expenditure of funds from the
Rainy Day Fund by appropriations made in the same manner as other funds are
appropriated that receive tax monies, upon making a finding that the proposed
use of the funds is consistent with the intent of the fund.
(Ord. 26-2001, passed 1-8-02)
§ 35.08 RIVERBOAT WAGERING TAX REVENUE SHARING FUND.
   The city being desirous of creating a fund for the share of riverboat
wagering tax revenue sharing hereby establishes by resolution a Riverboat
Wagering Tax Revenue Sharing Fund to receipt the city’s distribution to that
fund for the purposes allowed in I.C. 4-33-13-5(f).
(Res. 20-2003, passed 8-26-03)
§ 35.09 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND.
   (A)   The Common Council hereby establishes a Cumulative Capital Development
Fund for all uses as set out in I.C. 36-9-15.5. This Board will adhere to the
provisions of I.C. 36-9-15.5. The proposed fund will not exceed $.05 on each
$100 of assessed valuation. The tax rate will be levied beginning with taxes
for 2023 payable 2024.
   (B)   The Common Council hereby re-establishes the Cumulative Capital
Development Fund beginning in the year 2014. Notwithstanding division (A),
funds accumulated in the Cumulative Capital Development Fund may be spent for
purposes other than those stated therein, if the purpose is to protect the
public health, welfare or safety in an emergency situation that demands
immediate action. Money may be spent under the authority of this section only
after the Mayor issues a declaration that the public health, welfare or safety
is in immediate danger that requires the expenditure of money in the fund. This
fund takes effect upon approval of the Department of Local Government Finance.
(Ord. 07-2005, passed 7-26-05; Am. Ord. 07-2013, passed 6-7-13; Am. Res. 02-
2023, passed 3-28-23)
§ 35.10 LAKE MANITOU WATERSHED MANAGEMENT PLAN ACCOUNT.
   The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby instructed to set up a fund for the purpose of
receiving and disbursingthe grant funds received by the Lake Manitou
Association, to be known as the Lake ManitouWatershed Management Plan Account.
(Res. 10-2005, passed 8-9-05)
§ 35.11 COURT FEES ACCOUNT.
   (A)   A separate account is established for distribution of court fees
distributed by the Fulton County Auditor and received by the City of Rochester.
   (B)   The account shall be used for the Rochester City Police Department as
follows.
      (1)   For the continuing education and training of law enforcement
officers employed by the City of Rochester and for equipment and supplies for
law enforcement purposes.
      (2)   For the continuing education and training of Rochester Special
Operations Team and for equipment and supplies for Rochester Special Operations
Team.
(Ord. 04-2011, passed 3-29-11)
§ 35.12 DRUG INTERDICTION AND INVESTIGATION ACCOUNT.
   A separate account is established for monies received from the closed bank
account at First financial Bank, Rochester, Indiana, and any future monies
appropriated by the city fiscal body or received from the county for drug
interdiction and investigation.
(Ord. 03-2011, passed 3-8-11)
§ 35.13 CUMULATIVE FIRE FUND.
   (A)   A need exists for the establishment of a Cumulative Fire Fund for the
following purposes: For all uses as set out in I.C. 36-8-14.
   (B)   The Common Council will adhere to the provisions of I.C. 6-1.1-41. The
Fund will not exceed $0.02 on each $100 of assessed valuation. The tax rates
will be levied beginning with taxes for 2015 payable in 2016.
(Ord. 09-2015, passed 6-23-15)
§ 35.14 SPECIAL LOIT FUND.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-3, the Fund LOIT Special Distribution (MVH) is
established to meet the statutory requirements of I.C. 6-3.6-9-17 (HB 1001 & SB
67) for the restricted funds.
   (B)   These funds are restricted for the purpose of infrastructure as found
under I.C. 6-3.6-9-17(h)(1)(A) and cannot be used for any other purpose without
statutory authority.
(Ord. 06-2016, passed 7-26-16)
§ 35.15 STATE GRANTS FUND.
   (A)   A need exists for the establishment of a State Grants Fund to receive
and expend any monies as related to state awarded grants.
   (B)   This fund will be used for the sole purpose of receipting and
disbursing monies as they relate to any grant sponsored or supported by the
State of Indiana. These may be awarded by such state agencies as, but not
limited to: INDOT (Indiana Dept. of Transportation) and OCRA (Office of
Community and Rural Affairs).
(Res. 04-2018, passed 4-24-18)
§ 35.16 FEDERAL GRANTS FUND.
   (A)   A need exists for the establishment of a Federal Grants Fund to
receive and expend any monies as related to federal awarded grants.
   (B)   This fund will be used for the sole purpose of receipting and
disbursing monies as they relate to any federal grant sponsored or supported by
the State of Indiana and/or the Federal Government. These may be awarded by
such state agencies as, but not limited to: INDOT (Indiana Dept. of
Transportation), Federal Highway Administration, etc.
(Res. 05-2018, passed 4-24-18)
§ 35.17 ARP RECOVERY CORONAVIRUS LOCAL FISCAL RECOVERY FUND.
   (A)   Fund established. There is hereby established a fund to be known as
the ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Fund.
   (B)   Sources of funding. The source of funding includes monies allocated to
the city from the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 and distributed to the city
in 2021 and 2022.
   (C)   Uses of funding.
      (1)   The city shall only appropriate and use the funds to cover costs
incurred by the city by December 31, 2024 for the following:
         (a)   To respond to the public health emergency with respect to the
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) or its negative economic impacts, including
assistance to households, small businesses, and nonprofits, or aid to impacted
industries such as tourism, travel, and hospitality;
         (b)   To respond to workers performing essential work during the
COVID-19 public health emergency by providing preliminary pay to eligible
workers of the city that are performing such essential work, or by providing
grants to eligible employers that have eligible workers who perform essential
work;
         (c)   For the provision of government services to the extent of the
reduction in revenue of the city due to the COVID-19 public health emergency
relative to revenues collected in the most recent full fiscal year of the city
prior to the emergency that being 2019; or
         (d)   To make necessary investments in water, sewer, or broadband
infrastructure.
      (2)   The Common Council shall adopt a plan which provides details for
the use of funds.
   (D)   Amendments. This section may be amended from time to time if
additional guidance is received from any federal or state agency.
   (E)   Termination. The ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Fund shall
exist until terminated by ordinance of the Common Council. Moneys from the Fund
may not be transferred to another fund of the city.
(Ord. 07-2021, passed 4-27-21; Am. Res. 07-2022, passed 6-28-22; Am. Res. 03-
2023, passed 4-25-23)
§ 35.18 WATER UTILITY CASH RESERVE FUND.
   (A)   A cash reserve fund is created for the City Water Utility and carried
on the records of the utility by transferring the cash reserve fund surplus
earnings in the amount of $405,000.
   (B)   The City Council may from time to time, by ordinance, transfer
additional funds from surplus earnings to the Water Utility Cash Reserve Fund.
(Ord. 41-2024, passed 11-26-24)
REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC PURCHASES
§ 35.20 ESTABLISHMENT OF PURCHASING AGENCY.
   The Board of Public Works and Safety (the "Purchasing Agency") is
established as the purchasing agency for the city.
   (A)   The Purchasing Agency shall have all the powers and duties authorized
under I.C. 5-22, as may be supplemented from time to time by ordinances adopted
by the Council and policies adopted by the Purchasing Agency.
   (B)   The Purchasing Agency shall act as the purchasing agency for every
agency, board, office, branch, bureau, commission, council, department or other
establishment of the city.
   (C)   The Purchasing Agency may designate in writing any employee or elected
official of the city as a purchasing agent.
   (D)   The Purchasing Agency is hereby authorized to prepare and/or direct
the preparation of any such specification. The Purchasing Agency shall be
responsible for the maintenance of any and all records relating to such
specifications. A city purchase order shall be issued for every purchase and
shall contain the specifications for each such purchase, the agency making the
purchase and the solicitation type. This purchase order shall serve as an Index
of Specifications. Alternatively, the Purchasing Agency may utilize
specifications prepared by others as specifications to be utilized by the city.
Specifications prepared by others shall include, but not be limited to,
descriptions of property contained in catalogs or other publications. A
specification shall be appropriate and acceptable as long as the item can be
readily identified from a review of the description or any material or document
referenced in such description.
   (E)   Additional considerations for purchasing supplies shall be:
      (1)   Purchasing at a fair market value;
      (2)   Furnished in a timely manner;
      (3)   Minimum standard of quality;
      (4)   Reasonably available quantities.
(Ord. 22-1998, passed 7-14-98)
§ 35.21 PURCHASING POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Introduction.
      (1)   This policy is the result of the recognition of a need to improve
and modernize the city’s purchasing capability and to enhance and assure fiscal
responsibility in the procurement process.
      (2)   The express purpose of the policy is to establish an efficient,
fiscally responsible purchasing system capable of providing daily service and
support on an organization-wide basis. The policy outlined herein recognizes
and addresses the importance of the overall support mission of the procurement
process and the need for maximizing the value of each tax and utility dollar
expended. The objectives, policies and procedures set forth in subsequent
sections of this policy were written and designed to ensure the citizenry,
Common Council and employees receive maximum value for each tax and utility
dollar spent.
      (3)   The “art” of purchasing is a dynamic process. For this reason, this
policy shall be reviewed, and will be revised periodically to keep abreast of,
and current with continued developments in the “state of the art” as it
pertains to purchasing.
   (B)   Objectives of purchasing system. The objectives of the city’s
purchasing system are:
      (1)   To maintain minimum investment in materials inventory;
      (2)   To avoid duplication, waste and obsolescence with respect to
materials;
      (3)   To ensure that materials, equipment and services are purchased at
the lowest prices consistent with quality and performance;
      (4)   To provide adequate controls over city expenditures and financial
commitments;
      (5)   To obtain quality goods required by city departments and to ensure
that these goods are at the place needed and the time needed; and
      (6)   To provide a standardized system of purchasing for use by all city
departments.
   (C)   Authority to purchase.
      (1)   Routine purchases made by the city may be grouped under the
following categories:
         (a)   Purchases $150,000 and over.
         (b)   Purchases over $75,000 and under $150,000.
         (c)   Purchases over $5,000 and under $75,000.
         (d)   Purchases under $5,000.
         (e)   Charge purchases paid by statement.
      (2)   Each of these categories requires a different level of
organizational approval:
         (a)   Purchases more than $150,000 are made through the formal bid
procedure, I.C. 5-22-7.
         (b)   Purchases of $75,000, but less than $150,000, are made through
formal quote procedure that requires a minimum of three quotes for items
costing between $75,000 and $150,000. Two quotes are acceptable in
circumstances that three are unattainable, clarification with the Clerk-
Treasurer is required. Purchases may be subject to the approval of the
department governing board.
         (c)   Purchases of $5,000, but less than $75,000, are made through
informal quote procedure that requires a minimum of three quotes for items
costing between $5,000 and $75,000. Two quotes are acceptable in circumstances
that three are unattainable, clarification with the Clerk-Treasurer is
required. Purchases may be subject to the approval of the department governing
board.
         (d)   Purchases under $5,000, may be authorized by the department head
through normal request to purchase.
      (3)   Suppliers and employees are strictly prohibited from breaking up a
single intended purchase into multiple smaller transactions for the purpose of
circumventing any specified purchasing threshold. This includes, but is not
limited to, dividing orders, invoices, or payments into smaller increments to
avoid authorization or approval processes associated with higher-value
transactions.
   (D)   Competitive bidding.
      (1)   It is the policy of the city to procure needed materials, equipment
and services at the lowest cost consistent with quality and performance.
Whenever possible, purchase will be made only after three price quotations have
been obtained through either formal or informal means. Two quotes are
acceptable in circumstances that three are unattainable, clarification with the
Clerk-Treasurer is required. The only exceptions to this policy are:
         (a)   Sole-source purchases where only one supplier is available;
         (b)   Emergency purchases;
         (c)   Petty cash purchases; and
         (d)   Certain professional services such as architectural, banking,
engineering, insurance, and legal.
      (2)   For all other purchases, the following guidelines should be
followed:
         (a)   Informal telephone/email/online price quotations should be
obtained when:
            1.   Urgency is of prime consideration.
            2.   Specifications are clear and simple.
            3.   Cost of items is under $5,000.
            4.   Special note: Telephone/email/online price quotations should
be documented.
         (b)   Informal written price quotations should be obtained when:
            1.   Specifications are detailed.
            2.   Potential suppliers are not located nearby.
            3.   Needed items are "made to order."
            4.   Cost of item is over $5,000 and is below $75,000.
         (c)   Formal written quotes will be solicited when the cost of items
exceeds $75,000 but is less than $150,000. This requires a formal letter
detailing the good or service being solicited and sent to intended vendors. The
delivery of said letter can be by USPS, hand delivered, or email.
         (d)   Formal written bids will be solicited when the cost of items
exceeds $150,000. The bid process will be in accordance with I.C. 5-22-7.
   (E)   Emergency procedures. Covering supplies or services costing in excess
of $5,000.
      (1)   In case of an actual emergency and with the Clerk-Treasurer’s
permission, if possible, department heads may purchase directly any supplies or
services whose immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in work
which may vitally affect the life, health and safety, or convenience of city
residents.
      (2)   Within two working days, the department shall send to the Clerk-
Treasurer a purchase order with vendor’s invoice attached, with a full written
report of the circumstances of the emergency. If necessary, the Clerk-Treasurer
will authorize a confirming purchase order to cover the emergency purchase.
   (F)   Charge account purchases.
      (1)   Charge account purchases are the preferred method of purchase for
the city and may be used for those vendors for whom many repetitive purchases
are made as supplies are required. A purchase order is required for all
purchases over $5,000.
      (2)   Materials and services, for which purchase orders are used, will be
determined by each department head and approved by the Clerk-Treasurer and
Mayor. The following guidelines shall be used when utilizing charge account
purchases:
         (a)   All charge accounts will be established by the Clerk-Treasurer
to ensure appropriate vendor information is collected and accounts are
uniformly established with all vendors.
         (b)   Department heads shall establish, by department, the names of
those employees authorized to purchase, order, receive, and sign for items
under charge account purchases. Employees must be full-time with the exception
of the Parks Department seasonal operations. The Clerk-Treasurer has discretion
over the total number of employees per department on charge accounts to ensure
internal controls and management oversight.
         (c)   When charging supplies, the vendor’s package advice, packing
slip, or charge ticket or invoice must be signed by the authorized employee
receiving the material.
         (d)   Department heads, or authorized employee other than the employee
receiving the material, shall confirm receipt of the item by initialing the
vendor’s package advice, packing slip, or charge ticket if a purchase order is
not completed.
         (e)   Each department is responsible for seeing that all vendor
invoices are submitted directly from the vendor to the Clerk-Treasurer’s office
in a timely manner to ensure prompt claims processing. The vendor may email
Accounts Payable directly.
         (f)   Invoices signed by unauthorized personnel may not be paid.
   (G)   Joint purchasing with the State of Indiana. The city is authorized to
participate with the State of Indiana in joint purchasing. From time to time,
the city receives notices of various state contracts that show items available
for joint purchase. If these items are needed by the city and if it is
determined that the “state contract” items meet the city specifications at a
cost savings, then the item will be purchased under state joint purchasing
arrangements. A purchase order is placed directly with the supplier who has
been awarded the state contract.
   (H)   Joint purchasing. Where appropriate, the city shall continually
explore joint purchasing with other units of government. Joint purchasing can
result in substantially lower costs due to quantity purchasing.
   (I)   Gifts and gratuities.
      (1)   City employees are expressly prohibited from soliciting or
accepting any rebate, money or costly entertainment, gift or gratuity
(excepting mementos and novelties of nominal value) from any person, company,
firm or corporation to which any purchase order or contract is, or might be
awarded. The city will not tolerate circumstances that produce, or reasonably
appear to produce, conflicts between the personal interests of an employee and
interests of the city.
      (2)   Accordingly, the city may terminate, at no charge to the city, any
purchase order or contract if it is found that substantial gifts or gratuities
were offered to a city employee. The city may also take disciplinary action,
including dismissal, against an employee who solicits or accepts gifts or
gratuities of any value whatsoever.
      (3)   Employees attending continuing education conferences may utilize
the vendor booths/exhibitor hall to acquire novelty items such as but not
limited to pens, pencils, notepads, etc. Vendors offering networking
opportunities including dining opportunities are also acceptable and should not
construed as a conflict as stated above.
   (J)   Purchasing recycled products and materials. Department heads shall
make every effort to purchase items that have been recycled or contain
substantially recycled materials. Department heads shall continuously review
their purchases to identify items where recycled materials may be substituted.
   (K)   Procurement procedure - request to purchase.
      (1)   The preparation of the purchase order initiates the procurement
cycle. The receipt of the purchase order with the necessary information and
required signature gives authority for each specific purchase. A vendor invoice
may not be paid unless proper procurement procedures are followed.
      (2)   The following procedure shall be followed for all purchases over
$5,000, and under $75,000:
         (a)   Department head or designated city employee (employee)
determines the need for a specific service(s) or item(s). The employee will
provide the appropriate number of quotes/bids as determined by the guidelines
outlined above. All charges pertinent to the purchase should be included in the
quote; freight, labor, type of materials, discounts for a total due, net 30
days. No sales tax. If sales tax is included, the department head/employee will
be responsible for paying the tax out of their pocket.
         (b)   Department head or designated authority reviews purchase request
and evaluates need for the item or service.
         (c)   Department head or designated authority checks budget to verify
funds are appropriated and available then completes the procurement process.
         (d)   Department head approves purchase order and forwards the
request, to the Mayor’s Office for review and signature.
         (e)   The Mayor then forwards the purchase order to the Clerk-
Treasurer, who reviews the purchase order for accuracy and completeness.
Additionally, the Clerk–Treasurer will check the budget report and outstanding
purchase orders to verify funds are appropriated and available.
         (f)   The purchase order is then submitted to Accounts Payable for
review and processing.
         (g)   Department heads shall designate an employee to receive items
from vendors. The receiver inspects items to ensure they conform to
specifications and quantities shown on purchase order/invoice.
         (h)   Purchase orders shall be forwarded to the Clerk-Treasurer office
as soon as they are created with the accompanying invoice. Nothing will be paid
using an estimate or quote, all purchases must have an invoice or charge
account slip.
         (i)   For purchases under $5,000, the same procedure is followed
except the request to purchase does not require a purchase order.
      (3)   This policy and these procedures are designed to ensure proper
measures are in place to establish an efficient and responsible manner of
purchasing. The objectives set forth have been designed to ensure standard and
uniform practices are being implemented in every department of the city. It is
the desire of the Clerk-Treasurer’s Office and Common Council to provide
direction and supervision in this area to assist and support the quality of
service to the residents of the city.
(Ord. 22-1998, passed 7-14-98; Am. Ord. 09-2023, passed 12-19-23; Am. Ord. 03-
2024, passed 1-23-24)
CAPITAL ASSET POLICY
§ 35.30 PURPOSE; CLASSIFICATION OF ASSETS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this policy is to facilitate the preparation
of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting
principles.
   (B)   Classification of assets. Capital assets are personal and real
property used in the operations of the government that have an expected
estimated useful life beyond a single period. Capital assets are to include any
item that falls into one of the following categories.
      (1)   Land.
      (2)   Land improvements.
      (3)   Buildings.
      (4)   Machinery and equipment.
      (5)   Vehicles.
      (6)   Computer software.
      (7)   General infrastructure and improvements.
      (8)   Construction in progress.
(Ord. 10-2023, passed 12-19-23; Am. Ord. 02-2024, passed 1-23-24)
§ 35.31 CAPITALIZATION THRESHOLDS.
   (A)    To be considered a capital asset for financial reporting purposes, an
item must be at or above the capitalization threshold and have a unit
historical cost of $5,000 or more. Assets will remain as part of the property
record until they are retired or are disposed of, sold, traded in, and the
like, regardless of net book value amount.
   (B)   The capitalization threshold for the following classes of assets shall
be:
 
Land                                    N/A
Land improvements                       $10,000
Building improvements                   $10,000
Machinery and equipment and vehicles    $5,000
Computer software                       $5,000
General infrastructure and improvements $50,000
Construction in progress                N/A
 
   (C)    With regard to improvements to buildings and general infrastructure,
a capital outlay must be significant and increase capacity, increase
efficiency, or extend the asset's estimated useful life beyond the original
expectation.
   (D)   A change in capacity increases the level of service provided by the
asset. A change in efficiency increases the level of service but without
increasing the size of the asset or the change maintains the same level of
service at a lower cost. For example, an addition to a building provides
increased square footage, hence, the capacity is increased, and the capital
outlay is capitalized. Widening a road with additional lanes increases capacity
and, hence, the capital outlay is capitalized. An extended estimated useful
life involves a significant alteration, structural change or improvement.
   (E)   While substantial repairs and renovations will be reviewed for
potential capitalization, it is anticipated that most will be expensed in the
current year. These expenses often merely restore the asset to the original
service potential but do not necessarily improve the asset.
   (F)   All land, including rights-of-way, is capitalized at the time of
acquisition regardless of historical costs or fair value if donated.
(Ord. 10-2023, passed 12-19-23; Am. Ord. 02-2024, passed 1-23-24)
§ 35.32 HISTORICAL COST OR ESTIMATED HISTORICAL COSTS.
   (A)   Prospective reporting. Capital assets are recorded at historical cost
which includes any ancillary charges necessary to place the asset into its
intended location and condition for use. Ancillary charges include, for
example, freight and transportation charges, site preparation costs, and
professional fees. Engineering costs (internal and external) include related
preliminary project and environmental studies; project estimating, design, and
planning (drawings and specifications); and construction engineering,
construction management, construction inspection and project payment. Donated
capital assets are recorded at their estimated fair value at the time of
acquisition.
   (B)   Retroactive reporting at transition of Governmental Accounting
Standards Board Statement No. 34. When actual historical cost source data was
unavailable, estimated historical cost was developed utilizing a normal costing
approach. With this method of estimating historical cost, a current replacement
cost was ascertained. An appropriate cost index (including Consumer Price Index
and Federal Highway Price Trends) corresponding to an estimated date of
acquisition/construction was then applied to “deflate” the replacement cost to
an estimated historical cost.
(Ord. 10-2023, passed 12-19-23; Am. Ord. 02-2024, passed 1-23-24)
§ 35.33 ESTIMATED USEFUL LIVES OF DEPRECIABLE ASSETS; DEPRECIATION METHOD/
CONVENTION.
   (A)    Capital assets have estimated useful lives extending beyond a single
reporting period (one year) and are depreciated using the straight-line method
with no allowance for salvage value. The estimated useful lives currently used
were developed with the input of knowledgeable staff and reflect our
government's experience with these assets:
Land                                    Non-depreciable
Land improvements                       20 years
Buildings, building improvements        50 years
Machinery and equipment                 5 years
Autos                                   5 years
Light trucks                            10 years
Heavy trucks                            15 years
General infrastructure and improvements 20 to 100 years
Computer software                       5 years
 
   (B)    Depreciation will be calculated using the straight-line method and
full-year convention. No salvage value or residual value will be recognized.
(Ord. 10-2023, passed 12-19-23; Am. Ord. 02-2024, passed 1-23-24)
§ 35.34 ASSETS PURCHASE WITH FEDERAL OR STATE GRANTS.
    Assets at or above a threshold of $5,000 on a unit basis funded with a
federal grant are to be reported for federal compliance purposes,
notwithstanding §§
35.60 through
35.67. To achieve this end, a subsidiary list or other indicator is to be
established and maintained annually and include all such assets currently in
use.
(Ord. 10-2023, passed 12-19-23; Am. Ord. 02-2024, passed 1-23-24)
§ 35.35 RETIREMENTS.
   (A)    Retirements apply to all capital assets including land, buildings,
machinery and equipment, vehicles (including autos, light trucks and heavy
trucks), general infrastructure and computer software.
   (B)   When an asset is disposed of, scrapped, sold, subject to demolition,
and the like, it is to be removed from the property record and the appropriate
reduction will be made to historical cost, accumulated depreciation and net
book value amounts.
   (C)   Retirements will reflect the actual historical cost of the asset when
the amount is ascertainable. When historical cost is not ascertainable, an
estimated historical cost will be determined.
(Ord. 10-2023, passed 12-19-23; Am. Ord. 02-2024, passed 1-23-24)
§ 35.36 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROPERTY RECORD MAINTENANCE; PROPERTY CONTROL.
   (A)   Property record maintenance.
      (1)   The Clerk-Treasurer will ensure that reporting for capital assets
is being exercised by establishing a capital asset inventory, both initially
and periodically in subsequent years. The Clerk-Treasurer will further ensure
that the capital asset report will be updated annually to reflect improvements,
additions, retirements, and transfers and to reflect the new, annual capital
asset balance for financial reporting purposes and the annual and accumulated
depreciation calculations and net book value amounts.
      (2)   Day-to-day stewardship of personal property above the
capitalization threshold of $5,000 is the responsibility of the department
utilizing the property.
      (3)   For annual updating of the capital asset report, the departments
have the responsibility to report improvements, additions, retirements, and
transfers in detail to the Clerk-Treasurer. It is expected that this reporting
will be in a timely manner, as the capital asset record must be updated
annually.
      (4)   To restate, additions of assets at or above the unit capitalization
threshold of $5,000 are to be reported to the Clerk-Treasurer by the
departments upon purchase or receipt of the asset. These will be verified per
the claims process by the Clerk-Treasurer's office. Transfers and retirements
of assets at or above the $5,000 unit threshold are to be reported as such by
the departments to the Clerk-Treasurer at the time of the transaction.
   (B)   Property control.
      (1)   Capital assets below the capitalization threshold of $5,000 on a
unit basis but warranting “control” shall be inventoried at the department
level and an appropriate list will be maintained. Data elements are to include
purchase date, purchase price, asset description, location, make, model, serial
number, and other information that assists control or deemed relevant.
      (2)   Assets below the capitalization threshold but considered sensitive
may include, for example, weapons, radios, personal computers, laptop
computers, printers, fax machines, and small power tools. These minor but
sensitive items shall be inventoried and controlled at the department level.
Stewardship of these minor but sensitive items is the responsibility of the
departments utilizing these properties.
      (3)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall determine appropriate means, level of
detailed data elements, and the system to be utilized. Finally, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall have the right to request copies of the inventory and/or
updated inventory of controllable items to periodically review the information
and adherence to policy.
(Ord. 10-2023, passed 12-19-23; Am. Ord. 02-2024, passed 1-23-24)
MATERIALITY THRESHOLD FOR REPORTING IRREGULAR MATERIAL VARIANCES, LOSSES,
SHORTAGES, AND THEFTS
§ 35.40 POLICY ADOPTED.
   The city hereby endorses the Clerk-Treasurer’s directive as set forth below
regarding a policy on materiality and a process for reporting material items.
(Ord. 04-2016, passed 5-24-16)
§ 35.41 MATERIALITY THRESHOLD.
   (A)   Definition. For purposes of this subchapter, MATERIAL shall mean a
significant or consequential amount, as it pertains to the city, taking into
account the city’s size, demographics, calculations of monthly receivables, as
well as, the form or method of payment.
   (B)   More than $300 in cash. It will be the policy of the Clerk-Treasurer
to report to the State Board of Accounts any erroneous or irregular variances,
losses, shortages, or thefts of cash in excess of $300, except for inadvertent
clerical errors that are identified timely and promptly corrected with no loss
to the city, and except for losses from genuine accidents.
   (C)   More than $1,500 in non-cash items. It will be the policy of the
Clerk-Treasurer to report to the State Board of Accounts any erroneous, or
irregular variances, losses, shortages, or thefts of non- cash items in excess
of $1,500, estimated market value, except for inadvertent clerical errors that
are identified timely and promptly corrected with no loss to the city, and
except for losses from genuine accidents.
(Ord. 04-2016, passed 5-24-16)
§ 35.42 MATERIALITY VARIANCES.
   (A)   Reporting mandate. All erroneous or irregular variances, losses,
shortages, or thefts of city funds or property, or funds or property the city
holds in trust, shall be reported to the Clerk-Treasurer or his or her designee
promptly.
   (B)   Public officer duties. A public officer who has knowledge of or
reasonable cause to believe that there has been a misappropriation of public
funds or assets of the public office, including but not limited to, the
following: information obtained as a result of a police report, an internal
audit finding, or another source indicating that a misappropriation has
occurred.
(Ord. 04-2016, passed 5-24-16)
§ 35.43 OVERSIGHT AND RESOLUTION.
   (A)   Compliance. All city elected officials are asked, and all city
employees and agents are directed to comply with this policy, and the city
Common Council is asked to endorse it.
   (B)   Documentation. The city shall maintain records and documentation
concerning erroneous or irregular variances, losses, shortages, or thefts in
accordance with generally-accepted accounting principles and the internal
control standards provided by the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   (C)   Corrective action. The city shall investigate all erroneous or
irregular variances, shortages, losses, or thefts regardless of whether they
meet the materiality threshold established by this policy. Upon conclusion of
each such investigation, the city shall:
      (1)   Implement procedures designed to prevent the recurrence of such
incidents;
      (2)   Take appropriate disciplinary action against the employee
responsible for the incident.
(Ord. 04-2016, passed 5-24-16)
§ 35.44 ENFORCEMENT; REPORT TO STATE BOARD OF ACCOUNTS.
   The city calls upon the Clerk-Treasurer, city officials, employees, and
agents to enforce and comply with the policy on materiality and process for
reporting material items and to report noteworthy items to the State Board of
Accounts.
(Ord. 04-2016, passed 5-24-16)
UNIFORM INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS
§ 35.50 POLICY ADOPTED.
   The Common Council hereby adopts, as policy, the Uniform Internal Control
Standards as set forth by the Indiana State Board of Accounts Uniform Internal
Control Standards for Indiana Political Subdivisions Manual as expressly
written and published by the Indiana State Board of Accounts in September 2015
and as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 14-2016, passed 12-27-16)
§ 35.51 CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION.
   At the time the Annual Financial Report (AFR) is electronically filed, the
Clerk-Treasurer as fiscal officer of the city shall certify, in writing, that
the Uniform Internal Control Standards for Indiana Political Subdivisions have
been adopted and shall certify that the personnel have been trained as required
by law.
(Ord. 14-2016, passed 12-17-16)
COST PRINCIPLES FOR SPENDING FEDERAL FUNDS
§ 35.60 IMPLEMENTATION.
   The Clerk-Treasurer is responsible for the efficient and effective
administration of grant funds through the application of sound management
practices. Such funds shall be administered in a manner consistent with all
applicable federal, state and local laws, the associated agreements/assurances,
program objectives and the specific terms and conditions of the grant award.
(Ord. 05-2023, passed 6-27-23)
§ 35.61 COST PRINCIPLES.
   Except where otherwise authorized by statute, costs shall meet the following
general criteria in order to be allowable under federal awards:
   (A)   (1)   Be necessary and reasonable for proper and efficient performance
and administration of the federal award and be allocable thereto under these
principles.
      (2)   To determine whether a cost is reasonable, consideration shall be
given to:
         (a)   Whether a cost is a type generally recognized as ordinary and
necessary for the operation of the city or the proper and efficient performance
of the federal award;
         (b)   The restraints or requirements imposed by such factors as sound
business practices, arm’s length bargaining, federal, state, local, tribal and
other laws and regulations;
         (c)   Market prices for comparable goods or services for the
geographic area;
         (d)   Whether the individuals concerned acted with prudence in the
circumstances considering their responsibilities; and
         (e)   Whether the cost represents any significant deviation from the
established practices or policy of the City Council or the Board of Public
Works and Safety which may increase the expense.
      (3)   While federal regulations do not provide specific descriptions of
what satisfies the “necessary” element beyond its inclusion in the
reasonableness analysis above, whether a cost is necessary is determined based
on the needs of the program. Specifically, the expenditure must be necessary to
achieve an important program objective. A key aspect in determining whether a
cost is necessary is whether the city can demonstrate that the cost addresses
an existing need, and can prove it.
When determining whether a cost is necessary, consideration may be given to
whether:
         (a)   The cost is needed for the proper and efficient performance of
the grant program;
         (b)   The cost is identified in the approved budget or application;
         (c)   There is a benefit to the city or its citizens associated with
the cost;
         (d)   The cost aligns with identified needs based on results and
findings from a needs assessment; and
         (e)   The cost addresses program goals and objectives and is based on
program data.
      (4)   A cost is allocable to the federal award if the goods or services
involved are chargeable or assignable to the federal award in accordance with
the relative benefit received.
   (B)   Conform to any limitations or exclusions set forth as cost principles
in Part 200 or in the terms and conditions of the federal award.
   (C)   Be consistent with policies and procedures that apply uniformly to
both federally-financed and other activities of the city.
   (D)   Be afforded consistent treatment. A cost cannot be assigned to a
federal award as a direct cost if any other cost incurred for the same purpose
in like circumstances has been assigned as an indirect cost under another
award.
   (E)   Be determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles.
   (F)   (1)   Be representative of actual cost, net of all applicable credits
or offsets.
      (2)   The term APPLICABLE CREDITS refers to those receipts or reductions
of expenditures that operate to offset or reduce expense items allocable to the
federal award. Typical examples of such transactions are: purchase discounts;
rebates or allowances; recoveries or indemnities on losses; and adjustments of
overpayments or erroneous charges. To the extent that such credits accruing to
or received by the state relate to the federal award, they shall be credited to
the federal award, either as a cost reduction or a cash refund, as appropriate.
   (G)   Not be included as a match or cost-share, unless the specific federal
program authorizes federal costs to be treated as such.
   (H)   Be adequately documented:
      (1)   In the case of personal services, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
implement a system for city personnel to account for time and efforts expended
on grant funded programs to assure that only permissible personnel expenses are
allocated;
      (2)   In the case of other costs, all receipts and other invoice
materials shall be retained, along with any documentation identifying the need
and purpose for such expenditure if not otherwise clear.
(Ord. 05-2023, passed 6-27-23)
§ 35.62 SELECTED ITEMS OF COST.
   The city shall follow the rules for selected items of cost at 2 C.F.R. Part
200, Subpart E when charging these specific expenditures to a federal grant.
When applicable, city staff shall check costs against the selected items of
cost requirements to ensure the cost is allowable. In addition, state, city and
program-specific rules, including the terms and conditions of the award, may
deem a cost as unallowable, and city personnel shall follow those rules as
well.
(Ord. 05-2023, passed 6-27-23)
§ 35.63 COST COMPLIANCE.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall require that grant program funds are expended and
are accounted for consistent with the requirements of the specific program and
as identified in the grant application. Compliance monitoring includes
accounting for direct or indirect costs and reporting them as permitted or
required by each grant.
(Ord. 05-2023, passed 6-27-23)
§ 35.64 DETERMINING WHETHER A COST IS DIRECT OR INDIRECT.
   (A)   (1)   Direct costs are those costs that can be identified specifically
with a particular final cost objective, such as a federal award, or other
internally or externally funded activity, or that can be directly assigned to
such activities relatively easily with a high degree of accuracy.
      (2)   These costs may include: salaries and fringe benefits of employees
working directly on a grant-funded project; purchased services contracted for
performance under the grant; travel of employees working directly on a grant-
funded project; materials, supplies, and equipment purchased for use on a
specific grant; and infrastructure costs directly attributable to the program
(such as long distance telephone calls specific to the program, and the like).
   (B)   (1)   Indirect costs are those that have been incurred for a common or
joint purpose benefitting more than one cost objective and are not readily
assignable to the cost objectives specifically benefitted without effort
disproportionate to the results achieved. Costs incurred for the same purpose
in like circumstances shall be treated consistently as either direct or
indirect costs.
      (2)   These costs may include: general data processing, human resources,
utility costs, maintenance, accounting, and the like.
      (3)   Federal education programs with supplement not supplant provisions
must use a restricted indirect cost rate. In a restricted rate, indirect costs
are limited to general management costs. General management costs do not
include divisional administration that is limited to one component of the city,
the City Council, compensation of the Clerk-Treasurer, compensation of the
Mayor, and operation of the immediate offices of these officers.
      (4)   The salaries of administrative and clerical staff normally should
be treated as indirect costs. Direct charging of these costs may be appropriate
only if all of the following conditions are met:
         (a)   Administrative or clerical services are integral to a project or
activity.
         (b)   Individuals involved can be specifically identified with the
project or activity.
         (c)   Such costs are explicitly included in the budget or have the
prior written approval of the federal awarding agency.
         (d)   The costs are not also recovered as indirect costs.
   (C)   Where a federal program has a specific cap on the percentage of
administrative costs that may be charged to a grant, that cap shall include all
direct administrative charges as well as any recovered indirect charges.
   (D)   Effort should be given to identify costs as direct costs whenever
practical, but allocation of indirect costs may be used where not prohibited
and where indirect cost allocation is approved ahead of time by the Indiana
State Board of Accounts or the pass-through entity (federal funds subject to 2
C.F.R. Part 200 pertaining to determining indirect cost allocation).
(Ord. 05-2023, passed 6-27-23)
§ 35.65 TIMELY OBLIGATION OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Obligations are orders placed for property and services, contracts and
subawards made, and similar transactions during a given period that require
payment by the non-federal entity during the same or a future period.
   (B)   The following table illustrates when funds are determined to be
obligated under any federal agency regulations:
      (1)   If the obligation is for:
         (a)   Acquisition of property - on the date which the city makes a
binding written commitment to acquire the property.
         (b)   Personal services by an employee of the city - when the services
are performed.
   (C)   Personal services by a contractor who is not an employee of the city -
on the date which the city makes a binding written commitment to obtain the
services.
   (D)   Public utility services - when the city receives the services.
   (E)   Travel - when the travel is taken.
   (F)   Rental of property - when the city uses the property.
   (G)   A pre-agreement cost that was properly approved by the Secretary under
the cost principles in 2 C.F.R. Part 200, Subpart E - Cost Principles - on the
first day of the project period.
(Ord. 05-2023, passed 6-27-23)
§ 35.66 PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE.
   (A)   All obligations must occur on or between the beginning and ending
dates of the grant project. This period of time is known as the period of
performance. The period of performance is dictated by statute and will be
indicated in the grant award notification (“GAN”). As a general rule, state-
administered federal funds are available for obligation within the year that
Congress appropriates the funds for. However, given the unique nature of
educational institutions, for many federal education grants, the period of
performance is 27 months. This maximum period includes a 15-month period of
initial availability, plus a 12-month period for carryover. For direct grants,
the period of performance is generally identified in the GAN.
   (B)   In the case of a state-administered grant, obligations under a grant
may not be made until the grant funding period begins or all necessary
materials are submitted to the granting agency, whichever is later. In the case
of a direct grant, obligations may begin when the grant is approved, unless an
agreement exists with State Board of Accounts or the pass-through entity to
reimburse for pre-approval expenses.
   (C)   For both state-administered and direct grants, regardless of the
period of availability, the city shall liquidate all obligations incurred under
the award not later than 90 days after the end of the funding period unless an
extension is authorized. Any funds not obligated within the period of
performance or liquidated within the appropriate timeframe are said to lapse
and shall be returned to the awarding agency. Consequently, the city shall
closely monitor grant spending throughout the grant cycle.
(Ord. 05-2023, passed 6-27-23)
§ 35.67 VALIDITY OF THIS POLICY.
   This Cost Principles for Spending Federal Funds Policy is and shall be valid
upon adoption and publication as required by law and shall remain valid
indefinitely.
(Ord. 05-2023, passed 6-27-23)
CHAPTER 36: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
Alcohol and Controlled Substance Testing For Commercial Drivers License
Employees
   
36.01 - 36.05      Reserved
   
36.06   Retention of records
   
36.07   Testing procedures regulations
Conflict of Interest and Nepotism
   
36.20   Policy established
ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TESTING FOR COMMERCIAL DRIVERS LICENSE
EMPLOYEES
§§ 36.01 through 36.05 RESERVED.
§ 36.06 RETENTION OF RECORDS.
   The following records relating to the city's drug and alcohol testing
program are required to be maintained:
   (A)   Records related to the collection process:
      (1)   Collection logbooks;
      (2)   Documents related to the random selection process;
      (3)   Celebration documentation for Evidential Breath Testing Devices
(EBT's);
      (4)   Documentation of Breath Alcohol Technician (BAT) Training;
      (5)   Documentation of reasoning for reasonable suspicion testing;
      (6)   Documentation of reasoning for post-accident testing;
      (7)   Documents verifying a medical explanation for the inability to
provide adequate breath or urine for testing;
      (8)   Consolidated annual calendar year summaries.
   (B)   Records related to the driver's test results:
      (1)   Employer's copy of the alcohol test form, including results;
      (2)   Employer's copy of the drug test chain of custody and control form;
      (3)   Documents sent to the employer by the Medical Review Officer;
      (4)   Documentation of any driver's refusal to submit to a required
alcohol or controlled substance test;
      (5)   Documents provided by a driver to dispute results of test;
   (C)   Documentation of any other violations of controlled substance use or
alcohol misuse rules
   (D)   Records related to evaluations and training:
      (1)   Records pertaining to substance abuse professional's (SAP)
determination of driver's need for assistance;
      (2)   Records concerning a drivers compliance with SAP's recommendations.
   (E)   Records related to education and training:
      (1)   Materials on drug and alcohol awareness, including a copy of the
employer's policy on drug use and alcohol misuse;
      (2)   Documentation of compliance with requirements to provide drivers
with educational material, including driver's signed receipt of materials;
      (3)   Documentation of supervisor training;
      (4)   Certification that training conducted under this rule complies with
all requirements of the rule.
   (F)   Records relating to drug testing:
      (1)   Agreements with collection site facilities, laboratories, medical
review officers (MRO's) and consortia;
      (2)   Names and positions of officials and their role in the employer's
alcohol and controlled substance testing program;
      (3)   Monthly statistical summaries of urinalysis;
      (4)   The employer's drug testing policy and procedures.
   (G)   All required records shall be maintained in a secure location with
limited access. Records shall be made available for inspection at the Clerk-
Treasurer's office within two business days after a request has been made by an
authorized representative of the Federal Highway Administration.
   (H)   Documents to be maintained for five years:
      (1)   Verified positive controlled substance test results
      (2)   Refusals to submit to required alcohol or controlled substance
test;
      (3)   Required calibration of Evidential Breath Testing Devices (EBT's);
      (4)   Substance Abuse Professional's (SAP) Evaluation and referrals.
   (I)   Documents to be maintained for two years:
      (1)   Records related to the collection process (except calibration) and
required training.
   (J)   Documents to be maintained for one year:
      (1)   Alcohol test results indication a breath alcohol concentration less
than 0.02.
(Ord. 33-1995, passed 12-12-95)
§ 36.07 TESTING PROCEDURES REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The following testing procedures are to be strictly observed by any
collection facility and/or laboratory contracted with the city in order to
carry out its drug and alcohol testing program.
   (B)   Controlled substance testing procedures include the following;
      (1)   Chain of custody. Chain of custody is defined as procedures to
account for the integrity of each urine specimen by tracking it's handling and
storage from point of specimen collection to final disposition of the specimen.
These procedures will require an approved chain of custody form.
      (2)   Preparation of testing.
         (a)   Use of tamperproof seal system designed in a manner that a
specimen bottle top can be sealed against undetected opening and the bottle has
a means for identification of the test subject, either by number or some other
confidential manner.
         (b)   Use of shipping container in which one or more specimens and
associated paper work may be transferred and which can be sealed and initialed
to prevent undetected tampering.
         (c)   Written procedures and instructions for collection site.
      (3)   Specimen collection. Specimen collection will be done at collection
sites designated by the city.
      (4)   Laboratory analysis. Laboratory analysis of all specimens collected
will be done by a NIDA certified laboratory under all federal guidelines.
      (5)   Review of results of the laboratory tests.
         (a)   The laboratory reports the test results of the city's Medical
Review Officer (MRO) within an average of five working days.
         (b)   Both positive and negative results must be reported. The report,
as certified by the responsible laboratory individual shall indicate the drug/
metabolites tested for, whether the results are positive or negative, and the
cut-off level for each drug analyzed, the specimen number assigned to the
specimen and the drug testing laboratory identification number. All tests
submitted to the laboratory at the same time must be submitted to the MRO at
the same time.
         (c)   The laboratory may transmit the test results to the MRO by
various electronic means such as teleprinter, facsimile or computer, so long as
those methods established are designed to maintain confidentiality. Results
cannot, at any time, be provided verbally by telephone. The laboratory must
also transmit to the MRO the original or a certified copy of urine chain of
custody and control form and must identify the individual responsible for the
day-to-day management of the laboratory process.
      (6)   The role of the Medical Review Officer.
         (a)   The MRO must be licensed M.D. or D.O. and principally serve as
an arbiter between the laboratory and the city. The MRO must possess a
knowledge of drug abuse disorders. It is the primary role of the MRO to review
and interpret positive results obtained from the laboratory. The MRO must
access and determine whether alternate medical explanations could account for
the positive test results.
         (b)   To accomplish this task, the MRO may conduct medical interview
of the individual's medical history and review and other relevant bio-medical
factors. Additionally the MRO must examine all medical records as evidence of
prescribed medications.
         (c)   The MRO must give the individual testing positive an opportunity
to discuss the test results. If the tested individual provides sufficient
medical documentation that the positive result derives from the use of legally
prescribed medication the MRO may allow the driver to continue to operate, or
the MRO may request the opinion of another physician.
         (d)   After the individual testing positive has been given the
opportunity to provide sufficient information, and the MRO makes a final
decision, the city is notified of the results of the substance test.
      (7)   The need for confidentiality. All information obtained in the
course of testing employees shall be protected as confidential medical
information. No data concerning this information will be made part of the
driver's personnel file or will be provided to any other party without the
written consent of the driver.
      (8)   The appeal process available to drivers testing positive. If a
driver tests positive, he/she has the right to question the results by;
         (a)   Contact with the MRO to verify the sample number of the urine
sample to the MRO's form.
         (b)   Requesting the split-sample be tested within 72 hours of the
original testing.
      (9)   Alcohol testing procedures. Alcohol testing procedures include the
following;
         (a)   Testing devices. 
            1.   Alcohol tests are to be conducted with only evidential breath
testing devices (EBT's) approved by the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA) on their Conforming Products List (CPL)
            2.   The rules allow the use of EBT's for the initial screening
test £hat are on the CPL, that do not meet the additional requirements for the
confirmation test (e.g. sequential numbering and print-out capability)
         (b)   Test administrators. Only a Breath Alcohol Technician (BAT) that
has had proper training may administer breath alcohol tests. Reasonable cause
tests may not be conducted by the person making the determination that
suspicion exists to conduct an alcohol test.
         (c)   Test procedures.  
            1.   The BAT will perform an initial alcohol screen. If the initial
screen results in a Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) of 0.02% or above, a
confirmation test is required. Any tests resulting in a BAC of less than 0.02%
will be considered negative. The BAT will wait a minimum of 15 minutes, before
administering the confirmation test. Confirmation tests must be performed
within 20 minutes.
            2.   The Superintendent, or his designee will be responsible for
maintaining in municipal files and on a confidential basis all records required
by the federal regulations under this testing program.
(Ord. 33-1995, passed 12-12-95)
CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND NEPOTISM
§ 36.20 POLICY ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The City of Rochester Nepotism Policy is hereby established effective
July 1, 2012 by adopting the minimum requirements provisions of I.C. 36-1-20.2,
and including all future supplements and amendments thereto which become law
from time to time, and making them a part hereof as if fully set out herein. In
addition a copy of I.C. 36-1-20.2 Nepotism in effect on July 1 is attached to
the ordinance codified herein.
   (B)   The City of Rochester Contracting with a Unit by a Relative Policy is
hereby established effective July 1,2012 by adopting the minimum requirements
provisions of I.C. 36-1-21, and including all future supplements and amendments
thereto which become law from time to time, and making them a part hereof as if
fully set out herein. In addition a copy of the I.C. 36-1-21 Nepotism in effect
on July 1 is attached to the ordinance codified herein.
   (C)   The city finds that both I.C. 36-1-20.2 and I.C. 36-1-21 specifically
allow a unit to adopt requirements that are “more stringent or detailed” and
that more detailed are necessary.
   (D)   The city further finds that a single member of the legislative body
cannot act for the body to make work assignments, compensation, grievances,
advancement or a performance evaluation without prior authority of a majority
of the body and therefore without such authority by the majority he/she will
not be in the direct line of supervision.
   (E)   The city finds that a single member of governing bodies with authority
over employees in the city cannot act for the governing body to make work
assignments, compensation, grievances, advancement or a performance evaluation
without prior authority of a majority of the body, when a statute provides that
a majority is needed to act, and therefore, without such authority by the
majority the single member will not be in the direct line of supervision.
   (F)   All elected and appointed officials and employees of the city are
hereby directed to cooperate fully in the implementation of the policies
created by this section and demonstrating compliance with these same policies.
   (G)   Failure to abide by or cooperate with the implementation, compliance
and certifications connected with the Nepotism Policy is a violation and may
result in the discipline, including termination, of an employee or a transfer
from the direct line of supervision or other curative action. An elected or
appointed official of the city who fails to abide by or cooperate with the
implementation, with the compliance and with mandated certifications of the
Nepotism Policy may be subject to action allowed by law.
   (H)   Failure to abide by or cooperate with the implementation, compliance
and certifications connected with the Contracting with Unit by a Relative
Policy is a violation and may result in the discipline, including termination,
of an employee or a curative action. An elected or appointed official of the
city who fails to abide by or cooperate with the implementation, with the
compliance and with mandated certifications of the Contracting with Unit by a
Relative Policy may be subject to action allowed by law.
   (I)   It is the policy of the city that seasonal workers who were employed
with the city on July 1, 2012 do not have a break with employment for purposes
of I.C. 36-1-20.2-2 merely by passing through the worker’s non-working season
(s).
(Ord. 07-2012, passed 6-12-12; Am. Res. 05-2015, passed 4-22-15)
CHAPTER 37: CITY POLICIES
Section
   
37.01   Non-discrimination policy
   
37.02   Charges for photostatic copies
   
37.03   Reserved
   
37.04   Acceptance of credit card or bank card and electronic funds transfer
payments
   
37.05   Notice regarding returned checks
§ 37.01 NON-DISCRIMINATION POLICY.
   (A)   Policy statement.
      (1)   General commitment to non-discrimination.
         (a)   The city prohibits discrimination and/or the exclusion of
individuals from its municipal facilities, programs, activities and services
based on the individual person’s race, color, national origin, sex, age,
disability, low income status, sexual orientation or limited English
proficiency. The city affirms its commitment to providing meaningful
opportunities and access to municipal facilities, programs, activities and
services in an effort to comply with all laws including: Title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, as amended (hereinafter “Title VI”); Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended; and the Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1990, as amended.
         (b)   The city will post a Title VI notice to the public at each
facility that receives and/or provides programs, goods, and/or services to the
public.
      (2)   Persons with disabilities. The city is committed to including
qualified individuals with disabilities in municipal services, programs and
activities. For further information please see the city’s ADA Transition Plan.
      (3)   Limited English speaking (LEP) persons.
         (a)   The city is committed to providing persons with limited English
proficiency (LEP) meaningful access and equal opportunity to participate in our
services, activities and programs. The city will take reasonable steps to
ensure that persons with limited English proficiency (LEP) have meaningful
access and an equal opportunity to participate in our services, activities,
programs and other benefits.
         (b)   Which documents must be translated, when oral translation is
necessary, and whether such services must be immediately available depend on
many factors. As a result, the city is committed to following the United States
Department of Justice (USDOJ) guidance on making such determinations, which
includes determining:
            1.   Number or proportion of LEP individuals;
            2.    Frequency of contact with the program;
            3.   Nature and importance of the program;
            4.   Resources available to the city.
         (c)   This will be monitored and accomplished through the use of
language identification flashcards made available through the United States
Census 2010. Additionally LEP and other disadvantaged encounters will be
tracked by city personnel through the use of encounter forms placed at the
front desk of each department. Each department head will determine how this
policy is incorporated in their individual department and its needs.
      (4)   Contacting the city. Individuals with requests for services,
questions or complaints concerning the city’s Non-Discrimination Policy should
contact the city’s Title VI Coordinator at:
                        City Clerk-Treasurer’s Office
                        320 Main Street/ P.O. Box 110
                        Rochester, IN 46975
                        574-223-2510
   (B)   Non-discrimination standard operating procedures.
      (1)   Elimination of discrimination. The city will continue to work to
identify and eliminate discrimination on race, color race, color, national
origin, sex, age, disability, low income status, sexual orientation or limited
English proficiency. If discrimination is found to exist, the city will
implement appropriate policies, procedures or programs to eliminate the
discrimination. Programs and procedures, include, but are not limited to:
limited English proficiency access plan; extend contracting and subcontracting
activities to disadvantaged business enterprises (DBE) and non-DBE minority and
female owned business; and monitoring contractors and consultants for Title VI
compliance.
      (2)   Public outreach. The city is committed to providing the general
public with information on the non-discrimination protections provided by Title
VI, Section 504 and the ADA. The city will pursue all available opportunities
to educate the public on issues relating to discrimination under Title VI,
Section 504 and the ADA. Public outreach may include, but is not limited to,
posting the city’s non-discrimination policy in public locations, including the
city’s non-discrimination policy in public notices as appropriate, and posting
the city’s non-discrimination policy on the city’s website.
      (3)   Limited English proficiency.
         (a)   The city will take reasonable steps to ensure that persons with
limited English proficiency (LEP) have meaningful access and an equal
opportunity to participate in our services, activities, programs and other
benefits.
         (b)   For any program or project receiving federal funds the city will
conduct a four-part analysis to determine what, if any, limited English
proficiency services will be required.
         (c)   The four factors to be considered in determining the need and
type of language assistance services are:
            1.   Number or proportion of LEP individuals;
            2.   Frequency of contact with the program;
            3.   Nature and importance of the program;
            4.   Resources available to the city.
         (d)   If a review of the first two factors show that less than 5% of
the intended beneficiaries of the program or project are limited English
proficient, no language assistance measures will be developed for that program
or project. This will be determined through United States Census Bureau data as
well as a review of encounter forms completed by city personnel.
         (e)   However, in an effort to ensure that persons with limited
English proficiency have meaningful access and equal opportunity, the city will
accommodate any and all requests for oral or written translation services with
a 72-hour notice of request for services.
         (f)   If more than 5% of the intended beneficiaries of the program or
project are limited English proficient, the city will review the nature and
importance of the program or project to determine what language assistance
measures should be developed for the program or project. The resources
available to the city should be considered in determining the appropriate
language assistance measures. Language assistance measures may include, but are
not limited to, oral translation services, including the use of a telephone
interpreter line, and written translation services.
      (4)   Monitoring contractors and consultants. The city will ensure that
all federally funded contracts contain required Title VI assurances prohibiting
discrimination in violation of the city’s policy on non-discrimination. The
city will monitor consultants and contractors for compliance with the city’s
non-discrimination policy. The city will promptly investigate any alleged claim
of discrimination and will work with the consultant or contractor to obtain
voluntary compliance with the city’s non-discrimination policy.
   (C)   Complaint procedure.
      (1)   Any person who believes that he or she, on the basis of race,
color, national origin, gender, age, disability, religion, low income status,
or limited English proficiency, has been excluded from or denied participation
in, been denied the benefits of, or otherwise been subjected to discrimination
in or under any program or activity receiving federal funding assistance in
violation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended and its
related statutes, regulations and directives, may submit a complaint. The city
assures every effort will be made to ensure nondiscrimination in all of its
programs and activities, whether those programs and activities are federally
funded or not.
      (2)   Complaint forms can be obtained from the city. Individuals are not
required to use the complaint form and may submit a complaint in any format
that includes the name, address and telephone number of the individual
complaining and brief description of the alleged discriminatory conduct
including the date of harm. An individual submitting a complaint alleging
discrimination may include relevant evidence, including the names of witnesses
and supporting documentation. A complaint must be signed by the complainant.
      (3)   Complaint forms must be submitted within 180 days of the date of
the alleged discrimination. Complaint form should be directed to:
                     City Clerk-Treasurer’s Office
                     Title VI Coordinator
                     320 Main Street/P.O. Box 110
                     Rochester, IN 46975
                     574-223-2510
      (4)   Within 60 days of the receipt of the complaint, the Title VI
Coordinator will conduct an investigation of the allegation based on the
information provided and issue a written report of its findings to the
complainant. The Title VI Coordinator will try to obtain an informal voluntary
resolution to all complaints at the lowest level possible.
      (5)   Any person aggrieved by the findings of the Title VI Coordinator
may, within 15 days of the receipt of the response of the Title VI Coordinator,
file an appeal to the Office of the Mayor. Within 15 calendar days after
receipt of the appeal of the Title VI Coordinator’s report, the Mayor or his or
her designee will meet with the complainant to discuss the complaint and the
possible resolutions. Within 15 calendar days of the meeting, the Office of the
Mayor will respond in writing, will explain the position of the Mayor and offer
a final resolution of the complaint.
      (6)   These procedures do not deny the right of any individual to file a
formal complaint with any government agency or affect an individual’s right to
seek private counsel for any complaint alleging discrimination.
      (7)   Complaints may also be filed with the following governmental
agencies:
                  Indiana Department of Transportation
                  Economic Opportunity Division
                  100 N. Senate Ave, Room N750
                  Indianapolis, IN 46204
                  Phone: (317) 233-6511
                  Fax: (317) 233-0891
 
                  Indianapolis District EEOC Office
                  101 West Ohio Street, Ste 1900
                  Indianapolis, IN 46204
                  Phone: (800) 669-4000
                  Fax: (317) 226-7953
                  TTY: 1 (800) 669-6820
 
                  Indiana Civil Rights Commission
                  100 N. Senate Ave, Room N103
                  Indianapolis, IN 46204
                  Phone: (317) 232-2600
                  Fax: (317) 232-6560
                  Hearing Impaired: 1 (800) 743-3336
(Res. 10-2016, passed - - )
§ 37.02 CHARGES FOR PHOTOSTATIC COPIES.
   It is hereby resolved by the Common Council that the charges for the making
of photostatic copies of letter size paper documents in all city offices is
$.10 per page for 8½" x 11" and $.15 for 8½" x 14".
(Res. 31-1997, passed 9-9-97)
§ 37.03 RESERVED.
§ 37.04 ACCEPTANCE OF CREDIT CARD OR BANK CARD AND ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER
PAYMENTS.
   (A)   The Common Council, as the fiscal body of the city, authorizes the
Clerk-Treasurer to accept bank card, credit card, or electronic funds transfer
payments by the methods set forth in I.C. 36-1-8-11.
   (B)   The Common Council, as the fiscal body of the city, authorizes the
Clerk-Treasurer to pay any applicable bank card or credit card service charges
in accordance with I.C. 36-1-8-11(g).
   (C)   The Common Council ordains that the payment of any applicable bank
card or credit card service charges by the Clerk-Treasurer, as authorized
above, must be uniformly applied to all payments of the same type as set forth
in I.C. 36-1-8-11(e).
   (D)   The Common Council ordains that the city is authorized to collect from
a person using the card the fee charged by its bank or credit card vendor and a
reasonable convenience fee, as set forth in I.C. 36-1-8-11(f). However, the
city will provide notice at least 30 days prior to any change to the
convenience fee after January 1, 2014.
(Ord. 09-2013, passed 9-24-13)
§ 37.05 NOTICE REGARDING RETURNED CHECKS.
   (A)   If a check made payable to the city or any of its departments is
returned for insufficient funds or because of a closed account, there will be a
fee of $20 assessed, in addition to demand for the full amount of the check. If
the demand for payment is not satisfied within 15 days, the check will be
turned over to the County Prosecutor for possible criminal action.
   (B)   If a check is returned for insufficient funds or because of a closed
account, the city will only accept a money order or cash payment for subsequent
transactions with the city.
(Ord. 12-2004, passed 7-13-04)
CHAPTER 38: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Section
   
38.01   Creation
   
38.02   Violations Clerk
   
38.03   Duties of Violations Clerk and staff
   
38.04   Schedule of violations
§ 38.01 CREATION.
   There shall be created an Ordinance Violations Bureau pursuant to I.C. 33-6-
3-1 et seq., as amended, for the city.
(Ord. 03-1996, passed 6-25-96)
§ 38.02 VIOLATIONS CLERK.
   The City Clerk-Treasurer is appointed and shall serve as the Violations
Clerk, who administers the Bureau.
(Ord. 03-1996, passed 6-25-96)
§ 38.03 DUTIES OF VIOLATIONS CLERK AND STAFF.
   The Clerk-Treasurer and her staff, as her agents, shall accept written
appearances, waivers of trial, admissions of violations, and payment of civil
penalties in the amount and for the violation as provided in § 38.04.
(Ord. 03-1996, passed 6-25-96)
§ 38.04 SCHEDULE OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The following schedule of ordinances (hereinafter "Ord.") and City of
Rochester, Code of Ordinances provisions shall be subject to the jurisdiction
of the Ordinance Violations Bureau or the Superior Court of Fulton County and
the first violations within a calendar year of said ordinances and code
provisions shall be subject to the civil penalty set forth:
ROCHESTER CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE NO.  FINE
ROCHESTER CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE NO.                                                            FINE
GARBAGE
50.15    Use of Containers Required-Trash                           $15.00
50.19    Containers To Be Securely Covered-Trash                    $15.00
50.20    Placement Of Explosives In Containers                      $50.00
                                                                   
TRAFFIC
70.08    School Property                                            $15.00
70.09    Rochester Plaza                                            $15.00
                                                                    
71.02    Driving On Sidewalk                                        $15.00
71.03    Commercial Vehicles In Residence Districts                 $25.00
                                                                    
72.01    Parking To Display or Repair "On Street"                   $25.00
72.02    Parking in Alley                                           $15.00
72.22    Illegally Parking in a Handicapped Parking Space           $50.00
72.22    Late Penalty for Not Paying Fine Within Seven Days         $50.00
                                                                   
73.01    Manner Of Riding Bicycles On Sidewalks                     $ 5.00
        (On Main Street, between 6th & 9th)                         
73.03    Parking Of Bicycles                                        $ 5.00
73.15    Use Of Coasters and Roller Skates                          $ 5.00
        (On Main Street, between 6th & 9th)                         
                                                                    
74.01    Blocking Railroad Crossings                                $50.00
                                                                   
CHAPTER 76 PARKING SCHEDULES
        Violation Of Unlawful Parking-Pages 33-37                   
        Fines from $10.00 to $50.00                                 
        Write On UTT-have 30 days to pay to City Clerk              
        See also §                                                 
         95.31
                                                                   
ABANDONED OR JUNK VEHICLES
90.02    Junk Car Nuisance Declared                                 $15.00
                                                                   
ANIMAL
91.02    Animal Keeping                                              
            First Offense:                                       $100.00
           Second Offense:                                      $200.00
           Subsequent Offense:                                  $300.00
91.03    Animal Treatment                                            
            First Offense:                                       $100.00
           Second Offense:                                      $200.00
           Subsequent Offense:                                  $300.00
91.04    Harboring Noisy Animals                                     
            First Offense:                                       $25.00
           Second Offense:                                      $50.00
           Subsequent Offense:                                  $100.00
91.05    Animal Bite                                                 
           First Offense:                                       $100.00
           Second Offense:                                      $200.00
           Subsequent Offense:                                  $300.00
                                                                   
OPEN BURNING
92.01    Open Burning                                               $15.00
                                                                   
NOISE
94.01    Nuisances Declared                                         $15.00
94.02    Commercial Noise                                           $15.00
                                                                   
PARKS AND RECREATION
95.01    Riding Animals Or Vehicles In Parks                        $ 5.00
95.26    Closing Hours-Parks                                        $ 5.00
95.29    Injuring Of Natural Environment                            $15.00
95.30    Profanity                                                  $15.00
95.31    Parking Fine at Lakeside Park in Violation of Posted Signs $50.00
                                                                   
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
96.02    Depositing Matter On Public Ways                           $15.00
96.03    Placement Of Advertising On Public Property                $ 5.00
96.04    Placement Of Advertising On Utility Poles                  $ 5.00
                                                                   
TREES
97.40    Removal Of Weeds and Rank Vegetation by City               $15.00
                                                                   
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
115.15   License Required-Transient Merchant                        $15.00
                                                                   
GARAGE AND YARD SALES
116.01   Violation Yard Sales In City                               $ 5.00
                                                                   
COMMERCIAL USE OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
119.02   Improper Commercial Use of Municipal Property              $100.00
GENERAL OFFENSES
130.01   Nuisances Prohibited                                       $15.00
130.03   Shooting Rockets                                           $15.00
130.04   Discharge Of Firearms & Air Rifles                         $35.00
130.05   Destroying City Property                                   $35.00
                                                                   
 
   (B)   This division (B) applies where penalties for multiple offenses are
not addressed in the schedule in division (A) above. The second admission of a
violation of the same ordinance or code provision of one scheduled above within
a calendar year shall be subject to the penalty set forth above plus $5.00 as
the total civil penalty. Any third admission of a violation of the same
ordinance or code provision of one scheduled above within a calendar year shall
be subject to the penalty set forth above plus $10.00 as the total civil
penalty.
(Ord. 03-1996, passed 6-25-96; Am. Ord. 15-2000, passed 7-11-00; Am. Ord. 16-
2000, passed 8-8-00; Am. Ord. 12-2007, passed 7-24-07; Am. Ord. 01-2015, passed
1-27-15)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.  SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
      
51. SEWERS
      
52. WATER
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Construction of vehicles
Garbage Containers
   
50.15   Use of containers required
   
50.16   Responsibility for condition of container
   
50.17   Container specifications
   
50.18   Wrapping of garbage
   
50.19   Containers to be securely covered; emptied regularly
   
50.20   Placement of explosives in containers
Private Haulers
   
50.40   Inspection and approval of vehicles by Street Superintendent
Statutory reference:
   Health power of city, see I.C. 36-8-2-4
   Power of city to regulate garbage disposal, see I.C. 36-9-2-16 and 36-9-2-17
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Rejected food wastes, including, but not limited to every waste
accumulation of animal, fruit and vegetable matter, used or intended for food,
or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat,
fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables, and all other putrescible wastes except for
sewage and body wastes.
   PRIVATE HAULERS. Any person engaged in the collecting, hauling and disposing
of any garbage or rubbish for hire.
   RUBBISH. Such matter as ashes, cans, metal waste, broken glass, crockery,
dirt, sweeping, boxes, lumber, wood, leaves, grass, weeds, paper or litter of
any kind, except trees, and large amounts of debris from demolition or
construction of buildings.
   YARD WASTE. Tree branches, twigs, tree bark, leaves, plants, flowers, grass,
vegetation and weeds.
(‘79 Code, § 6-16) (Am. Ord. 04-2014, passed 5-27-14)
§ 50.02 CONSTRUCTION OF VEHICLES.
   All vehicles used for collection, hauling, or transportation of garbage and
rubbish shall be a suitably constructed, sanitary type, with an enclosed body
and a watertight bottom. The body shall be covered so as to eliminate flies,
insects and rodents, and keep its contents from falling, blowing or being
scattered from the vehicle.
('79 Code, § 6-25)
GARBAGE CONTAINERS
§ 50.15 USE OF CONTAINERS REQUIRED.
   The owner and/or occupant of every premises where any garbage and/or rubbish
is created or accumulated shall place the materials in a container that meets
the specifications of this subchapter. A container shall not be required for
yard waste to be removed within a reasonable time.
(‘79 Code, § 6-18) (Ord. 04-2014, passed 5-27-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.16 RESPONSIBILITY FOR CONDITION OF CONTAINER.
   The sole responsibility for the sanitary condition of any garbage and/or
rubbish containers and for the disposal of garbage and/or rubbish shall rest
with the owner and/or occupant of each premises.
('79 Code, § 6-17)
§ 50.17 CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Sanitation. All containers in which there has been deposited any
garbage or rubbish shall be kept in a sanitary condition. ('79 Code, § 6-19)
   (B)   Size. All containers in which garbage and/or rubbish is to be placed
shall not exceed 30 gallons in capacity. ('79 Code, § 6-20)
   (C)   Watertight; cover. All containers in which garbage is placed shall be
watertight and equipped with a tight-fitting cover. ('79 Code, § 6-21)
§ 50.18 WRAPPING OF GARBAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place any unwrapped garbage in a
required garbage container.
('79 Code, § 6-22)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.19 CONTAINERS TO BE SECURELY COVERED; EMPTIED REGULARLY.
   All containers in which any garbage and/or rubbish has been deposited shall
be securely covered so that flies, insects, and rodents cannot enter; the
containers shall be emptied frequently as required for sanitary measures.
('79 Code, § 6-23)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.20 PLACEMENT OF EXPLOSIVES IN CONTAINERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit any explosives such
as dynamite, dynamite caps, shotgun shells, rifle cartridges, gunpowder,
gasoline in a container which is used for garbage and/or rubbish for collection
or disposal.
('79 Code, § 6-24)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   General offenses, see §
130.01
PRIVATE HAULERS
§ 50.40 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL OF VEHICLES BY STREET SUPERINTENDENT.
   All vehicles to be used for the hauling of garbage and/or rubbish by a
private hauler shall be inspected by the Street Superintendent and shall meet
his approval.
('79 Code, § 6-36)
REMOVAL OF YARD WASTE
§ 50.50 REMOVAL OF YARD WASTE.
   From time to time, the city may engage in limited removal of certain yard
waste. Such services are for the sole benefit of the owner and/or occupant. Any
professional or for-hire performing tree-trimming, pruning, landscaping, or
other services which generate yard waste, is required to haul such items away
from the property, or arrange for a private hauler licensed under this chapter
to do the same. The city may refuse to haul any rubbish generated by such a
person.
(Ord. 04-2014, passed 5-27-14)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Management of sewage collection system; authority to prohibit dumping
   
51.02   Cost of construction to be borne by owner
Sewer Use
   
51.14   General Provisions
   
51.15   Applicability and enforcement of provisions
   
51.16   Definitions
   
51.17   Prohibited acts
   
51.18   Permit required; classes of permits
   
51.19   Industrial user prohibited discharges
   
51.20   Abnormal waste surcharge
   
51.21   National categorical pretreatment standards
   
51.22   Local limits
   
51.23   Pretreatment of industrial wastes and permits required
   
51.24   Additional pretreatment measures
   
51.25   Plans for pretreatment facility to be submitted to city; periodic
inspections
   
51.26   Pretreatment and discharge of industrial cooling water
   
51.27   Nonresidenial users to provide wastewater flow characteristics
information
   
51.28   Strength of sewage; testing
   
51.29   Accidental discharge/slug control plans
   
51.30   Compliance with state and federal standards
   
51.31   Tampering with municipal sewage works prohibited
   
51.32   Reports of potential problems
   
51.33   Right of entry for purpose of inspection
   
51.34   Non-delegated pretreatment program
   
51.35   Enforcement remedies
   
51.36   Pretreatment charges and fees
Rates and Charges
   
51.45   Definitions
   
51.46   Charges established; charges regulated by EPA; classes of users
   
51.47   Charges collected from owners; basis of sewage rates and charges
   
51.48   Methods of measurement to determine water quantity
   
51.49   Charges based on volume, strength and character of waste discharged
   
51.50   Manner of billing and collection
   
51.51   Special rate contracts
   
51.52   Special rates and charges
   
51.53   Area to be additionally charged
   
51.54   Monthly average calculation
   
51.55   Financial contributions
   
51.56   Study to review fairness, equity and proportionality of rates and
charges
   
51.57   Charges for connection to the sewage works system
   
51.58   Video discrepancy policy
 
   
51.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Environment generally, see I.C. 13-1-1-1 et seq.
   Federal general pretreatment regulations for existing and new sources of
pollution, see 40 CFR 403
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 MANAGEMENT OF SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM; AUTHORITY TO PROHIBIT DUMPING.
   (A)   The city shall make and enforce such rules and regulations as may be
deemed necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management of the
city's sewage collection system, pumping stations, vacuum stations, and sewage
treatment works, for the construction and use of house sewers and connections
to the sewage treatment works, the sewage collection system and for the
regulation, collection, rebating and refunding of such rates and charges.
   (B)   The city is authorized to prohibit dumping of wastes into the city's
sewage system which, in its discretion, are deemed harmful to the operation of
the sewage treatment works of the city, or to require methods affecting
pretreatment of the wastes to comply with the pretreatment standards included
in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to
the sewage works or as may be contained in the EPA General Pretreatment
Regulations, 40 CFR Part 403 and any amendments thereto or the city's
pretreatment program plan.
('79 Code, § 17-108) (Ord. 108-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 18-2001, passed
11-13-01)
Statutory reference:
   Leases of sewage works, see I.C. 36-9-23-2
   Control and supervision of sewage works, see I.C. 36-9-23-3
§ 51.02 COST OF CONSTRUCTION TO BE BORNE BY OWNER.
   The cost of sewer construction on private property to connect to the sewers
being installed by the city will be borne by the property owners.
('79 Code, § 17-153) (Ord. 114-1987, passed 11-10-87)
SEWER USE
§ 51.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose and policy.
      (1)   This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
publicly owned treatment works for the City of Rochester (“city” or
“Rochester”) and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and
federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq) and the
general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this
subchapter are:
         (a)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly
owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation;
         (b)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly
owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment
works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;
         (c)   To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may
be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public;
         (d)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and
sludge from the publicly owned treatment works;
         (e)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost
of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment
works; and
         (F)   To enable the city to comply with its national pollutant
discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned
treatment works is subject.
      (2)   This subchapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned
treatment works. This subchapter authorizes the issuance of individual
wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and
enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires
user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
      (3)   Unless otherwise defined herein, terms shall have the meanings
adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, American
Waterworks Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, as set
forth in 40 CFR Part 136. Waste constituents and characteristics shall be
measured by standard methods unless a mutually agreed upon acceptable
alternative method is adopted by agreement of the permittee and the permitting
authority or any other method is established by federal or state regulatory
agencies. Monitoring and metering shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods.
   (B)   Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Wastewater
Superintendent shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
subchapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Wastewater
Superintendent may be delegated by the Wastewater Superintendent to a duly
authorized city employee.
   (C)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this
subchapter, shall have the designated meanings:
BOD5    Biochemical Oxygen Demand
BMP     Best Management Practice
BMR     Baseline Monitoring Report
CFR     Code of Federal Regulations
CIU     Categorical Industrial User
CBOD5   Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand
COD     Chemical Oxygen Demand
EPA     U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
EPA RV  Environmental Protection Agency Region 5
FOG     Fats, Oils, and Grease
gpd     gallons per day
I.C.    Indiana Code
IAC     Indiana Administrative Code
IDEM    Indiana Department of Environmental Management
IOSHA   Indiana Occupational Safety & Health Administration
IWP     Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Permit
IU      Industrial User
mg/l    milligrams per liter
MSDS    Material Safety Data Sheet
NPDES   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NSCIU   Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User
POTW    Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA    Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIU     Significant Industrial User
SNC     Significant Noncompliance
TSS     Total Suspended Solids
U.S. C. United States Code
 
   (D)   Severability; effective date.
      (1)   Severability. If any provision of this subchapter is invalidated by
any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be
affected and shall continue in full force and effect.
      (2)   Effective date.
         (a)   This subchapter shall become immediately effective upon its
adoption by the City Council and Board of Works I, signature by the Mayor,
enrollment in the book of ordinances, and publication of notice as required by
law.
         (b)   Any ordinance in contradiction to this subchapter is repealed.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-2021)
§ 51.15 APPLICABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.
   This subchapter shall be applicable to and enforceable within the
incorporated boundary of the city, and shall also be applicable to and
enforceable in any other areas in which the city exercises boundaries with
respect to collection, processing, and discharge of sanitary sewage pursuant to
I.C. 36-92-16 to 36-9-2-18.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.16 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this subchapter shall be as follows:
   AMMONIA (NH3). The same as ammonia nitrogen measured as ammonia. The
laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth
in “Standard Methods.”
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to comply
with this subchapter [327 IAC 5-18-2(c) and 40 CFR 403.5]. BMPs include
treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   BOARD. The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city, or any other duly
authorized officials acting on its behalf.
   BUILDING (OR HOUSE) DRAIN. The lowest horizontal piping of building drainage
system which receives the discharge from waste, and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to a point approximately five feet
outside the foundation wall of the building.
      (1)   BUILDING DRAIN: SANITARY. A building drain which conveys sanitary
or industrial sewage only.
      (2)   BUILDING DRAIN: STORM. A building drain which conveys storm water
or other clean water drainage, but no wastewater.
   BUILDING (or HOUSE) LATERAL SEWER. The extension from the building drain to
the sewage system or other place of disposal.
      (1)   BUILDING SEWER: SANITARY. A building sewer which conveys sanitary
or industrial sewage only.
      (2)   BUILDING SEWER: STORM. A building sewer which conveys storm water
or other clean water drainage, but no sanitary or industrial sewage.
   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an
industrial user’s treatment facility.
   CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (or CBOD). Five-day measure of
pollutant parameters carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with
sections 307(b)  and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) that apply to a specific
category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-
471.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (or COD). COD of sewage, sewage effluent, polluted
waters or industrial wastes is a measure of the oxygen equivalent of that
portion of organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a
strong chemical oxidant. The laboratory determination shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in “Standard Methods”, and shall conform
to the current version of 40 CFR Part 136.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, PH, E-
coli bacteria, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants
identified in the NPDES permit if the treatment works was designed to treat
such pollutants and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial
degree. The term substantial degree is not subject to precise definition, but
generally contemplates removals in the order of 80% or greater. Minor
incidental removals in the order of 10% to 30% are not considered substantial.
Examples of the additional pollutants which may be considered compatible
include:
      (1)   Chemical oxygen demand;
      (2)   Total organic carbon;
      (3)   Phosphorus and phosphorus compounds;
      (4)   Nitrogen and nitrogen compounds; and
      (5)   Fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin (except as
prohibited where these materials would interfere with the operation of the
treatment works).
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A 24-hour composite sample consists of at least four
individual flow-proportioned samples of wastewater, taken by the grab sample
method over equal time intervals during the period of operator attendance or by
an automatic sampler, and which are combined prior to analysis.
      (1)   A flow proportioned composite sample shall be obtained by:
         (a)   Recording the discharge flow rate at the time each individual
sample is taken,
         (b)   Adding together the discharge flow rates recorded from each
individual sampling time to formulate the “total flow value,”
         (c)   Dividing the discharge flow rate of each individual sampling
time by the total flow value to determine its percentage of the total flow
value, and
         (d)   Multiplying the volume of the total composite sample by each
individual sample’s percentage to determine the volume of that individual
sample which will be included in the total composite sample.
      (2)   Alternatively, a 24-hour composite sample may be obtained by an
automatic sampler on an equal time interval basis over a 24-hour period
provided that a minimum of 24 samples are taken and combined prior to analysis.
The samples do not need to be flow-proportioned if the permittee collects
samples in this manner.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The Commissioner of the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management (IDEM).
   DAILY MAXIMUM. The highest total discharge for any calendar day during a
calendar month.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   E. COLI. Escherichia coli bacteria.
   EFFLUENT LIMITATIONS. The arithmetic mean of CBOD, ammonia-nitrogen and TSS
values and the geometric mean of E-coli values and fecal coliform values for
effluent samples collected in a calendar month or week which shall not exceed
the monthly averages contained in the discharge limitation section of NPDES
permit for the wastewater treatment plant for the city.
   FECAL COLIFORM. Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of
man and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pollution.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state, such that will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment facility approved by the city.
   GARBAGE. Any solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, or dispensing of
food and from handling, storage or sale of produce.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible
pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids, and further defined in
regulation 40 CFR Part 403.
   IDEM. Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGER. A nondomestic discharger introducing pollutants into a
POTW, regardless of whether the discharger is within the governmental
jurisdiction of the permittee.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. An indirect discharger.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of energy
discharged, permitted to flow or escape from an industrial, manufacturing,
commercial or business process, or from  the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource carried on by a period and shall further
mean any waste from an industrial sewer.
   INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to,
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. (INFILTRATION does
not include, and is distinguished from, inflow.)
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both infiltration and
inflow without distinguishing the source.
   INFLOW. The water discharged into a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leader, cellar, yard
and area drains, foundation drains, unpolluted cooling water discharges, drains
from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm
sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters or
drainage. (INFLOW does not include, and is distinguishable from, infiltration.)
   INSPECTOR. The person or persons duly authorized by the Board of Public
Works and Safety to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and
their connection to the public sewer system.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources does one of the following:
      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, its sludge processes, or its selected sludge use or disposal
methods.
      (2)   Causes a violation any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
      (3)   Prevents the use of the POTW’s sewage sludge or its sludge disposal
method selected in compliance with the following statutory provisions,
regulations, or permits issued thereunder more stringent state or local
regulations:
         (a)   Section 405 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1345).
         (b)   The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. 6901), including:
            1.   Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); and
            2.   The rules contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA (42 U.S.C. 6941).
         (c)   The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401).
         (d)   The Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2601).
   MONTHLY AVERAGE. The total discharge during a calendar month. The MONTHLY
AVERAGE shall be determined by the summation of the measured daily discharge
divided by the number of days during the calendar month when measurements were
taken.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet including store sewers, into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. For the purpose of determining surcharges,
wastewater or sewage having an average concentration as follows:
      (1)   CBOD not more than 250 mg/l.
      (2)   Suspended solids not more than 250 mg/l.
      (3)   Ammonia not more than 20 mg/l.
      (4)   COD not more than 500 mg/l.
      (5)   Phosphorus not more than 10 mg/l.
      (6)   As defined by origin, wastewater from segregated domestic and/or
sanitary conveniences as distinct from water from industrial purposes.
   NPDES PERMIT. National pollutant discharge elimination system permit setting
forth conditions for the discharge of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants to the navigable waters of the United States pursuant to Section 402
of PL 95-217.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge proceeding through a POTW into waters of the state
in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, are a cause of a violation of any requirement
of the POTW’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, partnership, co-
partnership, joint stock company, trust, estate, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency, the State of Indiana, the United
States of America, or other legal entity, or their legal representatives,
agents, or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the
singular shall include the plural where indicated by the content.
   pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alternations of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alternation
can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes
or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d); and shall include
all applicable rule and regulations contained in the Code of Federal
Regulations as published in the Federal Register, under Section 307 of Public
Law 95-217, under regulations 40 CFR Part 403 pursuant to the Act, and
amendments.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial
user, including applicable local limits.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. State pretreatment standards as established in 327
IAC 5-18-8; pretreatment standards for prohibited discharges, as established in
327 IAC 5-18-2; and national categorical pretreatment standards incorporated by
reference in 327 IAC 5-18-10.
   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned by a public authority.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has shredded to such a degree that all particles will
be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (or POTW). A treatment works owned by the
state or municipality, except that it does not include pipes, sewers or other
conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. The term includes
any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of municipal sewage or compatible industrial wastes. The term also
includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to
a POTW treatment plant. POTW also means the municipality that has jurisdiction
over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such treatment works.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is owned and controlled by the public authority
and will consist of the following increments:
      (1)   COLLECTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewaters from individual point source discharges.
      (2)   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
      (3)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment facility.
      (4)   PUMPING STATION. A station positioned in the public sewer system at
which wastewater is pumped to a higher level.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sanitary and industrial wastes, and to
which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. The combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial building, industrial plants and institution (including
polluted cooling water). The two most common types of sewage are:
      (1)   INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE. A combination of liquid and water-carried
wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment (this shall include the
wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water).
      (2)   SANITARY SEWAGE. The combination of liquid and water-carried
wastes, discharged from toilet and other sanitary facilities.
   SEWAGE WORKS. The structures, equipment and process to collect, transport
and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent and
accumulated residual solids.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SHALL. Is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 327 IAC 5-18-10.
      (2)   An industrial user that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blow down
wastewater) to the POTW;
         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
         (c)   Is designated as a significant industrial user by the control
authority on the basis that the industrial user has the reasonable potential
to:
            1.   Adversely affect the POTW’s operation;
            2.   Violate a pretreatment standard; or
            3.   Violate a requirement of 327 IAC 5-19-3.
      (3)   The control authority may, on its own initiative or in response to
a petition received from an industrial user or a POTW and in accordance with
327 IAC 5-19-3(6), determine that an industrial user is not a significant
industrial user if it does not meet Part III.A.9.b.(3) of NPDES Permit No.
IN0021661.
   SLUG. Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not
limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which as a
reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way
violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
   STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest approved
edition at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater prepared and published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Waterworks Association and The Water Pollution
Control Federation.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer for conveying water, ground water or unpolluted water
from any source and to which sanitary and/or industrial wastes are not
intentionally admitted.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the wastewater treatment plant of the
city, or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids which either floats on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquid and which are removable by
laboratory filtration. Their concentration shall be expressed in milligrams per
liter. Quantitative determination shall be made in accordance with procedures
set forth in Standard Methods.
   TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
   TSS. Total suspended solids.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USER. Any person that discharges, causes, or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the sewerage system.
   VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER. The material in the sewage solids transformed to
gasses or vapors when heated to 550 degrees Celsius for 15 to 20 minutes.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
   WEEKLY AVERAGE DISCHARGE. The highest average of a calendar week during a
calendar month. The weekly average shall be determined by the summation of the
measured daily discharge divided by the number of days during the calendar week
when measurements were taken.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-13-21)
§ 51.17 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human excrement,
garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   No new connection shall be made unless there is capacity available to
all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains and the sewage treatment
plant, including capacity for CBOD, COD, suspended solids, ammonia, and
phosphorus.
   (C)   No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner on public or private property within the jurisdiction of the
city, any wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with provisions of this subchapter and the
NPDES permit.
   (D)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural
outlet any wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with provisions of this subchapter and the
NPDES permit.
   (E)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (F)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, and which have or
maintain toilet facilities on said property shall connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided
that said public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line. (See I.C. 36-9-
23-30)
   (G)   The owner of any house, building, or other property which contains
basement drains connected to any sewers maintained by the city, whether storm
sewers, combined sewers, or any other sewer connection, shall have installed on
said basement drains appropriate plugs which may be firmly fastened by screw
threads or other appropriate means to prevent the backup from any such sewer
into said basement; in the alternative such drains shall be equipped with check
valves which are sufficient to prevent the backup of any waters from said sewer
into said basement.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.18 PERMIT REQUIRED; CLASSES OF PERMITS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Clerk Treasurer.
   (B)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   Residential users; and
         (b)   Commercial/non-residential users.
      (2)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Inspector. Connections fees will be
as defined by a separate ordinance.
   (C)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall be responsible
for the building sewer from the point of tap to the city line. The owner shall
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another or an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
   (E)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Inspector, to meet all
requirements of this subchapter.
   (F)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a new
building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointly testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification
thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications
of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewer carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (H)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface run-off ground
water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (I)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice
No.9. All such connections shall be made gas tight and water tight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Superintendent before installation.
   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Inspector
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Inspector or
his or her representative.
   (K)   All excavations for building installation must be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.19 INDUSTRIAL USER PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of the Rochester POTW whether or not they are
subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or
local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      (1)   A pollutant from any source of nondomestic wastewaters that could
pass through or cause interference with the operation or performance of the
POTW;
      (2)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the Rochester
POTW, including but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint
of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
      (3)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.5, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the Rochester POTW or
equipment;
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the POTW
such as , but not limited to, ashes , cinders, sand, mud, straw, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, paints, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch, manure, hair, fleashing, entrails, paper, dishes, cups, milk
containers, and the like either whole or ground by garbage grinders;
      (5)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD and the
like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause
interference in the Rochester POTW;
      (6)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 140 degrees Fahrenheit
(60 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the
treatment plant resulting in interference or damage to the POTW, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment
plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius);
      (7)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (8)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the Rochester POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;
      (9)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except with the permission of the
POTW, and when introduced to the POTW at a discharge point designated by the
POTW;
      (10)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair;
      (11)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant’s
effluent, thereby violating the city’s NPDES permit;
      (12)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (13)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (14)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Rochester
Board of Public Works and Safety upon recommendation of the Superintendent in a
wastewater discharge permit;
      (15)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      (16)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the Rochester POTW;
      (17)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and
150 degrees Fahrenheit or 0 degrees Celsius and 65 degrees Celsius;
      (18)   Any garbage that has not been properly ground or shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-quarters horsepower (0.76 HP metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval by the Board;
      (19)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Board as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
      (20)   Any waters or wastes containing acid metallic pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions; and
      (21)   Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones,
aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides,
and sulfides, and any other substances which the city, the state, or EPA has
notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system.
   (C)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or area proposed to be
discharged, to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in division (B) above, and which in the
judgment of the Board may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment or receiving waters, or otherwise create a hazard to life
or constitute a public nuisance, the Board may:
      (1)   Develop and enforce specific limits on prohibited substances.
      (2)   Require new industries, or industries with significant increase in
discharges, to submit information on wastewater characteristics and obtain
prior approval for discharges.
      (3)   Enter the premises of any industrial user to conduct inspections,
surveillance, record review, and/or monitoring, as necessary to determine
compliance with the SUO and, if applicable, any effective industrial wastewater
pretreatment permit.
      (4)   Accept or deny any new or increased discharges from any indirect
discharger.
      (5)   Require compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements by indirect dischargers.
      (6)   Immediately halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants to the POTW
which reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to the health or
welfare of the public, the environment, and/or which threatens to interfere
with the operation of the POTW.
      (7)   Require payment of a surcharge on any excessive flows or loadings
discharged to the treatment works to cover the additional costs of having
capacity for and treating such wastes.
      (8)   If the Board permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Board and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   (D)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
   (E)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible
at all times. Agents of the city, the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, record review, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing.
   (F)   All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of water
and wastes to which reference is made in this subchapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole, except for application for NPDES Permits and
report there of which shall be conducted in accordance with rules and
regulations adopted by the USEPA, 40 CFR Part 136 and any subsequent revisions
subject to approval by the city. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analysis
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, CBOD, suspended solids and ammonia analysis are
obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas PHs are determined
from periodic grab samples.)
   (G)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby a compatible industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefore, by the industrial concern, at such rates as are compatible with the
rate ordinance.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.20 ABNORMAL WASTE SURCHARGE.
   (A)   In order that the rates and charges may be justly and equitably
adjusted to the service rendered to users, the Board shall base its charges not
only on the volume, but also on strength and character of the stronger than
normal domestic sewage and wastes which it is required to treat and dispose of.
The Board shall require the user to determine the strength and content of all
sewage discharged either directly or indirectly to the POTW, in that manner, by
that method, and at those times as the Board may deem practicable in light of
the conditions and attending circumstances of the case, in order to determine
the proper charge. The user shall furnish a central sampling point available to
the Board at all times.
   (B)   Additional charges for treating stronger than normal domestic waste
are based on the following thresholds and rates:
      (1)   Total suspended solids (TSS) - shall be surcharged in excess of 250
mg/l at a rate of $0.24/lb.
      (2)   CBOD - shall be surcharged in excess of 250 mg/l of at a rate of
$0.24/lb.
      (3)   Ammonia - shall be surcharged in excess of 20 mg/l at a rate of
$0.69/lb.
      (4)   COD - shall be surcharged in excess of 500 mg/l at a rate of $0.24/
lb.
      (5)   Phosphorus - shall be surcharged in excess of 10 mg/l at a rate of
$1.80/lb.
   (C)   The determination of suspended solids, five-day biochemical oxygen
demand, ammonia, and phosphorus contained in the waste shall be in accordance
with the latest copy of Standard Methods for the Elimination of Water, Sewage,
and Industrial Wastes, as written by the American Public Health Association,
the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation, and
in conformance with Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of
Pollutants: 40 CFR 136.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.21 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   Industrial users per 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(ii) must comply with the categorical
pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
   (A)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Wastewater
Superintendent shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6
(e).
   (B)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
Wastewater Superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 CFR 404.6(c).
   (C)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the Wastewater
Superintendent may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed
either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for
purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual
industrial users.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.22 LOCAL LIMITS.
   (A)   The Board is authorized to establish and enforce local limits pursuant
to 327 IAC 5-18-2(b) and (d).
   (B)   The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass
through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in
excess of the following daily maximum limitations.
   (C)   Under the direction of the Wastewater Superintendent, BMPs may be
required and may include: treatment requirements; operating procedures and
practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal;
or drainage from raw materials storage. Such BMPs shall be considered local
limits and pretreatment standards for the purposes of this part and section 307
(d) of the Act.
Pollutant Daily Maximum Limitation (mg/l)
Pollutant                        Daily Maximum Limitation (mg/l)
Cadmium                          0.16
Chromium                         2.0
Hexavalent Chromium              0.86
Copper                           1.44
Cyanide                          0.24
Lead                             0.53
Mercury                          0.0003
Molybdenum                       0.5
Nickel                           3.95
Oil & Grease - Animal/Vegetable  200
Oil & Grease - Mineral/Petroleum 100
Silver                           1.34
Zinc                             0.63
Total Toxic Organics (TTO)       1.0
 
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.23 PRETREATMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES AND PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in §
51.19 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the Board
whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Wastewater Superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable to the Wastewater
Superintendent before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans
and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge
acceptable to the city under the provisions of this ordinance. The Wastewater
Superintendent may require other users to obtain individual wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this subchapter.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.24 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Wastewater Superintendent may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW
and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
   (C)   Users which operate vehicular wash facilities shall provide, operate,
and maintain pretreatment facilities approved by the Superintendent to control
solids and preclude the discharge toxic substances to the POTW.
   (D)   Users which operate food preparation facilities shall install grease
interceptors, which shall remove greases, fats, oils and food solids before
entering the sanitary sewer system and to the POTW. Wastes from sinks,
dishwashers and kitchen floor drains should be combined and routed through the
grease interceptor prior to entering the sanitary sewer system. The tank size
shall be based on design criteria set forth in Bulletin S.E. 13 from the
Indiana State Board of Health, latest edition. All interception units shall be
of type and capacity approved by the Superintendent and shall be so located to
be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be
inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their
expense.
   (E)   The Wastewater Superintendent may also require the installation of
grease, oil and sand interceptors when, in the opinion of the Superintendent,
they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease
in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.25 PLANS FOR PRETREATMENT FACILITY TO BE SUBMITTED TO CITY; PERIODIC
INSPECTIONS.
   Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
pretreatment of control facilities shall be submitted for approval of the city
and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until approval in
writing is granted. Where such facilities are provided, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operating order by the
owner at his or her expense and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the
city to determine that such facilities are being operated in conformance with
the applicable federal, state and local laws and permits. The owner shall
maintain operating records of the influent and effluent to show the performance
of the treatment facilities and for comparison against city monitoring records.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.26 PRETREATMENT AND DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL COOLING WATER.
   Industrial cooling water, which may be polluted with insoluble oils or
grease or suspended solids, shall be pretreated for removal of pollutants and
the resultant clear water shall be discharged to a sanitary sewer pending
written approval by the city.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.27 NONRESIDENTIAL USERS TO PROVIDE WASTEWATER FLOW CHARACTERISTICS
INFORMATION.
   The city shall require users of the sewage works, other than residential
users, to supply pertinent information on wastewater flow characteristics. Such
measurements, test and analyses shall be made at the users’ expense. If made by
the city, an appropriate charge may be assessed to the user at the option of
the city. All charges for test and analysis made by the city shall be adopted
by the Board.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.28 STRENGTH OF SEWAGE; TESTING.
   The strength of sewage shall be determined, for periodic establishment of
charges provided for in §§
51.45  through
51.50 from samplings taken at the afore mentioned structure at any period of
time and of such duration and in such manner as the city may elect, or at any
place mutually agreed upon between the user and the city. Appropriate charges
for sampling and analysis shall be assessed to the user as are adopted by the
Board. The results of routine sampling and analysis by the user may also be
used for determination of charges after verification by the city.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.29 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/ SLUG CONTROL PLANS.
   At least once every two years, the Wastewater Superintendent shall evaluate
whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or
other action to control slug discharges. The Wastewater Superintendent may
require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or
take such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges.
Alternatively, the Wastewater Superintendent may develop such a plan for any
user. An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:
   (A)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
   (B)   Description of stored chemicals;
   (C)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Wastewater Superintendent of
any accidental or slug discharge, as required by §
51.32; and
   (D)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.30 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL STANDARDS.
   All provisions of this subchapter and limits set herein shall comply with
any applicable state and/or federal requirements now, or projected to be in
effect.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.31 TAMPERING WITH MUNICIPAL SEWAGE WORKS PROHIBITED
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.32 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that might cause
potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and
notify the Wastewater Superintendent of the incident. This notification shall
include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume,
if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the Wastewater Superintendent, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve
the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of
any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
subchapter.
   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in division (A) above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   (D)   Significant industrial users are required to notify the Wastewater
Superintendent immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for a slug discharge.
   (E)   The Wastewater Superintendent will investigate violations through the
collection and analysis of samples and other information in a manner designed
to produce evidence that will be admissible in an enforcement proceeding or
judicial action.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.33 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR PURPOSE OF INSPECTION. 
   (A)   The Superintendent, Inspector and/or other duly authorized employees
of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, record review, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter. The Superintendent or his representative shall have authority to
inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining,
ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on
the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for
waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in §
51.29, the Superintendent and/or duly authorized employee of the city shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company
and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city
employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to
its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
§
51.18(E).
   (C)   The Superintendent and/or other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties for the purpose of, but not limited to inspection, record
review, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
City Code pertaining to the private property involved.
   (D)   Ordinance limitation testing may be conducted on a quarterly or semi-
annual basis or more frequently as exigent circumstances may require. The cost
of such testing and analysis shall be in accordance with fees established and
adopted by the Board.
§ 51.34 NON-DELEGATED PRETREATMENT PROGRAM.
   The city shall operate a non-delegated pretreatment program as defined in
its NPDES permit in accordance with the following:
   (A)   The Board, through its Superintendent and/or his or her duly
authorized employee, shall carry out all inspections, surveillance and
monitoring necessary to determine, independent of information supplied by the
city’s industrial users, compliance or noncompliance with limitations in
monitoring requirements contained in industrial waste pretreatment permits
(IWP) issued by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM).
   (B)   The Superintendent or any authorized representative of the
Superintendent is hereby authorized to enter any premises of any industrial
user in which a discharge source or pretreatment system is located or in which
records are required to be kept pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12(1) for the purpose of
assuring compliance with IWP permits. This authority shall include the power to
immediately order the cessation of any discharge of pollutants to the sewage
system which reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to the
health or welfare of the public, the environment, or which threatens to
interfere with the operation of the sewage works; and to immediately halt or
prevent any discharge of pollutant to the POTW which reasonably appears to
present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of the public, the
environment, and/or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the
POTW.
   (C)   In order to offset the cost incurred by the city, in managing,
sampling, inspecting, and analyzing industrial users subject to the non-
delegated pretreatment program, the Superintendent may charge reasonable fees
which may from time to time be established and adopted by the Board.
   (D)   The Board and the Superintendent is further authorized to immediately
begin operation of the non-delegated pretreatment program with respect to those
industries set forth in Part III of the NPDES permit and any other industry
which may subsequently be required to obtain an IWP permit from the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management. In carrying out the inspections,
surveillance and monitoring required by the non-delegated pretreatment program,
the Board and its Superintendent shall adhere to the following:
      (1)   Utilize a sample type which is identical to that sample type
required by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management in the IWP
permit issued to the industry subject to monitoring.
      (2)   Collect all samples at the sample location specified in the IWP
permit issued by IDEM to the industry subject to monitoring.
      (3)   Submit the analytical results of all monitoring to the pretreatment
group of the Indiana Department of Environmental Management on or before the
twenty-eighth day of the month following the month of sampling.
      (4)   Maintain a record of each industrial inspection performed which
shall be kept in a file designated for each industrial user subject to the non-
delegated pretreatment program. The inspection record shall be kept on a form
equivalent to the form then currently used by the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management. A copy of each inspection report shall be sent to the
pretreatment group of the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
   (E)   The Board and its Superintendent shall immediately sample and analyze
the sewage plant influent and effluent for suspected pollutants when the sewage
works operation is upset. The Superintendent or his or her representative shall
immediately contact the pretreatment group by phone at the time of any such
occurrence. The results of each analysis shall be sent to the pretreatment
group.
   (F)   The Board, through its Superintendent, shall notify the pretreatment
group of the Indiana Department of Environmental Management of any existing
industry not currently listed in the NPDES permit, Part III, that is
discharging processed wastewater to the sewage works. The Board, through the
Superintendent, shall not accept or allow the discharge of processed wastewater
into the sewage works by any new industry until such time as said industry has
obtained an IWP permit from the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
   (G)   The Board and the Superintendent shall maintain and operate the non-
delegated pretreatment program in accordance with all state and federal
regulations and requirements. Further, the Board and the Superintendent is
authorized to develop and operate a non-delegated pretreatment program as
required by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management upon
determination that the pretreatment program can be operated more effectively by
the city.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.35 ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
   (A)   Notification of violation. Whenever the Superintendent finds that any
user has violated or is violating this subchapter, a discharge permit, any
prohibition, limitation or requirement, or any order issued hereunder, the
Superintendent or the Superintendent’s agent may serve upon the user a written
notice of violation setting forth the nature of the violation(s). The notice
may also include specific corrective actions and compliance schedules to which
the Superintendent requires the user to adhere. Within ten days of the date of
receipt of this notice, the user shall submit to the Superintendent a written
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, consistent with the terms of the notice (to include
specific corrective actions and compliance schedules). Compliance with the
conditions, requirements and terms of this notice shall not be construed to
relieve the user of its obligation to comply with its discharge permit which
remains in full force and effect nor does such compliance excuse violations
occurring before or after receipt of this notice of violation. Additional
enforcement action may be pursued if corrective actions are not accomplished as
scheduled and the Superintendent expressly reserves the right to seek any and
all remedies available to it under this subchapter for any violations cited by
the notice. Nothing in this subchapter shall limit the authority of the city to
take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.
   (B)   Consent orders. The Superintendent is hereby empowered to enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement any user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders
will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
noncompliance including, but not limited to, compliance schedules, stipulated
fines or remedial actions, and signatures of the Superintendent and user
representatives. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as any
other orders issued by the Board of Public Works and Safety under this
subchapter.
   (C)   Show cause order and hearing.
      (1)   The Superintendent may serve upon any user who causes, allows or
contributes to a violation of this subchapter, its discharge permit, or any
order issued hereunder, or an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW a
written show cause order. Said order must be given at least ten days prior to
the hearing in accordance with this subchapter. The show cause order must
contain:
         (a)   The name and address of the user to whom the show cause order is
issued;
         (b)   The address, or the parcel number, of the property that is the
subject of the order, if different from division (C)(1)(a) above;
         (c)   The nature of the violation(s);
         (d)   An order to the user to appear before the Board of Public Works
and Safety to show cause as to why the city should not initiate formal
enforcement action against the user or discontinue service to the user;
         (e)   A statement indicating the exact time and place of the hearing,
and that the person to whom the show cause order was issued is entitled to
appear at the hearing with or without legal counsel, present evidence, cross
examine opposing witnesses and present arguments;
         (f)   A statement of the proposed enforcement action and the reasons
therefor;
         (g)   A statement indicating that a failure to comply with any of the
conditions, requirements or terms of the show cause order shall constitute a
violation of this subchapter and may subject the user to such other enforcement
response that may be appropriate;
         (h)   The name, address and telephone number of the Superintendent of
the city.
      (2)   The Board of Public Works and Safety may itself conduct a hearing
and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or
employee of the Wastewater Department to:
         (a)   Issue in the name of the Board of Public Works and Safety
notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and
the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing;
         (b)   Take the evidence;
         (c)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the Board of
Public Works and Safety for action thereon.
      (3)   A hearing must be held relative to each show cause order of the
city and the hearing shall be held on a business day no earlier than ten days
after notice of the show cause order is given. In this regard, the show cause
order shall be served upon the user in accordance with division (M) below and
the show cause order is effective on the date considered given in accordance
with division (N) below. At any hearing held pursuant to this subchapter,
testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically or
mechanically. The person to whom the show cause order was issued, or any other
person with an interest in the proceedings may appear in person or by counsel
at the hearing. Whether or not a duly notified user appears as noticed,
enforcement action may be pursued as appropriate. Each person appearing at the
hearing is entitled to present evidence, cross examine opposing witnesses and
present arguments. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any
member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual
charges therefor.
      (4)   After the Board of Public Works and Safety has reviewed the
evidence and if it finds any violation(s) of this subchapter, any prohibition,
limitation or requirement contained herein or of the user’s discharge permit,
or of any order issued hereunder, it shall make findings and it may issue to
the user responsible for the discharge any orders or directives as are
necessary and appropriate. Issuance of a show cause order shall not be a
prerequisite to taking any other action against a user.
   (D)   Compliance orders. When the Superintendent finds that a user has
violated or continues to violate this subchapter, discharge permits or orders
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, he or she
may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the
user come into compliance within a specified time period. If the user does not
come into compliance within the specified time period, sewer service shall be
discontinued to the user unless and until adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated.
Such service shall not recommence until such time as the user is able to
demonstrate that it can and will maintain compliance. Failure to comply with
this compliance order may subject the user to having its connection to the
sanitary sewer sealed by the city and assessed the costs therefor. Compliance
orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably
necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including, but not
limited to, the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-
monitoring and improved management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the POTW. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability for any
violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order
shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user.
   (E)   Cease and desist orders.
      (1)   When the Superintendent finds that a user is violating this
subchapter, the user’s discharge permit, any order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user’s past violations
are likely to recur, the Superintendent may issue an order to the user
directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements;
         (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and terminating the discharge.
      (2)   In an emergency, the order to cease and desist may be given by the
Superintendent by telephone. In non-emergency situations, the cease and desist
order may be used to suspend or revoke discharge permits. Issuance of a cease
and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against
the user.
   (F)   Revocation order. When the Superintendent finds that a user is
violating this subchapter, the user’s discharge permit, any order issued
hereunder, any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or any order or
directive issued by the Board of Public Works and Safety pursuant to a show
cause hearing, the Superintendent may issue an order to the user revoking the
user’s discharge permit and directing the user to immediately stop or eliminate
non-domestic contribution into the city’s POTW. Failure to comply with this
order may subject the user to having any or all connections to the sanitary
sewer sealed by the city and assessed the costs therefor. Revocation orders may
be issued by the Superintendent pursuant to § 51.23 and shall not be a
prerequisite to taking any other action against the user.
   (G)   Emergency suspensions.
      (1)   The city may, upon informal notice to the user, immediately suspend
a user’s discharge permit whenever such suspension is necessary, in the opinion
of the Superintendent, in order to halt or prevent an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an immediate or substantial
endangerment to human health, to the welfare of the public, or to the
environment, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW or is
causing or will cause the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
      (2)   Any user notified of a suspension of the waste water treatment
service and/or the discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
discharge. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with
the suspension order, the Superintendent shall take such steps as deemed
necessary, including, but not limited to, immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any
individuals or to the environment.
      (3)   The Superintendent shall allow the user to recommence its discharge
when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period
of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in §
51.35(H) are initiated against the user.
      (4)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence to the Superintendent prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing.
      (5)   Compliance with the conditions, requirements and terms of the
suspension order shall not be construed to relieve the user of its obligation
to comply with its discharge permit which remains in full force and effect nor
does such compliance excuse previous violations. Additional enforcement action
may be pursued if corrective actions are not accomplished as required and the
city expressly reserves the right to seek any and all remedies available to it
under this subchapter for any violations cited by the suspension order.
Further, a failure to comply with any of the conditions, requirements or terms
of the suspension order shall constitute a further violation of this subchapter
and may subject the user to such other enforcement response that may be
appropriate.
      (6)   The Superintendent may deny or condition new or increased
discharges by a user or changes in the nature of pollutants discharged by the
user if the discharge does not meet applicable pretreatment standards or will
cause the city to violate its NPDES permit.
      (7)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted as requiring a
hearing prior to any emergency suspension.
   (H)   Termination of discharge.
      (1)   In addition to the provisions of §
51.23, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
         (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
         (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §
51.21.
      (2)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 51.35(C) why the
proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the Rochester
Board of Public Works and Safety shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
   (I)   Right of appeal; Board of Public Works and Safety.
      (1)   Any user or applicant for any permit filed pursuant to this
ordinance affected by any decision, action, or determination, including cease
and desist orders, made by any Rochester representative; e.g., Inspector,
Superintendent, Board, interpreting or implementing the provisions of this
subchapter, or any permit issued herein, or the denial of any application for
permit provided in this subchapter, may file with the Superintendent a written
request for reconsideration within 30 days of such a decision, action, or
determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user’s request
for reconsideration.
      (2)   If the ruling made by the Superintendent is unsatisfactory to the
person requesting reconsideration, he or she may within 30 days from the
notification of the Superintendent, file a written appeal to the Rochester
Board of Public Works and Safety. The written appeal shall be heard by the
Board within 30 days from the date of filing. The Rochester Board of Public
Works and Safety shall make a final ruling on the appeal within 30 days of the
close of the meeting. The Rochester Board of Public Works and Safety’s
decision, action, or determination shall remain in effect during such period of
reconsideration.
      (3)   The findings of the Board of Public Works and Safety shall be in
writing and shall be available to the public upon request. However, neither the
city nor the Board of Public Works and Safety is required to give any person
notice of the findings and orders issued thereto other than the user or
applicant to whom said orders may be directed. The findings and any orders
issued by the Board of Public Works and Safety shall be served upon the user in
accordance with division (M) below and the notice is effective on the date
considered given in accordance with division (N) below.
      (4)   Compliance with the conditions, requirements and terms of any of
the orders issued by the Board of Public Works and Safety pursuant to division
(C)(4) above will not be construed to relieve theuser of its obligation to
comply with its wastewater contribution permit which remains in full force and
effect nor does such compliance excuse previous violations. Additional
enforcement action may be pursued if corrective actions are not accomplished as
scheduled and the city expressly reserves the right to seek any and all
remedies available to it for any violation found by the Board of Public Works
and Safety. Further, a failure to comply with any of the conditions,
requirements or terms of the orders shall constitute a further violation of
this subchapter and may subject the user to such other enforcement response
that may be appropriate.
      (5)   Any action taken by the Board of Public Works and Safety under this
subchapter is subject to review by the Circuit or Superior Court of the County
out of which the matter dealt with by the Board of Public Works and Safety
arose, on the request of any user or applicant to whom the respective order was
issued or to any interested party. Any person requesting judicial review under
this subchapter section must file a verified complaint with the Clerk of the
appropriate Circuit or Superior Court within ten days of the date when the
Board of Public Works and Safety issued its findings of fact and accompanying
order. An appeal under this division (I)(5) is an action de novo. The court may
affirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Board of Public Works and
Safety.
   (J)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment
standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this
subchapter, discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment requirement, or any order or directive issued by the Board of
Public Works and Safety pursuant to this subchapter, the Superintendent, or his
or her designee, may petition a judge of a circuit or superior court of the
county from which the action sought to be restrained or the action sought to be
compelled has arisen, through the City Attorney, for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels
the specific performance of the discharge permit, order, or other requirements
imposed by this subchapter on activities of the industrial user. Such other
action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by
the city. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite
to taking any other action against a user.
   (K)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any user which has violated or continues to violate this
subchapter, any order or discharge permit issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a civil
penalty of not more than $2,500 per day, per violation for a first violation
nor more than $7,500 per day, per violation for subsequent violations, in
accordance with I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B).
      (2)   The city may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city,
including fines, penalties, costs or damages imposed upon the city by the State
of Indiana, EPA or other governmental entities pursuant to this subchapter.
      (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective actions by the
user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice
requires.
      (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for
taking any other action against a user.
   (L)   Remedies nonexclusive. The provisions set forth in this section are
not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the right to take any, all or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s
enforcement response plan. However, the city reserves the right to take other
action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant
user. These actions may be taken concurrently.
   (M)   Service.
      (1)   Any notice of noncompliance, notice of orders, notice of any other
directives issued by the city or by the Board of Public Works and Safety may be
served upon any principle executive, general partner, corporate officer, or the
individual in charge of the user’s wastewater treatment program as designated
by the user, and shall be given by either:
         (a)   Sending a copy of the notice, order or statement by registered
or certified mail to the place of business or employment of the person to be
notified, with return receipt requested; or
         (b)   Delivering a copy of the notice, order or statement personally
to the person to be notified; or
         (c)   Leaving a copy of the notice, order or statement at the place of
business or employment of the person to be notified.
      (2)   When service is made by any of the means described, the person
making service must make an affidavit stating that he has made this service,
the manner in which the service was made, to whom the notice, order or
statement was issued, the nature of the notice, order or statement and the date
of service. The affidavit must be placed on file with the city.
      (3)   If, after reasonable effort, service is not obtained by a means
described above in division (M)(1) above, service may be made by publishing a
notice of the notice, order or statement in each newspaper which the city has
currently designated as a newspaper in which it shall publish legal notices.
Publication may be made on consecutive days. If service of an order is made by
publication, the publication must include a statement indicating generally what
action is required by the notice, order or statement and that the exact terms
of the notice, order or statement may be obtained from the city.
   (N)   Effective date of notice, order or statement. The date when the
notice, order or statement is considered given is as follows:
      (1)   If the notice, order or statement is delivered personally or left
at the usual place of business or employment, notice is considered given on the
day when the notice, order or statement is delivered to the person or left at
the person’s usual place of business or employment.
      (2)   If the notice, order or statement is mailed, notice is considered
given on the date shown on the return receipt, or, if no date is shown, on the
date when the return receipt is received by the city.
      (3)   Notice by publication is considered given on the date of the second
day that publication was made.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
§ 51.36 PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.
   The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up
and operating the city’s pretreatment program, which may include:
   (A)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost
of processing such applications;
   (B)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user’s discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by users;
   (C)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   (D)   Fees for filing appeals;
   (E)   Fees to recover administrative and legal costs (not included in
division (B) above) associated with the enforcement activity taken by the
Wastewater Superintendent to address industrial user noncompliance; and
   (F)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this subchapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties
chargeable by the city.
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)
(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)(Ord. 15-2021, passed 11-23-21)RATES AND CHARGES
§ 51.45 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BOARD. The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city, or any duly
authorized official acting in its behalf.
      CITY. The city acting by and through the Board of Public Works and
Safety.
      DEBT SERVICE COSTS. The average annual principal and interest payments on
all outstanding revenue bonds or other long-term capital debt.
      EXCESSIVE STRENGTH SURCHARGE. An additional charge which is billed to
users for treating sewage wastes with an average strength in excess of NORMAL
DOMESTIC SEWAGE.
      NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. For the purpose of determining surcharges, shall
mean wastewater or sewage having an average daily concentration as follows:
         (a)   CBOD not more than 250 mg/l.
         (b)   SS not more that 250 mg/l.
         (c)   Ammonia not more than 20 mg/l.
         (d)   COD not more than 500 mg/l.
As defined by origin, sewage from segregated domestic and/or sanitary
conveniences as distinct from wastes from industrial processes.
      OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. Include all costs direct and indirect,
necessary to provide adequate sewage collection, transport and treatment on a
continuing basis and produce discharges to receiving waters that conform with
all related federal, state and local requirements. (These costs include
replacement.)
      OTHER SERVICE CHARGES. Tap charges, connection charges, area charges and
other identifiable charges other than user charges, debt service charges and
excessive strength surcharges.
      REPLACEMENT COSTS. The expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful
life of the sewage works equipment to maintain the capacity and performance for
which such works were designed and constructed.
      SEWER USE ORDINANCE. A separate and companion enactment to Ordinance 18-
2001, which regulates the connection to and use of public and private sewers.
      USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of the sewage treatment works for
the cost of operation and maintenance of the works pursuant to Section 204(b)
of Public Law 92-500.
      USER CLASS. The division of sewage treatment customers by source,
function, waste characteristics, and process or discharge similarities (i.e.
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, and governmental).
         (a)   COMMERCIAL USER. Any establishment involved in a commercial
enterprise, business, or service which, based on a determination by the city,
discharges primarily segregated domestic waste or wastes from sanitary
conveniences.
         (b)   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Any federal, state or local governmental user
of the sewage treatment works.
         (c)   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any manufacturing or processing facility that
discharges industrial waste to a publicly owned treatment works.
         (d)   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Any establishment involved in a social,
charitable, religious and/or educational function which, based on a
determination by the city, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or
wastes from sanitary conveniences.
         (e)   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment works whose premises
or building is used primarily as a residence for one or more persons, including
all dwelling units, and the like.
   (B)   Any term not defined herein, but defined in the sewer use subchapter
set forth in §§
51.15 et seq. shall have the same meaning herein.
('79 Code, § 17-101) (Ord. 108-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 18-1988, passed
8-9-88; Am. Ord. 18-2001, passed 11-13-01)
§ 51.46 CHARGES ESTABLISHED; CHARGES REGULATED BY EPA; CLASSES OF USERS.
   Every person whose premises are served by the sewage works shall be charged
for the service provided. These charges are established for each user class, as
defined in order that the sewage works shall recover, from each user and user
class, revenue which is proportional to its use of the treatment works in terms
of volume and load. User charges are levied to defray the cost of operation and
maintenance (including replacement) of the treatment works. User charges shall
be uniform in magnitude with a user class.
   (A)   User charges are subject to the rules and regulations adopted by the
EPA published in the Federal Register, February 17, 1984 (40 CFR 35.2140).
Replacement costs, which are recovered through the system of user charges,
shall be based upon the expected useful life of the sewage works equipment.
   (B)   The various classes of users of the treatment works for the purpose of
this subchapter, shall be as follows:
      (1)   Class I      Residential
               Commercial
               Governmental
               Institutional
               Industrial
      (2)   Class II   Residential
               Commercial
               Government
               Institutional
               Industrial
      (3)   Who:
         (a)   Have a monthly average flow that is equal to a greater than
0.200 million gallons per day, and
         (b)   Make a contribution in aid of construction to the city.
('79 Code, § 17-102) (Ord. 108-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 18-2001, passed
11-13-01)
Statutory reference:
   Establishment of fees, see I.C. 36-9-23-25
§ 51.47 CHARGES COLLECTED FROM OWNERS; BASIS OF SEWAGE RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   For the use of the service rendered by sewage works, rates and charges
shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of real
estate, or building that is connected with the city sanitary system or
otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water, or other
liquids, either directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewage system of the
city. Such rates and charges include user charges, debt service costs,
excessive strength surcharges, and other service charges, which rates and
charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in an amount
determined as follows:
   (B)   The sewage rates and charges shall be based on the quantity of water
used on or in the property or premises subject to such rates and charges as the
same is measured by the water meter there in use, plus a base charge determined
by the size of water meter installed except as herein otherwise provided. For
the purpose of billing and collecting the charges for sewage service, the water
meters shall be read monthly and the users shall be billed each month (or
period equaling a month). The water usage schedule on which the amount of the
rates and charges shall be determined is as follows: All Class I and Class II
users.
      (1)   PHASE I - EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2024 - All Class I & Class II Users
         (a)   Inside corporate city boundaries:
            1.   Treatment rate per 1,000 gallons of usage per month:
 
User Charge Debt Service Total
$3.25       $1.22        $4.47
 
            2.   Plus base rate per month:
Water Meter User Charge Debt Service Total
Water Meter     User Charge Debt Service Total
5/8" – 3/4"   $ 14.94     $ 7.00       $ 21.94
1"              33.77       17.71        51.48
1 1/4" – 1 1/274.90       40.79        115.69
2"              127.23      70.30        197.53
3"              289.22      161.35       450.57
4"              513.59      287.60       801.19
6"              1,149.08    645.04       1,794.12
8"              2,046.41    1,149.82     3,196.23
 
            3.   For users of the sewage works that are unmetered water users
or accurate meter readings are not available, the monthly charge shall be
determined by equivalent single-family dwelling units, except as herein
provided. Sewage service bills shall be rendered once each month (or period
equaling a month). The schedule on which the rates and charges shall be
determined is as follows:
 
                                         Monthly Rate
                                         User Charge Debt Service Total
Residential: Single-family dwelling unit $ 29.50     $ 12.47      $ 41.97
 
         (b)   Outside corporate city boundaries: (Outside corporate city
boundaries rates and charges are approximately 14% higher than the rates and
charges for customers incise corporate city boundaries.)
            1.   Treatment rate per 1,000 gallons of usage per month:
 
User Charge Debt Service Total
$3.71       $1.39        $5.10
 
            2.   Plus base rate per month:
Water Meter User Charge Debt Service Total
Water Meter     User Charge Debt Service Total
5/8" – 3/4"   $ 17.03     $ 7.98       $ 25.01
1"              38.50       20.19        58.69
1 1/4" – 1 1/285.39       46.50        131.89
2"              145.04      80.14        225.18
3"              329.71      183.94       513.65
4"              585.49      327.86       913.35
6"              1,309.95    735.35       2,045.30
8"              2,332.91    1,310.79     3,643.70
 
            3.   For users of the sewage works that are unmetered water users
or accurate meter readings are not available, the monthly charge shall be
determined by equivalent single-family dwelling units, except as herein
provided. Sewage service bills shall be rendered once each month (or period
equaling a month). The schedule on which the rates and charges shall be
determined is as follows:
 
                                         Monthly Rate
                                         User Charge Debt Service Total
Residential: Single-family dwelling unit $ 33.63     $ 14.22      $ 47.85
 
      (2)   PHASE II - EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2024 - All Class I & Class II Users
         (a)   Inside corporate city boundaries:
            1.   Treatment rate per 1,000 gallons of usage per month:
 
User Charge Debt Service Total
$3.71       $1.39        $5.10
 
            2.   Plus base rate per month:
Water Meter User Charge Debt Service Total
Water Meter     User Charge Debt Service Total
5/8" – 3/4"   $ 17.06     $ 7.99       $ 25.05
1"              38.57       20.22        58.79
1 1/4" – 1 1/285.54       46.58        132.12
2"              145.30      80.28        225.58
3"              330.29      184.26       514.55
4"              586.52      328.44       914.96
6"              1,312.25    736.44       2,048.89
8"              2,337.00    1,313.09     3,650.09
 
            3.   For users of the sewage works that are unmetered water users
or accurate meter readings are not available, the monthly charge shall be
determined by equivalent single-family dwelling units, except as herein
provided. Sewage service bills shall be rendered once each month (or period
equaling a month). The schedule on which the rates and charges shall be
determined is as follows:
 
                                          Monthly Rate
                                          User Charge Debt Service Total
Residential: Single- family dwelling unit $ 33.69     $ 14.24      $ 47.93
 
         (b)   Outside corporate city boundaries: (Outside corporate city
boundaries rates and charges are approximately 14% higher than the rates and
charges for customers incise corporate city boundaries.)
            1.   Treatment rate per 1,000 gallons of usage per month:
 
User Charge Debt Service Total
$4.23       $1.58        $5.81
 
            2.   Plus base rate per month:
Water Meter User Charge Debt Service Total
Water Meter     User Charge Debt Service Total
5/8" – 3/4"   $ 19.45     $ 9.11       $ 28.56
1"              43.97       23.05        67.02
1 1/4" – 1 1/297.52       53.10        150.62
2"              165.64      91.52        257.16
3"              376.53      210.06       586.59
4"              668.63      374.42       1,043.05
6"              1,495.97    839.77       2,335.74
8"              2,664.18    1,496.92     4,161.10
 
            3.   For users of the sewage works that are unmetered water users
or accurate meter readings are not available, the monthly charge shall be
determined by equivalent single-family dwelling units, except as herein
provided. Sewage service bills shall be rendered once each month (or period
equaling a month). The schedule on which the rates and charges shall be
determined is as follows:
 
                                         Monthly Rate
                                         User Charge Debt Service Total
Residential: Single-family dwelling unit $ 38.41     $ 16.23      $ 54.64
 
      (3)   PHASE II - EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2025 - All Class I & Class II Users
         (a)   Inside corporate city boundaries:
            1.   Treatment rate per 1,000 gallons of usage per month:
 
User Charge Debt Service Total
$4.24       $1.59        $5.83
 
            2.   Plus base rate per month:
Water Meter User Charge Debt Service Total
Water Meter     User Charge Debt Service Total
5/8" – 3/4"   $ 19.48     $ 9.12       $ 28.60
1"              44.05       23.09        67.14
1 1/4" – 1 1/297.69       53.19        150.88
2"              165.93      91.68        257.61
3"              377.19      210.42       587.61
4"              669.81      375.08       1,044.89
6"              1,498.59    841.24       2,339.83
8"              2,668.85    1,499.55     4,168.40
 
            3.   For users of the sewage works that are unmetered water users
or accurate meter readings are not available, the monthly charge shall be
determined by equivalent single-family dwelling units, except as herein
provided. Sewage service bills shall be rendered once each month (or period
equaling a month). The schedule on which the rates and charges shall be
determined is as follows:
 
                                          Monthly Rate
                                          User Charge Debt Service Total
Residential: Single- family dwelling unit $ 38.47     $ 16.26      $ 54.73
 
         (b)   Outside corporate city boundaries: (Outside corporate city
boundaries rates and charges are approximately 14% higher than the rates and
charges for customers incise corporate city boundaries.)
            1.   Treatment rate per 1,000 gallons of usage per month:
 
User Charge Debt Service Total
$4.83       $1.81        $6.64
 
            2.   Plus base rate per month:
Water Meter User Charge Debt Service Total
Water Meter     User Charge Debt Service Total
5/8" – 3/4"   $ 22.21     $ 10.40      $ 32.61
1"              50.22       26.32        76.54
1 1/4" – 1 1/2111.37      60.64        172.01
2"              189.16      104.52       293.68
3"              430.00      239.88       669.88
4"              763.58      427.59       1,191.17
6"              1,708.39    959.01       2,667.40
8"              3,042.49    1,709.49     4,751.98
 
            3.   For users of the sewage works that are unmetered water users
or accurate meter readings are not available, the monthly charge shall be
determined by equivalent single-family dwelling units, except as herein
provided. Sewage service bills shall be rendered once each month (or period
equaling a month). The schedule on which the rates and charges shall be
determined is as follows:
 
                                          Monthly Rate
                                          User Charge Debt Service Total
Residential: Single- family dwelling unit $ 43.86     $ 18.54      $ 62.40
 
   (C)   (1)   Inside corporate city boundaries.  In the event two or more
dwelling units such as mobile homes, apartments, or housekeeping rooms
discharging sanitary sewage, water, or other liquids into the city’s sanitary
sewage system, either directly or indirectly, are users of water and the
quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then in such case,
billing shall be for a single service in the manner set out elsewhere herein,
except that an additional units charge shall be added thereto, in the amount of
$5.48 per month for Phase I, $6.26 per month for Phase II, and $7.15 per month
for Phase III per dwelling unit over one served through the single water meter,
in the case of mobile home courts, the number of dwelling units shall be
computed and interpreted as the total number of mobile home spaces available
for rent plus any other dwelling units served through the meter. A dwelling
unit shall be interpreted as a room or rooms or any other space or spaces in
which cooking facilities are provided.
      (2)   Outside corporate city boundaries. (Outside corporate city
boundaries rates and charges are approximately 14% higher than the rates and
charges for customers inside corporate city boundaries.) In the event two or
more dwelling units such as mobile homes, apartments, or housekeeping rooms
discharging sanitary sewage, water, or other liquids into the city’s sanitary
sewage system, either directly or indirectly, are users of water and the
quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then in such case,
billing shall be for a single service in the manner set out elsewhere herein,
except that an additional units charge shall be added thereto, in the amount of
$6.25 per month for Phase I, $7.14 per month for Phase II, and $8.15 per month
for Phase III per dwelling unit over one served through the single water meter,
in the case of mobile home courts, the number of dwelling units shall be
computed and interpreted as the total number of mobile home spaces available
for rent plus any other dwelling units served through the meter. A dwelling
unit shall be interpreted as a room or rooms or any other space or spaces in
which cooking facilities are provided.
   (D)   For the service rendered to the city, the city shall be subject to the
same rates and charges established in harmony therewith.
(‘79 Code, § 17-103) (Ord. 108-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 23-1993, passed
12-28-93; Am. Ord. 18-201, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 22-2004, passed 10-26-04;
Am. Ord 13-2009, passed 9-22-09; Am. Res. 0218-21, passed 2-18-21; Am. Ord. 02-
2021, passed 3-9-21; Am. Ord. 08-2023, passed 12-19-23)
§ 51.48 METHODS OF MEASUREMENT TO DETERMINE WATER QUANTITY.
   (A)   The quantity of water discharged into the sanitary sewage system and
obtained from sources other than the water utility that serves the city shall
be determined by the city in such a manner as the city shall reasonably elect,
and the sewage service shall be billed at the above appropriate rates; except
as hereinafter provided in this section, the city may make proper allowances in
determining the sewage bill for quantities of water shown on the records to be
consumed, but which are also shown to the satisfaction of the city that such
quantities do not enter the sanitary sewage system.
   (B)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building other than a
single-family dwelling unit discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes,
water or other liquids into the city’s sanitary sewage system, either directly
or indirectly, is not a user of water supplied by the water utility serving the
city, and the water used thereon or therein is not measured by a water meter,
or is measured by a water meter not acceptable to the city, then the amount of
water used shall be otherwise measured or determined by the city. In order to
ascertain the rate or charge provided in this subchapter, the owner or other
interested party shall, at his expense, install and maintain meters, weirs,
volumetric measuring devices or any adequate and approved method of measurement
acceptable to the city for the determination of sewage discharge.
   (C)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into the city’s
sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, is a user of water
supplied by the water utility serving the city, and in addition, is a user of
water from another source which is not measured by a water meter or is measured
by a meter not acceptable to the city, then the amount of water used shall be
otherwise measured or determined by the city. In order to ascertain the rates
or charges, the owner or other interested parties shall, at his expense,
install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric measuring devices, or any
adequate and approved method of measurement acceptable to the city for the
determination of sewage discharge.
   (D)   In the event two or more residential lots, parcels of real estate, or
buildings discharging sanitary sewage, water or other liquids into the city’s
sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, are users of water and
the quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then in each such
case, for billing purposes, the quantity of water used shall be averaged for
each user and the base charge and the consumption rates and charges shall apply
to each of the number of residential lots, parcels of real estate or buildings
served through the single water meter.
   (E)   For usage billed after September 1, 2009: In the event two or more
dwelling units such as mobile homes, apartments or housekeeping rooms
discharging sanitary sewage, water or other liquids into the city’s sanitary
sewage system, either directly or indirectly, are users of water and the
quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then in such case,
billing shall be for a single service in the manner set out elsewhere herein,
except that an additional units charge shall be added thereto, in the amount of
$3.07 per month per dwelling unit over one served through the single water
meter. In the case of mobile home courts, the number of dwelling units shall be
computed and interpreted as the total number of mobile home spaces available
for rent plus any other dwelling units served through the meter. A dwelling
unit shall be interpreted as a room or rooms or any other space or spaces in
which cooking facilities are provided.
   (F)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building discharges
sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquids into the city’s
sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, and uses water in excess
of 10,000 gallons per month, and it can be shown to the satisfaction of the
city that a portion of water as measured by the water meter or meters does not
and cannot enter the sanitary sewage system, then the owner or other interested
party shall, at his expense, install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric
measuring devices or any adequate and approved method of measurement acceptable
to the city for the determination of sewage discharge.
   (G)   (1)   In order that the domestic and residential users of sewage
service shall not be penalized for sprinkling lawns during the months of May,
June, July, August, September, and October, the billings for residences and/or
domestic users for the months of May, June, July, August, September, and
October shall be based on the average water usage billed for the previous
billed months of November, December and January. Averages resulting in
fractions of 100 gallons shall be raised to the next whole number of 100
gallons. In the event the water usage for the previous billed months of
November, December and January is greater than the water usage for the months
of May, June, July, August, September, and October, then the billing for sewage
services shall be computed on the actual water used in the month for which the
sewage service bill is being rendered.
      (2)   Domestic and/or residential sewage service as applicable to the
sprinkling rate shall apply to each lot, parcel of real estate or building
which is occupied and used as a residence. The sprinkling rate shall not apply
to any premises which are partially or wholly used for commercial or industrial
purposes. In the event a portion of the premises shall be used for commercial
or industrial purposes, the owner shall have the privilege of separating the
water service so that the residential portion of the premises is serviced
through a separate meter and in such case the water usage as registered by the
water meter serving such portion of the premises used for residential purposes
would qualify under the sprinkling rate.
(‘79 Code, § 17-104) (Ord. 108-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 18-2001, passed
11-13-01; Am. Ord. 22-2004, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 13-2009, passed 9-22-09;
Am. Ord. 08-2023, passed 12-19-23)
§ 51.49 CHARGES BASED ON VOLUME, STRENGTH AND CHARACTER OF WASTE DISCHARGED.
   (A)   In order that the rates and charges may be justly and equitably
adjusted to the service rendered to users, the city shall base its charges not
only on the volume, but also on strength and character of the stronger-than-
normal domestic sewage and wastes which it is required to treat and dispose of.
The city shall require the user to determine the strength and content of all
sewage and wastes discharged, either directly or indirectly into the sanitary
sewage system, in such manner, by such method, and at such times as the city
may deem practicable in light of the conditions and attending circumstances of
the case, in order to determine the proper charge. The user shall furnish a
central sampling point available to the city at all times.
   (B)   Normal sewage domestic waste strength should not exceed a carbonaceous
biochemical oxygen demand of 250 milligrams per liter of fluid, ammonia in
excess of 20 milligrams per liter of fluid, suspended solids in excess of 250
milligrams per liter of fluid, or chemical oxygen demand in excess of 500
milligrams per liter of fluid. Additional charges for treating stronger-than-
normal domestic waste shall be made on the following basis:
      (1)   ALL CLASS I AND CLASS II USERS.
         (a)   Phase I - Effective January 1, 2024.
            1.   Rate surcharge based upon suspended solids. There shall be an
additional charge of $0.11 per pound of suspended solids for suspended solids
received in excess of 250 milligrams per liter of fluid.
            2.   Rate surcharge based upon CBOD. There shall be an additional
charge of $0.11 per pound of carbonaceous biochemical oxygen for CBOD received
in excess of 250 milligrams per liter of fluid.
            3.   Rate surcharge based upon ammonia. There shall be an
additional charge of $0.43 per pound of ammonia for ammonia received in excess
of 20 milligrams per liter of fluid.
            4.   Rate surcharge based upon COD. There shall be an additional
charge of $0.05 per pound of COD for COD received in excess of 500 milligrams
per liter of fluid.
         (b)   Phase II - Effective July 1, 2024.
            1.   Rate surcharge based upon suspended solids. There shall be an
additional charge of $0.13 per pound of suspended solids for suspended solids
received in excess of 250 milligrams per liter of fluid.
            2.   Rate surcharge based upon CBOD. There shall be an additional
charge of $0.13 per pound of carbonaceous biochemical oxygen for CBOD received
in excess of 250 milligrams per liter of fluid.
            3.   Rate surcharge based upon ammonia. There shall be an
additional charge of $0.49 per pound of ammonia for ammonia received in excess
of 20 milligrams per liter of fluid.
            4.   Rate surcharge based upon COD. There shall be an additional
charge of $0.06 per pound of COD for COD received in excess of 500 milligrams
per liter of fluid.
         (c)   Phase III - Effective January 1, 2025.
            1.   Rate surcharge based upon suspended solids. There shall be an
additional charge of $0.15 per pound of suspended solids for suspended solids
received in excess of 250 milligrams per liter of fluid.
            2.   Rate surcharge based upon CBOD. There shall be an additional
charge of $0.15 per pound of carbonaceous biochemical oxygen for CBOD received
in excess of 250 milligrams per liter of fluid.
            3.   Rate surcharge based upon ammonia. There shall be an
additional charge of $0.56 per pound of ammonia for ammonia received in excess
of 20 milligrams per liter of fluid.
            4.   Rate surcharge based upon COD. There shall be an additional
charge of $0.07 per pound of COD for COD received in excess of 500 milligrams
per liter of fluid.
   (C)   System development charge. New users that connect to the sewer
collection system for purposes of sending sewage to the wastewater treatment
plant shall pay a system development charge in an amount equal to:
Meter Size Meter Ratio System Development Charge
Meter Size Meter Ratio System Development Charge
5/8"       1.0         $ 500
3/4"       1.5         750
1"         2.5         1,250
1-1/2"     5.0         2,500
2"         8.0         4,000
3"         15.0        7,500
4"         25.0        12,500
6"         50.0        25,000
8"         80.0        40,000
Unmetered  1.0         500
 
   (D)   Bulk waste (septic) charge. Commercial/domestic waste delivered to the
city’s plant by customer’s truck or tank shall be billed at a rate of $0.07 per
gallon for Phase I, $0.08 per gallon for Phase II, and $0.09 per gallon for
Phase III. This section excludes waste delivered by Republic Landfill (a.k.a.
County Line Landfill Partnership) which is contracted for under separate
agreement.
(‘79 Code, § 17-105) (Ord. 108-1987, passed 11-1087; Am. Ord. 18-1988, passed
8-9-88; Am. Ord. 23-1993, passed 12-28-93; Am. Ord. 18-2001, passed 11-13-01;
Am. Ord. 22-2004, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 13-2009, passed 9-22-09; Am. Res.
0218-21, passed 2-18-21; Am. Ord. 02-2021, passed 3-9-21; Am. Ord. 08-2023,
passed 12-19-23)
§ 51.50 MANNER OF BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   The rates and charges shall be prepared, billed and collected by the city in
the manner provided by law and ordinance.
   (A)   The rates and charges for all users shall be prepared and billed
monthly. Annually, each user shall be notified of the portion of the total
billing charged for operation, maintenance and replacement for that user during
the preceding year.
   (B)   (1)   The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant or tenants
occupying the properties served, unless otherwise requested in writing by the
owner, but such billing shall in no way relieve the owner from the liability in
the event payment is not made as herein required.
      (2)   The owners of properties served, which are occupied by a tenant or
tenants, shall have the right to examine the collection records of the city for
the purpose of determining whether bills have been paid by the tenant or
tenants, provided that such examination shall be made at the office at which
such records are kept and during the hours that such office is open for
business.
   (C)   As provided by statute, all rates and charges not paid within 15 days
of the billing date are declared to be delinquent and a penalty of 10% of the
amount of the rates or charges shall thereupon attach thereto.
   (D)   The city shall assess an additional fee of $30 for the filing of a
sewer lien upon any real property, including the recording of a notice of
intent to hold lien.
(‘79 Code, § 17-106) (Ord. 108-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 18-2001, passed
11-13-01; Am. Ord. 12-2012, passed 9-25-12)
§ 51.51 SPECIAL RATE CONTRACTS.
   The Board is hereby further authorized to enter into special rate contracts
with customers of the sewage works where clearly definable reduction in cost to
the sewage works can be determined, and the reduction shall be limited to such
reduced costs.
('79 Code, § 17-111) (Ord. 108-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 18-2001, passed
11-13-01)
§ 51.52 SPECIAL RATES AND CHARGES.
   Any special rates and charges whether tax fees or supplemental monthly
charges imposed for the purpose of paying for improvements within any special
areas which have been or may hereafter be imposed by several ordinances
applicable to a specific area shall remain effective and shall be in addition
to rates and charges as above set forth in this subchapter.
('79 Code, § 17-112) (Ord. 108-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 18-2001, passed
11-13-01)
§ 51.53 AREA TO BE ADDITIONALLY CHARGED.
   Since local sewers are under the applicable state laws, the financial
responsibility of the owners of property to be served by them and such sewers
are needed to be installed by the city in order to provide such service, it is
necessary to establish certain sewer and additional charges to be paid by the
owners of property to be connected to the Rochester Sewage Disposal System
located in the following described area: The area set forth in Section A-2 of
the plans and specifications for sewage works improvements for the city as
prepared by Philip L. Schnelker and Associates of Fort Wayne, Indiana, and
dated April 7, 1987, which plans and specifications are incorporated herein by
reference.
('79 Code, § 17-151) (Ord. 114-1987, passed 11-10-87)
§ 51.54 MONTHLY AVERAGE CALCULATION.
   (A)   The monthly average shall be calculated consistent with the current
practices as follows:
      (1)   The city shall collect 24-hour proportional composite samples of
the user’s discharge for at least seven days within any monthly period.
      (2)   The weighted average of the daily sample results shall be used to
determine the monthly average.
   (B)   The monthly average is intended to measure the average daily flow (in
MGD) and the average daily loading (in pounds) during the subject month.
(Ord. 18-1997, passed 7-8-99; Am. Ord. 18-2001, passed 11-13-01)
§ 51.55 FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   The city shall use its best efforts to negotiate with large volume
users to secure an appropriate financial contribution to assist in the
construction of improvements to the city's sewage works reasonably required as
a result of the additional discharges of such large volume users, it being the
intent of the city that existing ratepayers shall not subsidize the fixed or
incremental expenses associated with treatment of additional wastewater from a
new or newly expanded facility of a large volume user. If any large volume user
makes such a financial contribution, the city shall be prohibited from charging
such user any rate or charge designed to recoup any capital cost relating to
future capital improvements in the city's sewage works of the same nature as
the improvements for which the financial contribution was secured, but only
during the period comprising the useful life, or if longer the actual life, of
the improvement financed with said contribution. Future capital improvements to
the city's sewage works shall be deemed to be of the "same nature" as the
improvements for which the financial contribution was secured when the intent
or the effect of the future capital improvements is to expand or increase the
then existing treatment capacities of the city's sewage works for flow or
loadings that are not attributable to such large volume users. However, the
user making such financial contribution in aid of construction shall be subject
to other noncapital charges associated with the improvements, including
operation, repair, and maintenance.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, the city shall not be prohibited
from charging a large volume user which has made a financial contribution as
described in division (A) above, any cost or expense associated with (i) the
treatment of substances discharged in wastewater other than the substances
described in §
51.49, and (ii) a decrease in the permissible loading levels for the substances
described in §
51.49, to the extent federal or state statutes or regulations governing
wastewater treatment are modified.
   (C)   If the city shall fail to follow the policies set out in division (A)
above, by repeal of such subsection or future amendments, the financial
contribution made by a large volume user which is affected by such repeal or
amendment shall be reimbursed to such large volume user, to the extent
permitted by law. Such reimbursement shall be appropriated by the Common
Council and may be paid out of the sewage works net revenues. Such
reimbursement shall be subject to amortization for the useful life, or the
actual life if longer, of the improvement associated with such financial
contribution.
(Ord. 18-1997, passed 7-8-99; Am. Ord. 18-2001, passed 11-13-01)
§ 51.56 STUDY TO REVIEW FAIRNESS, EQUITY AND PROPORTIONALITY OF RATES AND
CHARGES.
   (A)   In order that the rates and charges for sewage services may remain
fair and equitable and be in proportion to the cost of provided services to the
various user classes, the city shall cause a study to be made within a
reasonable period of time following the first two years of operation, following
the date on which this subchapter goes into effect. Such study shall include,
but not be limited to, an analysis of the cost associated with the treatment of
excessive strength effluents from industrial users, volume and delivery flow
rate characteristics attributed to the various users or user classes, the
financial position of the sewage works and the adequacy of its revenue to
provide reasonable funds for the operation and maintenance, replacements, debt
service requirements and capital improvements to the sewage treatment systems.
   (B)   Thereafter, on a biennial basis, within a reasonable period of time
following the normal accounting period, the city shall cause a similar study to
be made for the purpose of reviewing the fairness, equity and proportionality
of the rates and charges for sewage services on a continuing basis. The studies
shall be conducted by officers or employees of the city or by a firm of
certified public accountants, or a firm of consulting engineers which firms
shall have experience in such studies, or by such combination of officers,
employees, certified public accountants or engineers as the city shall
determine to be best under the circumstances. The city shall, upon completion
of the study, revise and adjust the rates and charges, as necessary, in
accordance therewith in order to maintain the proportionality and sufficiency
of the rates.
('79 Code, § 17-107) (Ord. 108-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 18-2001, passed
11-13-01)
§ 51.57 CHARGES FOR CONNECTION TO THE SEWAGE WORKS SYSTEM.
   Sewage connection charges shall be made to each customer prior to connection
to the sewage works system as follows:
   (A)   For a new residential/non-residential account connection to the sewage
works system, the connection fee shall be $3,000.
   (B)   For a new residential/non-residential account Airvac connection to the
sewage system, the connection fee shall be $5,000.
   (C)   For a residential/non-residential connection to the sewage system
under an existing account, the connection fee shall be $1,500.
   (D)   For a residential/non-residential Airvac connection to the sewage
system under an existing account, the connection fee shall be $2,500.
   (E)   All new construction and/or rebuilds are required to file a new
utility application, and the homeowner will be responsible for a new connection
fee.
   (G)   The provisions of this section shall uniformly apply to all new
connections to the sewage works system in all geographical areas served by the
sewage works system other than that area set forth in Section A-2 of the plans
and specifications for sewage works improvements for the city, as prepared by
Philip L. Schnelker and Associates of Fort Wayne, Indiana, dated April 7, 1987,
which is governed by the provisions in §§
51.02 and §§
51.23 through
51.55.
(Ord. 04-2019, passed 7-23-19; Am. Res. 0218-21, passed 2-18-21; Am. Ord. 02-
2021, passed 3-9-21; Am. Ord. 08-2023, passed 12-19-23)
§ 51.58 VIDEO DISCREPANCY POLICY.
   (A)   If the city investigates a sewer back up, and operator or city staff
have cleaned and verified that it is not a city issue, then the certified
operator in charge will follow up with the property owner to explain the city's
findings. The city is not responsible for laterals that go from private
property to the city main.
   (B)   If a discrepancy exists between property owner and the city as to the
cause of a sewer malfunction, then the operator will give the property owner
the option to video (CCTV) the main sewer with a lateral launch. If the
malfunction is not with the city main, then the property owner is responsible
for the cost of the CCTV service. This cost of $1,000 will be added to the
property owner's monthly sewer bill, which shall be paid within 30 days.
(Ord. 04-2019, passed 7-23-19)
RATES AND CHARGES FOR CLASS II USERS
§ 51.75  CLASS II USERS.
   Class II users shall consist of the same categories of users as listed for
Class I in §
51.46 of this chapter, except such users shall have:
   (A)   Monthly average flow that is equal to or greater than 0.200 million
gallons per day; and
   (B)   Made a financial contribution as described in §
51.78 of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-1997, passed 7-8-99)
§ 51.76 MONTHLY AVERAGE CALCULATION.
   (A)   The monthly average shall be calculated consistent with the current
practices as follows:
      (1)   The city shall collect 24-hour proportional composite samples of
the user’s discharge for at least seven days within any monthly period.
      (2)   The weighed average of the daily sample results shall be used to
determine the monthly average.
   (B)   The monthly average is intended to measure the average daily flow (in
MGD) and the average daily loading (in pounds) during the subject month.
(Ord. 18-1997, passed 7-8-99)
§ 51.77 SURCHARGES.
   (A)   In additional to all existing rates and charges of the sewage works
(treatment rate and base rate), any Class II user shall be subject to the
following surcharges:
      (1)   Rate surcharged based upon suspended solids.  There shall be an
additional charge of six cents per pound of suspended solids for suspended
solids received in excess of 250 milligrams per liter of fluid.
      (2)   Rate surcharged based upon CBOD.  There shall be an additional
charge of six cents per pound of carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand for
CBOD received in excess of 250 milligrams per liter of fluid.
      (3)   Rate surcharged based upon ammonia. There shall be an additional
charge of twenty cents per pound for ammonia received in excess of 20
milligrams per liter of fluid.
      (4)   Rate surcharged based upon COD. There shall be an additional charge
of two cents per pound of COD for COD received in excess of 500 milligrams per
liter of fluid.
   (B)   The city may apply the CBOD surcharge or the COD surcharge to a user's
sewage flow, but not both; such surcharges are mutually exclusive.
   (C)   In the event the city is required to accept sewage from a Class II
user in volumes of flow and pounds of loading which average more that the
limits set out below;
      Monthly Average (as defined in §
51.76)
   Flow   0.200 MGD
   CBOD   5,000 pounds/day
   Suspended Solids   2,500 pounds/day
   Ammonia   17 pounds/day
for any 30 day period (hereinafter called the “qualifying period”), an
additional fee (hereinafter called the “sewer charge penalty”) will be paid to
the city, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The sewer charge penalty will be paid in addition to all other
rates and charges of the sewage works.
      (2)   The sewer charge penalty will be determined by the following
penalty formula:
         (a)   If one or more treatment parameters are exceeded:
            1.   Fixed penalty - $1,000, plus
            2.   Variable penalty calculated as follows:
               a.   Three times the then current rate for BOD in excess of
5,000 pounds, plus
               b.   Three times the then current rate for TSS in excess of
2,500 pounds, plus
               c.   Three times the then current rate for ammonia in excess of
17 pounds, plus
               d.   Three times the then current rate for every 1,000 gallons
flow in excess of 200,000 gallons per day.
      (3)   The sewer charge penalty will be calculated, applied, and collected
monthly and will apply when the user exceeds any category established in this
division (C).
   (D) The determination of suspended solids, five day carbonaceous biochemical
oxygen demand, COD and ammonia contained in the waste shall be in accordance
with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water,
Sewage and Industrial Waste" as written by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Federation, and in conformance with "Guidelines
Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants," 40 CFR part 136.
(Ord. 18-1997, passed 7-8-99)
§ 51.78 FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   The city shall use its best efforts to negotiate with large volume
users to secure an appropriate financial contribution to assist in the
construction of improvements to the city's sewage works reasonably required as
a result of the additional discharges of such large volume users, it being the
intent of the city that existing ratepayers shall not subsidize the fixed or
incremental expenses associated with treatment of additional wastewater from a
new or newly expanded facility of a large volume user. If any large volume user
makes such a financial contribution, the city shall be prohibited from charging
such user any rate or charge designed to recoup any capital cost relating to
future capital improvements in the city's sewage works of the same nature as
the improvements for which the financial contribution was secured, but only
during the period comprising the useful life, or if longer the actual life, of
the improvement financed with said contribution.
   (B)   Future capital improvements to the city's sewage works shall be deemed
to be of the "same nature" as the improvements for which the financial
contribution was secured when the intent or the effect of the future capital
improvements is to expand or increase the then existing treatment capacities of
the city's sewage works for flow or loadings that are not attributable to such
large volume users. However, the user making such financial contribution in aid
of construction shall be subject to other noncapital charges associated with
the improvements, including operation, repair, and maintenance.
   (C)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) and (B) above, the city shall not be
prohibited from charging a large volume user which has made a financial
contribution as described in divisions (A) and (B) above, any cost or expense
associated with (i) the treatment of substances discharged in wastewater other
than the substances described in §
51.77, and (ii) a decrease in the permissible loading levels for the substances
described in §
51.77, to the extent federal or state statutes or regulations governing
wastewater treatment are modified.
   (D)   If the city shall fail to follow the policies set out in divisions (A)
and (B) above, by repeal of such subsection or future amendments, the financial
contribution made by a large volume user which is affected by such repeal or
amendment shall be reimbursed to such large volume user, to the extent
permitted by law. Such reimbursement shall be appropriated by the Common
Council within 12 months of such repeal or future amendment and shall either be
paid out of the sewage works net revenues or from proceeds derived from short-
term or long-term obligations to be issued by the sewage works. Such
reimbursement shall be subject to amortization for the useful life, or the
actual life if longer, of the improvement associated with such financial
contribution and shall be subject to the prior payment of any obligations
payable from the net revenues of the sewage works.
(Ord. 18-1997, passed 7-8-99)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this code for which no
other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in §
51.30(A) shall be guilty of a violation and on conviction thereof, shall be
fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500 per day, per violation for the first
violation and up to $7,500 per violation per day for subsequent violations.
Each day in which any violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(Ord. 17-2006, passed 1-9-07)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Operation of municipal waterworks
   
52.002   Definition
   
52.003   Loaning curb stop key
   
52.004   Shutting off water; notice
   
52.005   Superintendent; appointment and duties
   
52.006   Cashier; appointment and duties
   
52.007   Payment for lost water
Connections and Maintenance Regulations
   
52.015   Permit required
   
52.016   Application for service
   
52.017   Application form; meter deposits
   
52.018   Tapping fees
   
52.018.1   System development charges
   
52.019   Installation and pipe costs
   
52.020   Tapping permit; manner of tapping; specifications of materials used
   
52.021   Authorization required to tap or make connection
   
52.022   Registered plumber to make attachments with main pipes; permit
required
   
52.023   Consumers to maintain pipes and fixtures; repair breaks; liability
   
52.024   Consumers liable for city service to frozen pipes; multiple customers
on same line prohibited
   
52.025   Waterworks Department turning water off and on; charge
   
52.026   Repair by city; liability for damages from turning water on or off
   
52.027   Valves to be installed where private wells used in conjunction with
city water
   
52.028   Closing corporation stop and turning water off
   
52.029   Attaching pipe to stopcock
   
52.030   Inspection and approval by Superintendent
   
52.031   Information to be submitted after inspection and approval
   
52.032   Consumer to maintain stop box; liability for failure to provide access
   
52.033   Inspections by Superintendent; control of stopcock
   
52.034   Forfeiture or revocation of registration of plumber
   
52.035   Cross connections
Meters
   
52.045   Service to be metered; permit to remove meter
   
52.046   Board to specify size and type of meter
   
52.047   Obstruction of meters; shutting off water for violation; right of city
to examine meters
   
52.048   Removal of water meter
   
52.049   Outside meter installations
Board of Directors
   
52.060   Composition; terms
   
52.061   Appointment
   
52.062   Qualifications
   
52.063   Persons ineligible
   
52.064   Political affiliation
   
52.065   Bond requirement
   
52.066   Powers and duties
Waterworks Bonds; Disposition of Revenue
   
52.080   Keeping of records; inspection by bond holders
   
52.081   Duties of Clerk-Treasurer; handling of funds
Rates and Charges
   
52.095   Duty of city to establish just rates
   
52.096   Establishment of rates and services
   
52.097   Metered rates
   
52.098   Minimum monthly charge
   
52.099   Hydrant charges; private hydrants
   
52.100   Sprinkler system connection charge
   
52.101   Charge to temporary users
   
52.102   Collection and deferred payment charge
   
52.103   Adjustments for meter leakage
   
52.104   Disconnection of service for non-payment
   
52.105   Testing of meters to determine overcharge
Capital Charges in Certain Areas
   
52.115   Lake Manitou area described
   
52.116   Surcharge established
   
52.117   Application of surcharges
   
52.118   Cost of water line construction borne by owner
   
52.119   Connection fee for existing buildings; exceptions
   
52.120   Connection fee for newer buildings; exceptions
Statutory reference:
   Environment generally, see I.C. 13-1-1-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 OPERATION OF MUNICIPAL WATER WORKS.
   The municipal waterworks of the city shall be operated in accordance with
the provisions of I.C. 8-1.5-4-1 through 8-1.5-4-9, and subject to all the
terms, conditions, and regulations contained therein, as said sections shall be
amended by any subsequent amendment.
('79 Code, § 17-16) (Ord. 931, passed 12-14-82)
§ 52.002 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSUMER. The person who has an interest, either legal or equitable, sole,
or partial, either as tenant or owner, in any property which is, or is about to
be supplied with water service by the city.
('79 Code, § 17-77)
§ 52.003 LOANING CURB STOP KEY.
   Neither the Water Department nor any officer or employee thereof, nor any
plumber shall give or loan a curb stop key to any person.
('79 Code, § 17-29)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.004 SHUTTING OFF WATER; NOTICE.
   The city reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut off the
water in the street mains for repairs, extensions, or for any other purposes.
All persons having any apparatus connected to the water system dependent on the
water pressure are cautioned against danger of collapse when the supply is cut
off. When circumstances permit, the consumer will be advised of a shut-off by
public notice or otherwise, but in no case shall the city, the Board of
Directors, the Superintendent of the Waterworks or any other city employee be
held for damages resulting from failure from any cause to supply water to any
consumer.
('79 Code, § 17-30) (Ord. 931, passed 12-14-82)
§ 52.005 SUPERINTENDENT; APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Board of Directors shall annually at the first meeting in the
month of January of each year appoint a Superintendent of the Waterworks, whose
term of office shall be for one year and who shall have immediate control under
the direction of the Directors of the operation of the waterworks.
   (B)   The Superintendent shall be responsible to the Directors for the
proper operation of the waterworks and he shall have the power and/or duty to:
      (1)   See that the rules and regulations adopted by the Directors or
enacted by ordinance are properly executed; he shall also see that the
conditions of all contracts are faithfully complied with and shall superintend
all repairs of the waterworks ordered by the Directors and shall cause the same
to be done in accordance with the orders and directions of the Directors.
      (2)   Inspect all extensions and improvements of the waterworks that may
be hereafter authorized and cause the same to be done according to the contract
therefor made.
      (3)   Superintend and inspect all connections of service pipe with the
main and for extensions therefrom to the stop and box at the sidewalk including
stop-box, and all material used in tapping mains and in running the service
pipe used from the mains to the corporation stop at the sidewalk including the
stop-box shall be subject to his inspection and he shall cause the plumber and
his employees engaged in doing the work to strictly conform to all bylaws,
rules, regulations and ordinances relating thereto.
      (4)   Keep in repair all the fire hydrants, belonging to the waterworks
and flush all hydrants when necessary, keeping the working parts well oiled and
especially see that each and every fire hydrant is at all times ready for
immediate use.
      (5)   At the first meeting of the Directors of each month make a
financial and working report to the Directors, and not later than the first of
each month, report all consumers who are delinquent in the payment of their
water bills to the Directors; when the Directors shall order the water shut off
with respect to any delinquent user, the Superintendent shall immediately
discontinue the service, to be turned on again.
('79 Code, § 17-26) (Ord. 931, passed 12-14-82)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment of superintendent, see I.C. 8-1.5-3-4(a)(3)
§ 52.006 CASHIER; APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES.
   (A)   At the first meeting of the Board of Directors in the month of January
of each year, the Directors shall appoint a Cashier for the waterworks, fix the
compensation therefor and require the Cashier to furnish bond for the
satisfactory performance of the duties of the Cashier in the penal sum of not
less than $1,000 with surety to the approval of the Trustees.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Cashier to make all bills to consumers for
water used upon report of the Superintendent of meter readings and for any
other service that may be utilized other than through meters, receive all money
due to the waterworks from the consumers for service furnished, and daily
deposit with the Clerk-Treasurer all funds received by such cashier during any
day that collections are made by the cashier pursuant to this chapter.
('79 Code, § 17-27) (Ord. 931, passed 12-14-82)
Cross-reference:
   
Duties of Clerk-Treasurer — handling of funds, see § 52.081
Statutory reference:
   Powers of the Board, see I.C. 8-1.5-3-4(a)(1) and (2)
§ 52.007 PAYMENT FOR LOST WATER.
   (A)   Definition. Person is meant to be developer, contractor, landowner,
agent, or anyone else that causes water losses.
   (B)   Lost water. It is hereby ordained that henceforth any person working
within the boundaries of the Rochester Water Works Department jurisdiction be
ordered to pay the Water Works Department of the city for lost water from a
broken water main caused by a person. Payment is to be at the rate of
“Rochester Lost Water Revenue Estimate” already established at the time the
water main is broken or from back-flushing or any other water loss created by
the person. (Refer to the Rochester Lost Water Revenue Estimate Chart on file
at the Water Department.)
(Ord. 06-2002, passed 5-14-02)
CONNECTIONS AND MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS
§ 52.015 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises, which is now
or may hereafter be supplied with water from any service line or attachment,
connection, or extensions thereto, to make any attachments thereto or
extensions of the service line or any attachment, connections, or extensions of
the service line without first having made an application therefor and
obtaining permission from the Superintendent of the Waterworks Department.
('79 Code, § 17-37)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.016 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   Any person desiring a supply of water from a city water main shall apply in
writing and on the application form shall state that he will in all things
abide by the applicable provisions of this code and any other ordinance of the
city, and any rules and regulations of the waterworks system.
('79 Code, § 17-38)
§ 52.017 APPLICATION FORM; METER DEPOSITS.
   (A)   An application for water service shall be in the form prescribed by
the Waterworks Department.
   (B)   Whenever an application is made for the use of city water by any
person or organization, the Superintendent of the Department of Waterworks
shall require the person to make a meter deposit with the Clerk-Treasurer of
the city.
      (1)   For an application for water service to a single-family residence,
the meter deposit shall be $75.
      (2)   On an application for water service for a business or commercial
installation, the meter deposit shall be $125.
   (C)   In the event of the default by any consumer in the payment of his
water bill, the Waterworks Department shall have the right to charge the same
against the meter deposit when the unpaid bill shall equal or exceed the amount
of the meter deposit.
(‘79 Code, § 17-39) (Ord. 951, passed 7-26-83; Am. Ord. 32-1985, passed 10-22-
85; Am. Ord. 23-1989, passed 6-13-89; Am. Ord. 09-2006, passed 8-22-06; Am.
Ord. 10-2021, passed 8-24-21; Am. Ord. 42-2024, passed 23-17-24)
Cross-reference:
   
Rates and charges, see §§ 52.095 et seq.
§ 52.018 TAPPING FEES.
   Tap charges shall be made from each customer prior to connection to the
water system as follows:
   (A)   All installations completed by the Water Department will be for one-
inch taps only and the fee shall be $1,800. Except as stated in division (C),
no tapping fee shall be incurred when existing infrastructure designed to serve
multiple properties is dedicated to, and accepted by, the Water Department,
where no installation is completed by the Water Department.
   (B)   In addition, if the line must be placed beneath a road there will be a
$1,500 road cut fee plus an $800 boring fee. If an outside meter pit must be
installed, then additional charges may apply based on material and labor costs
as determined by the Water Department Superintendent.
   (C)   For installations larger than one inch, the customer is responsible
for all installation and applicable charges including any damages to the water
main, meter pit, and/or curb stop. In addition, all installations must be
inspected and approved by the Water Department prior to service being started.
Any taps larger than one inch will also pay the fee listed in division (A) to
the Water Department.
(‘79 Code, § 17-40) (Ord. 686, passed 7-27-77; Am. Ord. 703, passed 2-14-78;
Am. Ord. 3-1991, passed 2-26-91; Am. Ord. 23-1995, passed 11-14-95; Am. Ord.
04-2013, passed 4-23-13; Am. Ord. 09-2017, passed 11-28-17; Am. Ord. 10-2021,
passed 8-24-21; Am. Ord. 02-2022, passed 8-23-22; Am. Ord. 07-2023, passed 12-
19-23; Am. Ord. 10-2024, passed 4-23-24; Am. Ord. 42-2024, passed 12-17-24)
Cross-reference:
   Rates and charges, see §§
52.095 et seq.
§ 52.018.1 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES.
   (A)   Effective January of each calendar year beginning 2021, a system
development charge will be collected from new customers of the water system in
accordance with the following schedule:
Meter Size (inches) Meter Ratio System Development Charge
Meter Size (inches) Meter Ratio System Development Charge
5/8                 1.0         $ 1,000
3/4                 1.5         1,500
1                   2.5         2,500
1-1/2               5.0         5,000
2                   8.0         6,000
3                   15.0        16,000
4                   25.0        25,000
6                   50.0        50,000
8                   80.0        80,000
Unmetered           1.0         1,000
 
   (B)   The city shall collect such rates and charges at the same time and the
same manner as the collection of the water tapping fee. The above system
development fees may be modified upon recommendation of the Water Board when
investments in water infrastructure made by the developers or private property
owners result in significant enhancement of the capabilities of the city to
serve existing or future customers.
(Ord. 10-2021, passed 8-24-21; Am. Ord. 42-2024, passed 12-17-24)
§ 52.019 INSTALLATION AND PIPE COSTS.
   (A)   Upon payment of all required fees and costs, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
issue the water service applicant a receipt and the receipt shall be presented
to the Superintendent of the Waterworks and the city will then cause the water
main to be tapped and service pipe of the size designated connected with the
main and laid to the tree line in front of the premises to be served with
water, provided there is a city water main in the street adjacent to the
premises.
   (B)   If there is no such water main, then the service pipe will be
designated an extended line and the applicant shall pay the regular tapping
fees, and in addition thereof, in the event the distance of the extended line
exceeds 20 feet, the following fees shall be charged:
 
Size of Service (inches) Cost per Foot
¾                       $ 1.25
1                        1.75
1½                      2.00
2                        2.25
 
   (C)   These fees and costs shall include the tapping, furnishing and laying
of a service pipe corporation stop, stop-box and curb stop.
('79 Code, § 17-41)
Cross-reference:
   
Rates and charges, see § 52.096
§ 52.020 TAPPING PERMIT; MANNER OF TAPPING; SPECIFICATIONS OF MATERIALS USED.
   (A)   Whenever it shall be necessary to tap the water main and lay water
service pipes and connections, and if fees have been paid in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall present the receipt of the
Clerk-Treasurer to the Superintendent of the Waterworks Department who will
then issue to the holder of the receipt a permit to connect with service pipe
to the main. Upon issuance of the permit the city will cause laid water main to
be tapped and the service pipe of the size mentioned in the permit to be
connected with the main and laid to the tree line in front of the premises to
be served with water.
   (B)   All tapping and making connections with the street main and laying the
service pipes, corporation stops and stop boxes shall be done by the Water
Department, provided however, that in making the tap only registered plumbers,
hired by the Waterworks Department, shall be permitted to make the tap. When
the work of laying the service line and the tapping has been completed the
Superintendent shall make inspection and, if he approves, shall then order the
water turned on.
   (C)   All water mains shall be of cast-iron material; all service lines of
two inches or less shall be of copper material, and all service lines of more
than two inches shall be of cast-iron material. The material shall be of a
quality approved by the Superintendent of the Waterworks.
   (D)   All attachments for copper service pipes will be made by means of a
flared fitting, of the best material and workmanship, and for all attachments
to mains for supplies greater than 3/4 inch, the Board of Waterworks Trustees
reserves the right to designate the size and number of taps to be made, and the
size and kind of service pipe to be laid.
   (E)   The corporation cock shall be best quality of yellow brass, round way
ground stop, with “T” handles.
   (F)   All service pipes shall be laid not less than four and one-half feet
below the surface of the ground at all points. The stop boxes shall be of first
quality adjustable to height with the words “City Water” cast on the lid and
the boxes so set that the top of the box will be at a grade to be designated by
the Waterworks Department.
('79 Code, § 17-42) (Ord. 335, passed 8-10-65)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.021 AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED TO TAP OR MAKE CONNECTION.
   No person shall be permitted to tap or make any connections with the
distributing pipes of the waterworks unless duly authorized.
('79 Code, § 17-43)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.022 REGISTERED PLUMBER TO MAKE ATTACHMENTS WITH MAIN PIPES; PERMIT
REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any attachments to water service
connected with the main pipes of the waterworks, or make any addition or
alteration of any kind to tap, pipe, cock or other fixture connected with the
pipe supply to consumers from the waterworks unless he is a plumber registered
with the Clerk-Treasurer; provided however, that nothing in this section shall
authorize a plumber to make any attachments, alterations, additions or do any
other work in connection with or for the purpose of supplying water from the
waterworks without the required permit.
('79 Code, § 17-44)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.023 CONSUMERS TO MAINTAIN PIPES AND FIXTURES; REPAIR BREAKS; LIABILITY.
   (A) All water consumers shall keep their service pipes and fixtures from the
street mains in repair and in good working order at their own expense. It is
expressly stipulated that no claim shall be allowed by reason of damages to the
consumers' property as a result of the breaking of any service cock or service
pipe. In case of a break in any service pipe the owners of the property shall
repair the pipe immediately, and on failure to do so, after being notified, the
Waterworks Department will repair the pipe and the repairs shall be added to
the water bill of the consumer and shall be paid by the consumer and the
failure to do so shall subject the consumer to such penalty collection charges
as is provided in the case of a delinquent water bill, including the liability
of having the supply of water shut off.
   (B)   The water consumer shall be held liable for any damages to the public
generally, resulting from failure to immediately protect and repair a leak in
his water service.
('79 Code, § 17-45)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.024 CONSUMERS LIABLE FOR CITY SERVICE TO FROZEN PIPES; MULTIPLE CUSTOMERS
ON SAME LINE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   In case the city furnishes any service with respect to thawing any
frozen water pipes, either in the service pipe and connections or to pipes
located on a consumer's premises, the consumer shall pay the amount as may be
fixed by the Board of Waterworks Trustees, and the charge shall be added to the
regular water bill of the consumer, and the nonpayment thereof shall be subject
to the penalty collection charge and the liability of having the water
disconnected as is provided with respect to repairs made by the city.
   (B)   In the passage of this chapter it is expressly stipulated that not
more than one consumer can be supplied from one tap to the water main or one
service line.
('79 Code, § 17-46)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.025 WATERWORKS DEPARTMENT TURNING WATER OFF AND ON; CHARGE.
   The Waterworks Department shall make all water service turn-ons and turn-
offs. A service charge of $20 will be made to the property owner or water user
for each turn-on and each turn-off made by the Department Monday through
Friday, from 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. A service charge of $75 will be made for
turn-offs after business hours and Saturdays. A service charge of $100 will be
made for turn-offs on Sundays and holidays.
(‘79 Code, § 17-47) (Ord. 335, passed 8-10-65; Am. Ord. 951, passed 7-26-83;
Am. Ord. 23-1989, passed 6-13-89; Am. Ord. 10-2021, passed 8-24-21; Am. Ord.
11-2024, passed 4-23-24; Am. Ord. 42-2024, passed 12-17-24)
Cross-reference:
   
Rates and charges, see §§ 52.095 et seq.
§ 52.026 REPAIR BY CITY; LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES FROM TURNING WATER ON OR OFF.
   The Waterworks Department will not make any repair work nor attempt to drain
any plumbing and shall not be responsible for any damage done to property due
to turning on or turning off the water; where pipes needing draining or which
are out of order the consumer shall assume full responsibility for draining or
repairs.
('79 Code, § 17-48) (Ord. 335, passed 8-10-65)
§ 52.027 VALVES TO BE INSTALLED WHERE PRIVATE WELLS USED IN CONJUNCTION WITH
CITY WATER.
   Whenever private well supplies are used to supply boilers or there are any
cross connections with the city's water mains, there must be installed check
valves and gate valves as approved by the State Board of Health to prevent any
private supply from backing up into the city's water mains.
('79 Code, § 17-49)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.028 CLOSING CORPORATION STOP AND TURNING WATER OFF.
   Any plumber who has made any connection with a water service pipe leading to
a water main, made any addition thereto, added or changed any fixture or done
any other work by which water is to be conveyed into any fixture or done any
other work by which water is to be used, or can be used, after turning and
leaving the water on sufficiently long to test the work, must close the
corporation stop at the tree line and leave the water turned off and
immediately make his return to the Superintendent of the Waterworks Department.
The failure to do so shall be grounds to revoke his registration.
('79 Code, § 17-50)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.029 ATTACHING PIPE TO STOPCOCK.
   Whenever any plumber has occasion to attach any pipe to a stopcock at the
tree line, either in new work or in case of repairs, he must see that the tee
on the stopcock is left in the center of the stop box and the stop box well
secured to prevent removal or displacement in filling around it or settling of
such filling.
('79 Code, § 17-51)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.030 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL BY SUPERINTENDENT.
   All plumbers working on a water connection shall allow the Superintendent of
the Waterworks to inspect any and all work so done by him or them before the
trenches are filled up and before the water is turned into the building so
plumbed and to this end he shall notify the Superintendent when the work is
completed and ready for inspection and no water shall be turned into the pipes
connecting the waterworks mains with such premises until the inspection is made
by the Superintendent and the work of the plumbing is satisfactory to him.
('79 Code, § 17-52)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.031 INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED AFTER INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   Within 48 hours after the work described in §
52.030 has been inspected and found satisfactory by the Superintendent of the
Waterworks, the plumber shall make out on a blank furnished him by the city, an
accurate return to the Superintendent setting out the location of the premises
in reference to the street on which the same fronts, the number of the house,
if any, the name of the owner or occupant of the premises, and in plain writing
all the uses, both ordinary and special, to which the water is designed to be
applied; the failure on the part of any plumber to do so shall be grounds to
revoke his certificate of registration.
   (B)   The plumber shall in no case be allowed to deliver such return to the
owner or occupant of the premises, but must in all cases deliver the same to
the Superintendent.
('79 Code, § 17-53)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.032 CONSUMER TO MAINTAIN STOP BOX; LIABILITY FOR FAILURE TO PROVIDE
ACCESS.
   The consumer of city water shall at all times use care to see that the stop
box is kept in good repair, and in plain view, and access to the stop box not
in any manner obstructed. If it is not so arranged and the city has to dig up
the main to shut off the water or to turn it on, the property owner shall be
liable for and chargeable with the extra expense, including that of digging and
excavating.
('79 Code, § 17-54)
§ 52.033 INSPECTIONS BY SUPERINTENDENT; CONTROL OF STOPCOCK.
   The Superintendent of the Waterworks Department shall have access to and be
permitted at any reasonable time to inspect all pipes, fixtures and apparatus
supplied with water service, and shall have the power to control the stopcock
in the cellar as the interests of the city may require.
('79 Code, § 17-55)
§ 52.034 FORFEITURE OR REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION OF PLUMBER.
   (A)   In addition to any other penalty provided by law, any plumber
violating the bylaws, rules or regulations which have been established by the
city for the government of the waterworks shall forfeit his registration; and
upon the discovery of any such violation the Mayor shall immediately revoke his
registration and the plumber will be prohibited from doing any further work in
connection with the waterworks until full satisfaction has been rendered in the
way of paying all penalties prescribed by the bylaws for such violation and
satisfactory assurance given that in the future no violations of the bylaws,
rules or regulations of the waterworks will be committed by the plumber and
until his registration has been reinstated by the Mayor.
   (B)   The forfeiture or revocation of the registration of any plumber who is
a member of or employed by a corporation or firm, shall operate as to affect
all other members of the firm or corporation alike, and no separate
registration shall be issued to any person interested in or employed by the
firm or corporation so long as the offending plumber is a member of or employed
by the firm or corporation.
('79 Code, § 17-56)
§ 52.035 CROSS CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   A cross connection shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains
potable water from the city water system, and the other, water from a private
source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals,
whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow
depending on the pressure differential between the two systems.
   (B)   No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No
interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private,
auxiliary, or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of
such supply shall have been approved by the Department of Water Works and by
the state Department of Environmental Management in accordance with 327 IAC 8-
10.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Water Works Department to cause inspection
to be made of all properties served by the public water system where cross
connections with the public water system is deemed possible.
      (1)   The frequency of inspections and reinspection based on potential
health hazards involved shall be established by the Water Works Department.
      (2)   Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the Water
Works Department shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time
to examine the property served by a connection to the public water system of
the city for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of
any property so served, shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent
information regarding the piping systems on such property. The refusal of
access or refusal of requested pertinent information shall be deemed evidence
of the presence of cross connections.
      (3)   The Department of Water Works is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation
of this section exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system.
Water service shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been
eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. If it is
deemed by the Department of Water Works that a cross connection or an emergency
endangers public health, safety, or welfare and requires immediate action, and
a written finding to that effect is filed with the Clerk and delivered to the
consumer’s premises, service may be immediately discontinued. The consumer
shall have an opportunity for a hearing within ten days of such emergency
discontinuance.
   (D)   All consumers using toxic or hazardous liquids, all hospitals,
mortuaries, wastewater treatment plants, laboratories, and all other hazardous
users shall install and maintain a reduced-pressure-principal backflow
preventer in the main water line serving each building on the premises. The
backflow preventor must be installed in an easily accessible location not
subject to flooding or freezing.
   (E)   That all consumers determined by the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management (IDEM) as high hazard by using toxic or hazardous
liquids, which includes:
      (1)   Aircraft and missile manufacturing plants;
      (2)   Automotive plants;
      (3)   Beverage bottling plants, including dairies and breweries;
      (4)   Canneries, packing houses and reduction plants;
      (5)   Car washes;
      (6)   Chemical, biological, radiological laboratories, including those in
high schools, trade schools, colleges, universities and research institutions;
      (7)   Hospitals, clinics, medical buildings, autopsy facilities, morgues,
medical facilities and mortuaries;
      (8)   Metal and plastic manufacturing, fabricating, cleaning, plating and
processing facilities;
      (9)   Plants manufacturing paper and paper products;
      (10)   Plants manufacturing, refining, compounding, or processing
fertilizer, film, herbicides, natural or synthetic rubber, pesticides,
petroleum products, pharmaceuticals, radiological materials, or any chemical
that could be a contaminant to the public water supply;
      (11)   Commercial facilities that use herbicides, pesticides,
fertilizers, or any chemical that could be a contaminant to the public water
supply;
      (12)   Plants processing, blending, or refining animal, vegetable or
mineral oils;
      (13)   Commercial laundries and dye works, including coin-operated
laundromats;
      (14)   Sewage, storm water and industrial waste treatment plants and
pumping stations;
      (15)   Waterfront facilities, including piers, docks, marinas and
shipyards;
      (16)   Industrial facilities that recycle water;
      (17)   Restricted or classified facilities (federal government defense or
military installations), or other facilities closed to the supplier of water or
to the Commissioner;
      (18)   Private water wells connected to the municipal water system;
      (19)   Irrigation systems;
      (20)   Any other application deemed a risk to the public water supply as
determined by the City of Rochester Water Department.
   (F)   The reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall not be
installed below ground level. All reduced pressure principle backflow
preventers must be installed in an easily accessible location not subject to
flooding or freezing as approved by the City of Rochester Water Department.
   (G)   This section does not supersede the Indiana Plumbing Code, the IDEM
Rule 327 IAC 8-10 or the city plumbing ordinances, but it supplementary to
them.
   (H)   If, in the judgment of the Superintendent of Water, an approved
backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water
system, the Superintendent of Water will give notice to the water consumer to
install such an approved device immediately. The water consumer shall, at his
or her own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a
manner approved by the Superintendent of Water and shall have inspections and
test made of such approved devices as required by the Superintendent of Water
and in accordance with the IDEM Rule 327 IAC 8-10.
(Ord. 31-1999, passed 11-9-99; Am. Ord. 09-2016, passed 9-6-16)
METERS
§ 52.045 SERVICE TO BE METERED; PERMIT TO REMOVE METER.
   All services for the furnishing of water to any consumer shall be measured
by a meter which shall be furnished by the Waterworks Department and no person
shall interfere with or remove any water meter from any service line after it
has been attached unless upon the written permit of the Superintendent;
provided, however, that service furnished for public and private fire
protection shall not be required to be metered.
('79 Code, § 17-72)
Cross-reference:
   
Adjustments for meter leakage, see § 52.103
   
Testing of meters to determine overcharge, see § 52.105
§ 52.046 BOARD TO SPECIFY SIZE AND TYPE OF METER.
   The Board of Waterworks Trustees shall specify the size and type of water
meter required by the service to be performed.
('79 Code, § 17-73)
§ 52.047 OBSTRUCTION OF METERS; SHUTTING OFF WATER FOR VIOLATION; RIGHT OF CITY
TO EXAMINE METERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cover up, or in any way obstruct, the
free access to any water meter in the service of the Waterworks Department. In
case of violation of this provision on the part of the owner or tenant, and
failure on the part of the owner or tenant to remove such obstructions upon
notice from the Superintendent of the Waterworks Department, the water service
shall be immediately shut off from the premises; the city reserves the right to
examine every meter connected to the waterworks system, whether located for
convenience on private property or in any public street or alley.
('79 Code, § 17-74)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.048 REMOVAL OF WATER METER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not employed by the Waterworks
Department, or not a licensed plumber working by permission of the Waterworks
Department, to attach or remove a water meter to or from any service pipe
connected to the waterworks system.
('79 Code, § 17-75)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.049 OUTSIDE METER INSTALLATIONS.
   Whenever a water meter is installed outside of a building, it shall be
installed in a pit which meets with the approval of the Waterworks Department.
The pit shall be not less than 20 inches in diameter and not less than four
feet in depth with a cast-iron cover as approved by the Department. All meters
shall be raised within 18 inches of the top of the meter box pit. Where it is
necessary to install outside meters the costs of such installation shall be
borne by the consumer. Where a meter is located on the inside of a building the
consumer shall be responsible for any damage that occurs to the meter when
damage has occurred, and upon notification thereof the Department will repair
or replace any such meter but will make a charge to the consumer to cover the
costs of materials and labor in case of repair or to cover the new meter in
case a new meter is furnished.
('79 Code, § 17-76)
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
§ 52.060 COMPOSITION; TERMS.
   The Board of Directors of the Department of Waterworks shall consist of
three Directors, which Directors shall serve for terms of three years,
provided, however, that in the initial appointments the Directors shall be
appointed for terms of one year, two years, and three years respectively so as
to stagger the terms of the Directors.
('79 Code, § 17-17) (Ord. 931, passed 12-14-82)
Statutory reference:
   Board of Directors, see I.C. 8-1.5-4-2
§ 52.061 APPOINTMENT.
   The members of the Board of Directors shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to the approval of the Common Council.
('79 Code, § 17-18) (Ord. 931, passed 12-14-82)
Statutory reference:
   Board of Directors, see I.C. 8-1.5-4-2
§ 52.062 QUALIFICATIONS.
   All members of the Board of Directors shall be city residents and citizens
of outstanding reputation for integrity, responsibility and business ability.
('79 Code, § 17-19) (Ord. 931, passed 12-14-82)
§ 52.063 PERSONS INELIGIBLE.
   No member of the Common Council or any other city officer shall be eligible
for appointment to the Board of Directors.
('79 Code, § 17-20) (Ord. 931, passed 12-14-82)
§ 52.064 POLITICAL AFFILIATION.
   No more than two of the individuals appointed to the Board of Directors
shall be of the same political party.
('79 Code, § 17-21)
§ 52.065 BOND REQUIREMENT.
   Each member and officer of the Board of Directors shall give a bond to the
state for the use of the city in the sum of $5,000; such bond shall be
conditioned for the faithful discharge of his duties and the payment to the
proper person of all money coming into his hands as such officer or member.
('79 Code, § 17-23) (Ord. 931, passed 12-14-82)
§ 52.066 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Directors shall have management and control of the waterworks
plant and shall manage it for the benefit of the city. In addition the Board
shall have the powers, rights and duties prescribed by state law.
('79 Code, § 17-24) (Ord. 931, passed 12-14-82)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 8-1.5-3-4 and 8-1.5-4-4
WATERWORKS BONDS; DISPOSITION OF REVENUE
§ 52.080 KEEPING OF RECORDS; INSPECTION BY BOND HOLDERS.
   The city shall keep proper books and records, separate from all other
records and accounts, in which complete and correct entries shall be made
showing all revenues collected from the waterworks system and deposited in the
special fund hereinafter established, and all disbursements made therefrom,
together with all transactions, relating to the system. The city, upon request,
shall furnish to any holder of any of its waterworks bonds, not more than 30
days after the close of each six months fiscal period, complete operating and
income statements of the system in reasonable detail covering the six-month
period, and not more than 60 days after the close of the fiscal year, shall
furnish complete financial statements of the waterworks system, and of the city
covering such fiscal year and certified by the Clerk-Treasurer. The financial
statements of the waterworks system shall at all times be kept on file in the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer. Any holder of any of the bonds shall have the
right at all reasonable times to inspect the waterworks system and all records,
accounts and data of the city relating thereto.
('79 Code, § 17-25)
§ 52.081 DUTIES OF CLERK-TREASURER; HANDLING OF FUNDS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Clerk-Treasurer to receive all moneys from
the Cashier as provided in § 52.006 and all other revenues arising from the
operation of the waterworks and keep the revenues in separate and distinct
funds as hereinafter designated and all warrants for claims and other
indebtedness against the fund shall be signed by the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   All funds belonging to the waterworks shall be deposited in the
regular depository of the city in separate accounts from other city funds and
the separate accounts shall be designated:
      (1)   Waterworks fund;
      (2)   Meter deposit fund;
      (3)   Bond and interest redemption fund;
      (4)   Depreciation fund; and
      (5)   Such other funds as from time to time may be required.
   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall also keep appropriate records of the various
transactions pertaining to the waterworks including a record of appropriations
as the they are made by the Common Council.
   (D)   The City Clerk-Treasurer’s Office is authorized to accept a credit
card or debit card for payment of water / waste water utility bills. In the
event of a charge to the city for the use of the credit or debit card payments,
the City Clerk-Treasurer’s Office is authorized and directed to charge and
collect a sum equal to the amount of the charge from the person who uses the
credit or debit card for payment of their water / waste water utility bill.
(‘79 Code, § 17-28) (Am. Ord. 17-2008, passed 1-13-09)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 52.095 DUTY OF CITY TO ESTABLISH JUST RATES.
   The city shall establish, maintain and collect nondiscriminatory,
reasonable, and just rates or charges for the facilities and service afforded
by its waterworks system which shall be sufficient to:
   (A)   Pay the legal and other necessary expenses incident to the operation
of the utility, including maintenance costs, operating charges, upkeep,
repairs, depreciation, interest charges on bonds and other obligations,
including leases, and costs associated with the acquisition of utility property
under I.C. 8-1.5-2;
   (B)   Provide a sinking fund for the liquidation of bonds or other
obligations, including leases;
   (C)   Provide a debt service reserve for bonds or other obligations,
including leases, in an amount not to exceed the maximum annual debt service on
the bonds or obligations or the maximum annual lease rentals;
   (D)   Provide adequate money for working capital;
   (E)   Provide adequate money for making extensions and replacements to the
extent not provided for through depreciation in division (A) above; and
   (F)   Provide money for the payment of any taxes that may be assessed
against the utility.
(‘79 Code, § 17-64) (Am. Ord. 10-1021, passed 8-24-21)
Statutory reference:
   Rates and charges, see I.C. 8-1.5-3-8
§ 52.096 ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES AND SERVICES.
   There are hereby established for the water and services rendered by the
waterworks of the city, except as otherwise may be provided by contract, the
rates and services listed in this subchapter, based upon the amount of water
supplied during each monthly water billing period.
(‘79 Code, § 17-65) (Ord. 491, passed 11-25-69; Am. Ord. 798, passed 4-22-80;
Am. Ord. 111-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 8-1990, passed 4-10-90; Am. Ord.
19-2001, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 21-2004, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 12-2009,
passed 9-23-09)
Cross-reference:
   
Meter deposits, see § 52.017
   
Tapping fees, see § 52.018
   
Installation and pipe costs, see § 52.019
   
Waterworks Department turning water off and on; charge, see § 52.025
§ 52.097 METERED RATES.
   Monthly metered water rates and charges are as follows: For usage billed
after September 1, 2011:
 
Metered Rates per Month Rate per 1,000 Gallons Rate per 1,000 Gallons
                        (Inside City)          (Outside City)
First 2,500             $ 11.05                $ 12.61
Next 22,500             8.90                   10.15
Next 175,000            7.20                   8.22
Over 200,000            6.10                   6.96
(‘79 Code, § 17-66) (Ord. 491, passed 11-25-69; Am. Ord. 796, passed 4-22-80;
Am. Ord. 111-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 8-1990, passed 4-10-90; Am. Ord.
22-1993, passed 12-28-93; Am. Ord. 19-2001, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 21-2004,
passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 12-2009, passed 9-23-09; Am. Ord. 10-2021, passed 8-
24-21; Am. Ord. 42-2024, passed 12-17-24)
§ 52.098 MINIMUM MONTHLY CHARGE.
   Each user shall pay a minimum charge in accordance with the following
applicable size of meter installed, for which the user will be entitled to the
quantity of water set out in § 52.097: For usage billed after September 1,
2011:
Size of Meter (inches) Gallons Allowed Rate (Inside City) Rate (Outside City)*
Size of Meter (inches) Gallons Allowed Rate (Inside City) Rate (Outside City)*
5/8                    2,500              $ 27.65      $ 31.50
3/4                    5,237              52.00        59.30
1                      10,758             101.10       115.35
1 1/4                  17,092             157.50       179.65
1 1/2                  21,776             199.20       227.20
2                      28,879             255.80       291.80
3                      44,928             371.35       423.70
4                      62,629             498.80       569.20
6                      104,828            802.65       916.10
8                      200,000         1,487.90           1,698.40
10                     287,500         2,021.65           2,307.40
12                     537,500         3,546.65           4,047.40
 
* Outside corporate city boundaries rates and charges are approximately 14.1%
higher than the rates and charges for customers inside corporate city
boundaries.
(‘79 Code, § 17-67) (Ord. 491, passed 11-25-69; Am. Ord. 796, passed 4-22-80;
Am. Ord. 111-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 8-1990, passed 4-10-90; Am. Ord.
22-1993, passed 12-28-93; Am. Ord. 19-2001, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 21-2004,
passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 12-2009, passed 9-23-09; Am. Ord. 10-2021, passed 8-
24-21; Am. Ord. 42-2024, passed 12-17-24)
§ 52.099 HYDRANT CHARGES; PRIVATE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   Hydrant charges. The annual charge for water service shall be as
follows:
      Municipal hydrants   $300 per hydrant
      Private hydrants   $450 per hydrant
   (B)   Private fire hydrants. All private fire hydrants within the city shall
be located, installed and maintained in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Costs for the installation and maintenance of a private fire
hydrant, as detailed in this section, shall be the responsibility of the
property owner.
      (2)   All private fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with
nationally recognized good practices, NFPA Standards, AWWA Standards and by the
city Water Department specifications maintained with the building fire
protection system.
      (3)   All private fire hydrants must be the color red and the large
diameter steamer connection shall be a five-inch Storz fitting. The two smaller
connections shall be two and one-half-inch male (NST) National Standard
Threads. All private fire hydrants shall have an approved shut-off valve
installed in the fire hydrant lead not more than 100 feet from the fire
hydrant. Such shut-off valve shall be accessible at all times.
      (4)   All private fire hydrant placement must be approved by the city
Water Department and the Fire Chief before installation, and accessible at all
times for fire-fighting purposes. No private fire hydrant shall be installed
closer than two feet or more than five feet from a street, roadway or driveway.
For average conditions, all private fire hydrants shall be placed 50 feet from
the building protected, as specified by the authority having jurisdiction. All
private fire hydrants shall be set plumb with outlets a minimum of 18 inches
above the adjoining finished grade.
      (5)   All private fire hydrants are required to be inspected and tested
once per year by a qualified testing company to verify the flow, proper
operation, and should consist of greasing outlets and greasing stem. The
results must include the hydrant location and the results of the flow test
(static pressure and GMP flow). The property owner will maintain a copy of the
test certification on the premises and send a copy within 30 days of the
testing to the city Water Department at 320 Main Street, Rochester, Indiana
46975.
      (6)   All private fire hydrants shall be maintained in proper working
order by the owner and must be repaired or replaced within 180 days if non-
conforming.
      (7)   Notification must be made to the Fire Department of any private
fire hydrant taken out or service for repair or maintenance and reported back
in service to the Fire Department when repaired by calling the Fire Department
during normal business hours.
(‘79 Code, § 17-68) (Ord. 491, passed 11-25-69; Am. Ord. 796, passed 4-22-80;
Am. Ord. 111-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 8-1990, passed 4-10-90; Am. Ord.
22-1993, passed 12-28-93; Am. Ord. 19-2001, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 21-2004,
passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 12-2009, passed 9-23-09; Am. Ord. 10-2021, passed 8-
24-21; Am. Ord. 42-2024, passed 12-17-24)
§ 52.100 SPRINKLER CONNECTION SYSTEM CHARGE.
   The annual connection charge for water service to a private fire protection
sprinkling system shall be as follows:
 
Size (inches) Charge per Annum
2             $ 34
4             207
6             600
8             1,279
10            2,300
 
(‘79 Code, § 17-69) (Ord. 491, passed 11-25-69; Am. Ord. 796, passed 4-22-80;
Am. Ord. 111-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 8-1990, passed 4-10-90; Am. Ord.
22-1993, passed 12-28-93; Am. Ord. 19-2001, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 21-2004,
passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 12-2009, passed 9-23-09; Am. Ord. 10-2021, passed 8-
24-21; Am. Ord. 42-2024, passed 12-17-24)
§ 52.101 CHARGE TO TEMPORARY USERS.
   Water furnished to temporary users, such as contractors, circuses, and the
like, shall be charged on the basis of the metered gallonage rates hereinbefore
set forth as estimated and established by the Waterworks Superintendent, in
addition to the charges set forth in §
52.025.
(‘79 Code, § 17-70) (Ord. 491, passed 11-25-69; Am. Ord. 796, passed 4-22-80;
Am. Ord. 111-1987, passed 11-10-87; Am. Ord. 8-1990, passed 4-10-90; Am. Ord.
19-2001, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 21-2004, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 12-2009,
passed 9-23-09; Am. Ord. 10-2021, passed 8-24-21)
§ 52.102 COLLECTION AND DEFERRED PAYMENT CHARGE.
   All bills for water services not paid within 15 days from the billing due
date thereof, as stated on the bills, shall be subject to a collection or
deferred payment charge of 10% on the first $3 and 3% on the excess over $3.
(‘79 Code, § 17-71) (Ord. 491, passed 11-25-69; Am. Ord. 111-1987, passed 11-
10-87; Am. Ord. 23-1989, passed 6-13-89; Am. Ord. 8-1990, passed 4-10-90; Am.
Ord. 19-2001, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 21-2004, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 12-
2009, passed 9-23-09)
§ 52.103 ADJUSTMENTS FOR METER LEAKAGE.
   If a water meter fails to register correctly, the bill for water used shall
be estimated from the most recent date as the Superintendent of the Waterworks
Department and the Board of Directors shall determine, but no deductions will
be made from the bill on account of leakage, and no adjustment will be made on
any bill by reason of any leak that occurs inside of a building.
('79 Code, § 17-78)
Cross-reference:
   
Meters, see §§ 52.045 et seq.
§ 52.104 DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE FOR NON-PAYMENT.
   (A)   When the Water Board orders the water of any consumer shut off for
non-payment of charges, the supply shall not again be turned on until the
consumer shall pay all charges due and in addition pay a turn-on charge in the
sum of $75. However, this sum shall be $125 if the consumer's service has been
shut off one time in the previous 12 months and $250 if the consumer has been
shut off two or more times in the previous 12 months. The delinquency
hereinbefore mentioned shall be held and construed to mean any and all bills
due the waterworks from the consumer whether the bills shall arise from the
occupancy of the same or different premises.
   (B)   The past due notice threshold shall be $10.
   (C)   Upon learning that an account exists in the name of a deceased
consumer, the Water Department may send a letter to the occupant(s) of the
property receiving service, notifying the occupant(s) that service will be
disconnected if a new account is not created for service to the property within
a reasonable time, as determined by the Water Board.
(‘79 Code, § 17-80) (Ord. 931, passed 12-14-82; Am. Ord. 951, passed 7-26-83;
Am. Ord. 23-1989, passed 6-13-89; Am. Ord. 09-2006, passed 8-22-06; Am. Ord.
13-2013, passed 4-23-13; Am. Ord. 03-2019, passed 5-28-19; Am. Ord. 10-2021,
passed 8-24-21; Am. Ord. 11-2024, passed 4-23-24; Am. Ord. 42-2024, passed 12-
17-24)
§ 52.105 TESTING OF METERS TO DETERMINE OVERCHARGE.
   (A)   Whenever any customer of the Waterworks Department believes that he is
being overcharged for water service and wishes to have the water meter serving
him tested, the customer will be entitled to have his water meter tested by
making a written request to the Water Department for the meter testing.
   (B)   Upon receiving such written request, the Water Department shall make
appropriate arrangements for the transportation of the water meter and the
testing thereof at an appropriate testing laboratory.
   (C)   In the event that after testing any such water meter is 95% correct,
the costs for transportation and testing for the water meter shall be paid by
the customer requesting the testing; and the amount for transportation and
testing of the water meter shall be added to the water bill for that customer.
   (D)   In the event that after testing the water meter is erroneous by more
than 5%, the cost of the transportation and testing of the water meter shall be
paid by the Water Department; and the Department shall install an accurate
water meter for service to the customer.
   (E)   In the event that the water meter proves to be more than 5% in error,
any adjustment to be made for water service to the customer requesting the
testing shall be limited to a period of one year immediately prior to the
testing of the water meter.
('79 Code, § 17-81) (Ord. 15-1990, passed 7-10-90)
Cross-reference:
   
Meters, see §§ 52.045 et seq.
CAPITAL CHARGES IN CERTAIN AREAS
§ 52.115 LAKE MANITOU AREA DESCRIBED.
   The area in which water mains are to be constructed for service to the
residents thereof is described as follows: The area set forth on sheets 1
through 31 of the plans and specifications heretofore prepared by Philip L.
Schnelker, Inc. of Fort Wayne, Indiana, and dated April 7, 1987, as the plans
and specifications apply to the Lake Manitou area, being the area covered by
sheets 1 through 31 of Contract B of the plans and specifications. The plans
and specifications are made a part of this subchapter by reference as fully as
if they were attached hereto and incorporated herein and the plans and
specifications are now on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer of the city
and are available for public inspection.
('79 Code, § 17-84) (Ord. 112-1987, passed 11-10-87)
§ 52.116 SURCHARGE ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The following surcharges are hereby established for Water Department
customers in the area described in § 52.115. The monthly surcharge rate shall
be based upon the meter size for each water connection. A schedule of the
surcharge is as follows:
Meter Size (inches) Monthly Surcharge Rate
Meter Size (inches) Monthly Surcharge Rate
5/8                 $ 20.00
3/4                 28.00
1                   50.00
1 1/4               80.00
1 1/2               116.00
2                   200.00
3                   460.00
4                   820.00
6                   1,840.00
 
   (B)   The monthly surcharge rates described in division (A) above shall
commence as of the date that water billing rates for the area begins, and shall
continue for a period of 20 years from this date. The surcharge shall be
payable at the same time, in the same manner as the regular charge for water
service from the Water Department, and shall be in addition to the regular
charge for water service.
('79 Code, § 17-85) (Ord. 112-1987, passed 11-10-87)
§ 52.117 APPLICATION OF SURCHARGES.
   The monthly surcharges described in §
52.116, shall be effective for those customers who have presently requested
water service from the Water Department and for whom the service is installed
promptly upon the construction of the necessary distribution lines in such
area.
('79 Code, § 17-86) (Ord. 112-1987, passed 11-10-87)
§ 52.118 COST OF WATER LINE CONSTRUCTION BORNE BY OWNER.
   The cost of all water line construction on private property to connect to
the water distribution lines now being installed by the city will be borne by
the property owners.
('79 Code, § 17-87) (Ord. 112-1987, passed 11-10-87)
§ 52.119 CONNECTION FEE FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS; EXCEPTIONS.
   The owner of any building existing on November 1, 1987, which connects to
the water utility shall, prior to being permitted to make such connection, pay
a connection fee in the amount of $3,000 per equivalent single-family dwelling
unit as calculated under §
52.116 hereof for the property to be served by the connection. Provided,
however, no connection fee will be required of any such owner connecting to a
water service line if the following conditions are met:
   (A)   The connection takes place within 90 days of the date on which water
becomes available for connection; and
   (B)   The owner pays the debt surcharge as set forth in §
52.116 hereof.
('79 Code, § 17-88) (Ord. 112-1987, passed 11-10-87)
§ 52.120 CONNECTION FEE FOR NEWER BUILDINGS; EXCEPTIONS.
   The owner of any building which is not in existence on November 1, 1987, but
which comes into existence prior to the completion of the water distribution
system as per the plans and designs of Philip L. Schnelker, Inc., Consulting
Engineer, including platted lots, and wishes to connect to the water utility,
shall, prior to being permitted to make connection, pay a connection fee in the
amount of $3,000 per equivalent single-family dwelling unit as calculated under
§
52.116 hereof for the property to be served by the connection. Provided,
however, no connection fee will be required of any such owner connecting to a
water service line if the following conditions are met:
   (A)   The connection takes place before the later of the date of January 1,
1989, or date on which water becomes available for connection;
   (B)   The owner pays the debt surcharge as set forth in §
52.116 hereof retroactive to the beginning of the construction process; and
   (C)   That the owner pays the standard water tap fee as provided by other
city ordinance.
('79 Code, § 17-89) (Ord. 112-1987, passed 11-10-87)
§ 52.121 OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO OWNERS OF UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY ABUTTING WATER
SERVICE LINE.
   (A)   The owners of undeveloped property abutting the water service line as
per the plans and designs of Philip L. Schnelker, Inc., Consulting Engineer,
may, prior to January 1, 1989, elect one of the following options:
      (1)   Pay the connection charge of $3,000. Pursuant to such payment, the
water service line will be extended to the owner's property line. Upon future
development of the property and connection to the water system, the owner will
be entitled to one equivalent single-family dwelling unit as calculated under §
52.116 hereof without payment of additional connection fee.
      (2)   Pay the monthly surcharge of $20 as set forth in §
52.116 hereof. Upon future development of the property and connection to the
water system, the owner will be entitled to one equivalent single-family
dwelling unit as calculated under §
52.116 hereof without payment of additional connection fee, provided, however,
no connection may be made unless the surcharge payments are current.
   (B)   In addition, the owner shall pay the standard water tap fee as
provided by other city ordinance.
('79 Code, § 17-90) (Ord. 112-1987, passed 11-10-87)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70. GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71. TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72. PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73. BICYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES
      
74. RAILROADS
      
75. TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
76. PARKING SCHEDULES
      
77. GOLF CART USE AND REGULATION
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Compliance required
   
70.03   Obedience to Police and Fire Department officials
   
70.04   Persons exempt from title; authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.05   Sidewalk and Tree Safety Commission
   
70.06   Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures
   
70.07   Installation and maintenance of signs, signals, and the like
   
70.08   Special provisions for school property
   
70.09   Special provisions for Rochester Plaza Shopping Center property
   
70.10   Special provisions for Peace Tree Plaza Shopping Center property
   
70.11   Street names
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, see I.C. 9-21-1-1 et seq.
   Traffic generally, see I.C. Title 9
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public thoroughfare which affords only secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting property and not over 20 feet in width.
   CENTRAL FIRE DISTRICT. All streets and portions of streets within the fire
limits.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily
for the transportation of property.
   CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
   FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers.
   PARK. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading.
   PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   STOP. The complete cessation of movement.
   STOP, STOPPING, or STANDING. Any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign
or signal.
('79 Code, § 8-1)
Statutory reference:
   State traffic definitions generally, see I.C. 9-13-2-1 et seq.
§ 70.02 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to
perform any act required by this title.
('79 Code, § 8-2)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.03 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or Fire Department
official.
('79 Code, § 8-3)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.04 PERSONS EXEMPT FROM TITLE; AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The provisions of this title applicable to the drivers of all vehicles
owned or operated by the United States, this state or any county, city, town,
district, or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth in this title with reference to authorized
emergency vehicles.
   (B)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this title
shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while
actually engaged in work on the surface of a highway but shall apply to such
persons and vehicles when traveling to or from work.
   (C)   The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or when responding, but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise
the privileges set forth in this title but subject to the conditions herein
stated.
   (D)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title.
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger
life or property.
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
   (E)   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals meeting
the requirements of law, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated
as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible
from in front of the vehicle.
   (F)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
('79 Code, § 8-5)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 9-21-1-6 through 9-21-1-8
§ 70.05 SIDEWALK AND TREE COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is hereby established a commission to be entitled and designated
as the “Rochester Sidewalk and Tree Commission.”
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of five members. No member shall be paid
or granted any salary or compensation from the city. The five members shall
consist of five residents of the city.
   (C)   The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor subject
to approval of the Common Council and shall each serve a one-year term.
   (D)   The Street Department Superintendent and the Special Projects Manager
shall both serve as ex officio members of the Commission. The common Council
may appoint one Council Member to be an ex officio member. The commission is
also authorized to appoint additional non-voting members by majority vote of
the commission at any meeting where a quorum is present. Ex officio members
shall not have voting rights, and no non-voting member shall be counted for
purposes of quorum.
   (E)   The members of the Commission shall choose a Chairperson. The
Chairperson of the Commission shall appoint the Secretary of the Commission who
shall have the duty to:
      (1)   Send all notices for the meetings of the Commission;
      (2)   Keep and preserve the minutes; have custody and keep all documents
and papers filed with the Commission; and
      (3)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Commission.
   (F)   The Commission shall meet on the call of its Chairman or on call by a
majority of its members. Three members shall constitute a quorum.
   (G)   The responsibilities of the Commission shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      (1)   Developing and implementing coordinated sidewalk and traffic safety
programs which meet local needs;
      (2)   Establishing sidewalk safety priorities for the city;
      (3)   Reviewing and approving project applications for funding;
      (4)   Promoting public acceptance of official programs proposed or
instigated by the city;
      (5)   Cooperating with the schools in promoting educational pedestrian
safety aids;
      (6)   Educating the public in pedestrian and traffic safety;
      (7) Generally aiding the overall reduction of accidents, injuries and
deaths on the city sidewalks.
      (8) Advising and consulting with the Board of Public Works and Safety and
city officials as to the work and recommendations of the Commission; and
      (9) Working with organized community groups and others to carry forward
all plans and policies of the Commission as to accident prevention which may be
approved by the Commission.
      (10)   Fulfilling all the duties of a City Tree Board described in §
97.28, or elsewhere in the code.
(‘79 Code, § 8-5.1) (Ord. 714, passed 4-11-78; Am. Ord. 04-2001, passed 2-27-
01; Am. Ord. 01-2012, passed 2-28-12; Am. Ord. 46-2024, passed 11-26-24)
§ 70.06 DISPOSITION OF TRAFFIC FINES AND FORFEITURES.
   (A)   All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the
forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the
provisions of this title shall be paid into the city treasury as required by
law.
   (B)   The failure, refusal, or neglect on the part of any judicial or other
officer or employee receiving or having custody of any traffic fine or
forfeiture, either before or after its deposit in the street and traffic safety
improvement fund to comply with division (A) shall constitute misconduct in
office and shall be ground for removal therefrom.
('79 Code, § 8-31)
Statutory reference:
   Disposition of fines assessed for traffic violations, see I.C. 9-21-1-2
§ 70.07 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND THE LIKE.
   The Police Department shall place and maintain traffic-control signs,
signals and devices when required under all traffic ordinances and when
necessary to make such ordinances effective.
('79 Code, § 8-32)
§ 70.08 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR SCHOOL PROPERTY.
   (A)   All traffic regulations of the state and the city shall be enforceable
by officers of the Police Department of the city with regard to all motor
vehicles, drivers and occupants thereof which shall be operated or found upon
the property of the Rochester Community School Corporation; it shall be
unlawful to violate the traffic regulations.
   (B)   The speed limit for all motorized vehicles on school drives and access
roadways shall be as posted by appropriate sign, but not to exceed 25 miles per
hour. The speed limit for all motorized vehicles on other school property,
including parking lot areas shall not exceed 15 miles per hour.
   (C)   All regular and appropriate directional signs, including stop, yield
and one-way signs shall be complied with and enforced in the same manner as if
placed upon the streets and highways of the city and state.
   (D)   No unauthorized vehicles shall be permitted off of the roadways on
school properties.
   (E)   The operations of snowmobiles, go-carts, off-the-road vehicles and all
other similar motorized vehicles on school property is prohibited.
   (F)   Driving or parking on school property shall be limited to those
vehicles operated by individuals who are attending school or school functions,
on official school business, or participating in approved recreational
activities on the school site or property.
('79 Code, § 8-27.1) (Ord. 674, passed 1-26-77)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.09 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ROCHESTER PLAZA SHOPPING CENTER PROPERTY.
   (A)   All traffic regulations of the state and the city shall be enforced by
officers of the Police Department of the city with regard to all motor
vehicles, drivers, and occupants thereof, which shall be operated upon or found
upon the property of Rochester Plaza Shopping Center. It shall be unlawful to
violate any of the ordinances of the city concerning traffic regulations or any
statutes of the State of Indiana concerning traffic regulations on the
property.
   (B)   The speed limit for all motorized vehicles on Rochester Plaza Shopping
Center property shall be limited as may be hereafter posted by any appropriate
signs but in any event shall not exceed 15 miles per hour on the property.
   (C)   All appropriate directional signs and all stop, yield, or one-way
signs which shall be properly placed upon the property shall be complied with
and enforced in the same manner as if placed upon the streets and highways of
the city.
   (D)   The operation of snowmobiles, go-carts, off-the-road vehicles and all
other similar motorized vehicles on the property of Rochester Plaza Shopping
Center is prohibited.
   (E)   Driving or parking on Rochester Plaza Shopping Center property shall
be limited to those vehicles operated by persons who are shopping or otherwise
transacting business with a tenant or business occupant of Rochester Plaza
Shopping Center.
('79 Code, § 8-27.2) (Ord. 80-1986, passed 12-30-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.10 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR PEACE TREE PLAZA SHOPPING CENTER PROPERTY.
   (A)   All traffic regulations of the state and city shall be enforced by
officers of the Police Department of the city with regard to all motor
vehicles, drivers, and occupants thereof, which shall be operated upon or found
upon the property of Peace Tree Shopping Center. It shall be unlawful to
violate any of the ordinances of the city concerning traffic regulations or any
statutes of the State of Indiana concerning traffic regulations on the
property.
   (B)   The speed limit for all motorized vehicles on Peace Tree Shopping
Center property shall be limited as may be hereafter posted by any appropriate
signs but in any event shall not exceed 15 miles per hour on the property.
   (C)   All appropriate directional signs and all stop, yield or one-way signs
which shall be properly placed upon the property shall be complied with and
enforced in the same manner as if placed upon the streets and highways of the
city.
   (D)   Operation of snowmobiles, go-carts, off-the-road vehicles and all
other similar motorized vehicles on the property of Peace Tree Shopping Center
is prohibited.
   (E)   Driving or parking on Peace Tree Shopping Center property shall be
limited to those vehicles operated by persons who are shopping or otherwise
transacting business with a tenant or business occupant of Peace Tree Shopping
Center.
(Ord. 32-1997, passed 9-23-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.11 STREET NAMES.
   The authority to name or re-name any street or public way within the city,
and to hear petitions for the same, shall rest with the Board of Public Works
and Safety.
(Ord. 16-2024, passed 8-27-24)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless another penalty is expressly provided, whoever violates any
provision of this title and any other traffic ordinance of the city shall be
punished as provided for in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   The penalty for violating §
70.08 shall be that imposed by the laws of the state or the city with regard to
the particular violation committed; provided, however, for any violation, the
Commission of which has not been unlawful under prior statute or ordinance,
upon conviction, the violator shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.
('79 Code, § 8-27.1) (Ord. 674, passed 1-26-77)
   (C)   The penalty for violating §
70.09 shall be that imposed by the laws of the state or the city with regard to
the particular violation committed; provided, however, for any violation, the
Commission of which has not been unlawful under prior statute or ordinance,
upon conviction, the violator shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.
('79 Code, § 8-27.2) (Ord. 80-1986, passed 12-30-86)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Turning around
   
71.02   Driving on sidewalks
   
71.03   Restriction on certain commercial vehicles in residence districts
   
71.04   Manner of conducting processions
   
71.05   Use of play streets
   
71.06   Obstruction of intersections
   
71.07   Angle loading or unloading permit
Cross-reference:
   
Special provisions for school property, see § 70.08
   
Special provisions for Rochester Plaza Shopping Center property, see § 70.09
§ 71.01 TURNING AROUND.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to turn the vehicle so as
to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district, or
upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic.
('79 Code, § 8-7)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.02 DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to drive within any
sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
('79 Code, § 8-10)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.03 RESTRICTION ON CERTAIN COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.
   Except on state highways or state-controlled highways it shall be unlawful
for any person to operate a commercial vehicle with a gross weight in excess of
10,000 pounds in any residence district; provided, however, that this
prohibition shall not apply to such a vehicle when it is making a delivery from
a state or state-controlled highway and returning to it by the most direct
route possible, and in the event that this restriction results in any undue
hardship or unfair competition, the Chief of Police shall have the power to
authorize the issuance of special permits from time to time as deemed necessary
for the protection of the rights of any individual.
('79 Code, § 8-11) (Ord. 577, passed 11-27-73)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.04 MANNER OF CONDUCTING PROCESSIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for a driver in a funeral or other procession to fail
to drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical, or to fail
to follow the vehicle ahead of it as closely as is practical and safe.
('79 Code, § 8-12)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.05 USE OF PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof
as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or
portion thereof except for drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within the closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise
the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
('79 Code, § 8-14)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.06 OBSTRUCTION OF INTERSECTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver,except the driver of a school bus, to
enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on
the other side of it to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any
traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
('79 Code, § 8-19) (Ord. 13-1997, passed 7-8-97)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.07 ANGLE LOADING OR UNLOADING PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to issue special permits for the
backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of the permit. The
permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the
owner of the vehicle and shall grant to the person the privilege as therein
stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or
other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such
permit.
('79 Code, § 8-20)
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Parking to display, wash, grease or repair vehicle
   
72.02   Parking in alleys
   
72.03   Use of bus and cab stands by other vehicles
   
72.04   Presumption with reference to illegal parking
   
72.05   Impoundment of vehicles
Buses; Taxicabs
   
72.15   Stopping, standing or parking buses
   
72.16   Stopping, standing or parking of taxicabs
Handicapped Parking Spaces
   
72.20   Application
   
72.21   Authority of police
   
72.22   Parking fees and fines
   
72.23   Definitions
   
72.24   Parking for persons with a physical challenge required
   
72.25   Parking for persons with a physical challenge
   
72.26   Compliance with state law required
   
72.27   Exclusiveness of state parking permits
   
72.28   Reciprocity
   
72.29   Enforcement
   
72.30   Violations
   
72.31   Penalty
   
72.32   Supremacy clause
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to regulate parking generally, see I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(1)
Cross-reference:
   Off-street parking, see §
152.044
   Special provisions for school property, see §
70.08
   Special provisions for Rochester Plaza Shopping Center property, see §
70.09
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 PARKING TO DISPLAY, WASH, GREASE OR REPAIR VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any street or
highway for the principal purpose of displaying it for sale, or washing,
greasing, or repairing the vehicle; provided, however, that this section shall
not be construed to prohibit parking to make repairs necessitated by an
emergency.
('79 Code, § 8-23)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.02 PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within an alley in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet
of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, or to
stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
('79 Code, § 8-24)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.03 USE OF BUS AND CAB STANDS BY OTHER VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle other
than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, except
that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when
the stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or
about to enter the zone.
('79 Code, § 8-27)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.04 PRESUMPTION WITH REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
   In any prosecution for illegal standing or parking of a vehicle proof that
the particular vehicle described in the complaint was illegally parked together
with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of the
parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a
prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person
who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during
which, the violation occurred; provided, however, that the provisions of this
section shall apply only when the proper arrest and citation procedure has been
followed.
('79 Code, § 8-28)
Statutory reference:
   Arrest and citation procedure generally, see I.C. 9-30-2-1 et seq.
§ 72.05 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove a
vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of
safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the city located in or
within one mile of the city limits under the following circumstances:
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge or in any
tunnel where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic.
      (2)   When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal.
      (3)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic, or is parked in violation of the night parking
restrictions set forth in § 73.02.
   (B)   Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in
this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the
registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof,
the officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to
the owner of the fact of the removal and the reasons therefor and of the place
to which the vehicle has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored
in a public garage, a copy of the notice shall be given to the proprietor of
the garage.
   (C)   The owner or operator of any such vehicle so towed in may regain
possession thereof by paying in full to the owner or operator of the garage
having possession of the vehicle the towage charges plus the storage charges
incurred pursuant to this section.
   (D)   All towage charges and storage charges incurred as herein provided
shall become a lien upon the vehicle in favor of the owner or operator of the
garage in possession of the vehicle. The owner or operator of the garage as
herein provided having a lien on any vehicle may after 60 days proceed to
foreclose on the lien in the same manner as provided for the foreclosure of
mechanics' liens.
('79 Code, § 8-29)
Statutory reference:
   Foreclosure proceeding for mechanics' liens, see I.C. 32-33-9
   Liens on motor vehicles for storage, see I.C. 32-33-10
BUSES; TAXICABS
§ 72.15 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING BUSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a common carrier bus to stand
or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a common carrier bus to stop
such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or
unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand, or
passenger loading zone so designated as provided herein, except in case of an
emergency.
   (C)   The operator of a common carrier bus shall enter a bus stop, bus
stand, or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the
bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position
with the right front wheel of the vehicle not further than 18 inches from the
curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede
the movement of other vehicular traffic.
('79 Code, § 8-25) (Ord. 14-1997, passed 7-8-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.16 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING OF TAXICABS.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a taxicab to stand or park such
vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand; provided,
however, that this provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations
at any place while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading
passengers.
('79 Code, § 8-26)
Penalty, see § 10.99
HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES
§ 72.20 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this chapter are enforceable on all parking facilities,
subject to the provisions of I.C. 5-16-9-1 et seq., regardless of whether the
parking facility is privately or publicly owned.
(Ord. 08-2018, passed 6-26-18)
§ 72.21 AUTHORITY OF POLICE.
   City personnel, designated by the Chief of Police, and the officers of the
Police Department shall have the authority to issue citations of violation of
the parking provisions of this chapter, addressing accessible parking spaces
for persons with a physical challenge.
(Ord. 08-2018, passed 6-26-18)
§ 72.22 PARKING FEES AND FINES.
   A $50 fine shall be imposed for the first violation in a calendar year in
the parking spaces reserved for persons with a physical challenge. If the
violator fails to pay the fine within seven business days of the violation, he
or she shall pay an additional $50 as a late penalty; such payment shall not
eliminate or replace the parking fine owed.
(Ord. 08-2018, passed 6-26-18)
§ 72.23 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter:
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the meaning set forth at I.C. 9-13-2-105.
   PARKING FACILITY. Any facility or combination of facilities for motor
vehicle parking that contains parking spaces for the public, whether publicly
or privately owned.
   PERSON WITH A PHYSICAL CHALLENGE. A person who has been issued a placard
under the I.C. 9-14-5, or a person with a registration plate for a motor
vehicle for persons with a physical challenge issued by the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles under I.C. 9-18-22.
(Ord. 08-2018, passed 6-26-18)
Editor’s notes:
   I.C. 9-14-5 was repealed by P.L. 198-2016, Sec. 185.
   I.C. 9-18-22 was added by P.L. 2-1991, Sec. 6 and expired 12-31-2016 by P.L.
198-2016, Sec. 262.
§ 72.24 PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH A PHYSICAL CHALLENGE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner of any parking facility shall provide accessible parking for
persons with a physical challenge. The number of accessible spaces so provided
shall, as a minimum, comply with the provisions of I.C. 5-16-9-2.
   (B)   The city shall reserve parking spaces on municipally owned lots as
prescribed by state law. The number of accessible spaces so provided shall, as
a minimum, comply with provisions of I.C. 5-16-9-2. In addition, the city shall
reserve parking on city streets as required to be used for the exclusive use of
persons with a physical challenge.
(Ord. 08-2018, passed 6-26-18)
§ 72.25 PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH A PHYSICAL CHALLENGE.
   (A)   Only vehicles displaying a placard on the dashboard or rearview
mirror, as issued by the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles, or any successor
agency thereof, or displaying a registration plate for persons with a physical
challenge, may make use of the marked spaces pursuant to this section. Persons
utilizing the spaces must obey all other regulations and restrictions effective
in that zone.
   (B)   Parking of a vehicle by any person in a space designated hereunder,
without a visible placard or registration plate for persons with a physical
challenge showing such parking to be authorized, shall be unlawful, and shall
subject the owner and driver of the vehicle so parked to the penalties provided
for violators in this code.
   (C)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall be empowered to establish
and so designate accessible parking spaces at such places, and in such numbers
that the designation shall comply with the requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act at all city on-street and off-street parking facilities.
(Ord. 08-2018, passed 6-26-18)
§ 72.26 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW REQUIRED.
   The manner of posting notice parking spaces for persons with a physical
challenge, and the size and location of parking spaces, shall comply with
provisions of the I.C. 5-16-92 and I.C. 5-16-9-4.
(Ord. 08-2018, passed 6-26-18)
§ 72.27 EXCLUSIVENESS OF STATE PARKING PERMITS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require a person to obtain or
display any permit, registration plate, or registration decal other than those
specified in I.C. 5-16-9-9(c) in order to stand or park in a space reserved for
persons with a physical challenge, as established pursuant to I.C. 5-16-9-1 et
seq. or this chapter.
(Ord. 08-2018, passed 6-26-18)
§ 72.28 RECIPROCITY.
   As required by I.C. 5-16-9-9(d), a motor vehicle displaying an unexpired
parking permit for a person with a physical challenge, an unexpired physically
challenged veteran’s registration plate, or an unexpired registration plate or
decal for persons with a physical challenge issued under the laws of another
state, shall be permitted to stand or park in a space reserved for a person
with a physical challenge, but only when the vehicle is being used to transport
a person with a physical challenge.
(Ord. 08-2018, passed 6-26-18)
§ 72.29 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The provisions of §
72.30(A) through (C) may be enforced as follows:
      (1)   The violator may be issued a citation for the commission of a Class
C infraction pursuant to the provisions of the I.C. 5-16-9-5 of the state
statute concerning parking facilities for persons with a physical challenge; or
      (2)   The violator may be issued a citation for the violation of the
local ordinance herein established.
   (B)   The provisions of §
72.30(D) shall be enforced through the issuance of a citation for violation of
the local ordinance herein established.
   (C)   The Police Department, or any officers of the Police Department, shall
have the responsibility for citing violations of §
72.30(A) through (C).
   (D)   The chief code enforcement officer shall have the primary
responsibility for citing violations of §
72.30(D).
(Ord. 08-2018, passed 6-26-18)
§ 72.30 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person who parks a motor vehicle that does not have displayed a
valid and unexpired registration plate, placard or decal for a physically
challenged person or a physically challenged veteran, issued under the laws of
the State of Indiana or under the laws of another state, in a parking space
reserved under this chapter for a vehicle for a person with a physical
challenge, shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person who knowingly parks in a parking space reserved for a
person with a physical challenge, while displaying a placard, decal or
registration plate to which neither the person or the person’s passenger is
entitled, shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Any person who displays for use in parking in a reserved space for the
physically challenged, a placard or license plate not issued under the laws of
the State of Indiana or some other state, shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter.
   (D)   Any owner of a parking facility, who fails to comply with the
provisions of I.C. 5-16-9-1 et seq. relating to accessible parking spaces for
the physically challenged, shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. For
the purpose of this division, notice of an ordinance violation shall be deemed
given to the owner of the parking facility when served upon the local agent in
charge of the operation of the parking facility. Pursuant to the provisions of
I.C. 36-1-6-2, before any action to enforce compliance with the provisions of
this chapter is brought under this division, all persons holding a substantial
interest in the property shall be given 90 days to bring the property into full
compliance.
(Ord. 08-2018, passed 6-26-18)
§ 72.31 PENALTY.
   (A)   In any action brought for a violation under this chapter, whoever
violates the provisions of §
72.30 shall be subject to penalties under §
10.99.
   (B)   Nothing in division (A) of this section shall be construed as
preventing the enforcement of parking violations for the physically challenged
pursuant to the provisions of the I.C. 5-16-9-5.
   (C)   Any person found in violation of §
72.30 who fails to provide required accessible parking spaces for persons with
a physical challenge, after having been given 90 days to do so, shall be
subject to penalties under §
10.99. Each day that the failure to bring the parking facility into compliance
with the provisions of this chapter and state statute continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 08-2018, passed 6-26-18)
§ 72.32 SUPREMACY CLAUSE.
   The provisions of this chapter are intended as being supplemental to, and
not in replacement of, the provisions of I.C. 5-16-9-1 et seq. Should a
conflict be found to exist, the provisions of I.C. 5-16-9-1 shall be deemed as
controlling. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting the
enforcement of the provisions of I.C. 5-16-9-1 et seq. as therein provided.
(Ord. 08-2018, passed 6-26-18)
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
73.01   Manner of riding bicycles on sidewalks
   
73.02   Use of bicycle paths
   
73.03   Parking of bicycles
   
73.04   Impoundment of bicycles
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate bicycles, see 9-21-1-3(a)(9)
BICYCLES
§ 73.01 MANNER OF RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk that person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing the pedestrian.
   (B)   On Main Street, between Sixth Street and Ninth Street no person shall
ride a bicycle, roller skates, inline skates, or skateboard upon a sidewalk;
operators in such areas shall walk bicycles while traveling on sidewalks.
Violations of this section shall result in the forfeiture to the Police
Department of the bicycle, roller skates, inline skates, or skateboard involved
for not less than seven days or more than 14 days.
('79 Code, § 8-16) (Ord. 656, passed 5-25-76; Am. Ord. 09-1996, passed 6-25-96)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.02 USE OF BICYCLE PATHS.
   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway,
it shall be unlawful for a bicycle rider to fail to use the path.
('79 Code, § 8-17)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.03 PARKING OF BICYCLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a bicycle upon a street other
than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to
support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to
afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
('79 Code, § 8-18)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.04 IMPOUNDMENT OF BICYCLES.
   In addition to any other penalty provided by law, any person who violates
any of the provisions of this subchapter while on a bicycle may, upon
conviction have his bicycle impounded for a period not to exceed 30 days.
('79 Code, § 8-30)
CHAPTER 74: RAILROADS
Section
   
74.01   Blocking railroad crossings
   
74.02   Manner of blocking
§ 74.01 BLOCKING RAILROAD CROSSINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any standing train, engine or other equipment
operated by a railroad to block any railroad crossing for a period of time
exceeding five minutes; provided, however, that the provisions of this section
shall not apply to passenger trains, moving trains, or in cases of an extreme
emergency.
('79 Code, § 13-2)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 74.02 MANNER OF BLOCKING.
   It shall be the duty of the crew of each railroad train, engine or other
rail equipment to allow traffic to pass over a railroad crossing in such a
manner and for such time as to cause the least delay and interruption for the
smooth flow of traffic after each blocking of the crossing.
('79 Code, § 13-3)
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
   
II.   Through streets
   
III.   Stop streets
   
IV.   One-way streets and alleys
   
V.   Other prohibitions
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   The maximum speed limit on the following streets shall be as follows.
Street Location Speed Limit Ord. No. Date Passed
Street            Location                     Speed Limit Ord. No. Date Passed
Third Street      Between west city limits and 20 mph      —      - -
                  Main Street
Fourth Street     From Madison Street to Main  20 mph      —      - -
                  Street
Fourteenth Street Between Main and College     20 mph      —      - -
                  Streets
Clay Street       Between Sixth Street and     20 mph      —      - -
                  Third Street
Jefferson Street  Between Third Street and     20 mph      —;     - - ;
                  Thirteenth Street                        11-2021  7-27-21
Madison Street    Between Ninth Street and     20 mph      —      - -
                  Sixth Street
Monticello Street From Main Street to Fulton   20 mph      —      - -
                  Avenue
                  From Park Road East to the
State Road 14     intersection of State Road   25 mph      30-1999  11-9-99
                  14 and State Road 25 (School
                  Zone)
 
Street           Location                     Speed Limit Ord. No. Date Passed
West 13th Street Between Main Street and City 20 mph      17-2012  10-23-12
                 Park
Westside Drive   Between Mitchell Drive to    20 mph      17-2012  10-23-12
                 Wolf Point Drive
Whitecreek Drive All of Whitecreek Drive      15 mph      17-2012  10-23-12
                 within city limits
Boulevard Street All of Boulevard Street      20 mph      17-2012  10-23-12
                 within city limits
East 4th Street  Between Madison Street and   30 mph      17-2012  10-23-12
                 State Road 25
 
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour. All other streets located within the
city limits and over which the city has exclusive jurisdiction.
   (B)   The speed limit for motor vehicles traveling upon the alleys within
the city limits shall be ten miles per hour.
   (C)   The speed limit for motor vehicles traveling upon roadways within the
boundaries of any city park area shall be 15 miles per hour; the speed limit
for motor vehicles traveling upon city streets within 500 feet of any city
park, where the street runs adjacent to any park or is utilized as a means of
ingress or egress thereto shall be 20 miles per hour.
(‘79 Code, § 8-6) (Ord. 687, passed 8-24-77; Am. Ord. 837, passed 2-24-81; Am.
Ord. 30-1999, passed 11-9-99; Am. Ord. 17-2012, passed 10-23-12)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to regulate speed limits, see I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(10) and 9-21-5-
6
SCHEDULE II. THROUGH STREETS.
   The following streets are designated as through streets:
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Street                     Location                      Ord. No.   Date Passed
                           Between west city limits and
                           Clay Street, between Clay
Third Street               Street and Fulton Avenue, and —        - -
                           between Fulton Avenue and
                           Main Street
                           Between Clay Street and
                           Fulton Avenue, between Fulton
                           Avenue and Jefferson Street,
Fourth Street              between Main Street and State —        - -
                           Road 25, and between State
                           Road 25 and the east city
                           limits
                           Between Clay Street and
Fifth Street               Fulton Avenue, and between    —        - -
                           Fulton Avenue and Jefferson
                           Street
                           Between the west city limits
                           and Clay Street, between Clay
                           Street and Fulton Avenue,
Sixth Street               between Fulton Avenue and     —        - -
                           Jefferson Street, and between
                           Indiana Avenue and the east
                           city limits
Seventh Street             Between Fulton Street and     —        - -
                           Jefferson Street
                           Between west city limits and
                           Fulton Avenue, between Fulton
Eighth Street              Avenue and Jefferson Street,  —        - -
                           and between Madison Street
                           and Race Street
                           Between west city limits and
                           Fulton Avenue, between Fulton
Ninth Street               Avenue and Jefferson Street,  —        - -
                           and between Main Street and
                           east city limits
Tenth Street               Between Fulton Avenue and     —        - -
                           Jefferson Street
                           Between west city limits and
Eleventh Street            Fulton Avenue, and between    —        - -
                           Fulton Avenue and Main Street
                           Between Park Road and Pontiac
Twelfth Street             Street, and between Monroe    —        - -
                           Street and Wabash Avenue
                           Between City Park and Fulton             - -;
Thirteenth Street          Avenue and between Fulton     —; 01-2014-24-18
                           Avenue and Main Street
                           Between Madison Street and
Fourteenth Street          Franklin Avenue, and between  —        - -
                           Franklin Avenue and College
                           Avenue
Fifteenth Street           Eastbound between Monroe      —        - -
                           Street and Elm Street
Sixteenth Street           Between Bancroft Avenue and   —        - -
                           Audubon Avenue
Seventeenth Street         Between Bancroft Avenue and   —        - -
                           Audubon Avenue
                           Between U.S. Highway 31 and
Eighteenth Street          Wabash Avenue and between     —        - -
                           Wabash Avenue and east city
                           limits
Audubon Street             Between Eighteenth Street and —        - -
                           Wabash Road
                           Between Eighteenth Street and
Bancroft Avenue            Fourteenth Street, and        —        - -
                           between Fourteenth Street and
                           Twelfth Street
Barrett Road               Between State Road 14 and     —        - -
                           Bessmore Park Road
Bessmore Park Road         Between State Road 14 and the —        - -
                           south city limit
Boulevard Street           Between Ferndale Road and     —        - -
                           State Road 14
Brown Avenue               Between Wabash Avenue and     —        - -
                           Washington Street
Clay Street                Between Sixth Street and      —        - -
                           Fourth Street
Clayton Avenue             Between Sixth Street and      —        - -
                           Fourth Street
Clayton Avenue             Between Fourth Street and     —        - -
                           Second Street
                           Eastbound between Wabash
                           Avenue and Washington Street,
Clover Street              between Washington Street and —        - -
                           Jackson Boulevard, and
                           westbound between Jackson
                           Boulevard and Wabash Avenue
                           Between Seventeenth Street
College Avenue             and Fourteenth Street, and    —        - -
                           between Fourteenth Street and
                           Twelfth Street
                           Between Bessmore Park Road
Country Club Drive East    extending east and south to   —        - -
                           the south city limits
                           Between Bessmore Park Road
Country Club Drive South   extending east and south to   —        - -
                           the south city limits
                           Between Fourteenth Street and
Elm Street                 Twelfth Street, and between   —        - -
                           Twelfth Street and Norfolk &
                           Western right-of-way
                           Between State Road 14 and
Ewing Road                 Mitchell Drive (Eighteenth    —        - -
                           Street extended)
                           Between Fourteenth Street and
Franklin Avenue            Twelfth Street and between    —        - -
                           Twelfth Street and Ninth
                           Street
                           Between Eleventh Street and
                           Sixth Street, between Sixth
Fulton Avenue              Street and Third Street, and  —        - -
                           between Third Street and
                           Monticello Road
Goose Pond Road            Between West Side Road and    —        - -
                           the east end
Indiana Avenue             Between Eighth Street and     —        - -
                           Fourth Street
                           Between Wabash Avenue and
Jackson Boulevard          Rochester Boulevard, and      —        - -
                           between Rochester Boulevard
                           and east city limits
                           Between Eighth Street and
Jay Street                 Sixth Street, and between     —        - -
                           Third Street and Erie
                           Railroad
                           Between south city limits and
                           Fifteenth Street, between
                           Thirteenth Street and
                           Eleventh Street, between
Jefferson Street           Eleventh Street and Third     —        - -
                           Street, between Third Street
                           and Erie Railroad, and
                           between Erie Railroad and
                           Monticello Road
                           Between the beginning of the
Lincolnway                 street and Rochester          —        - -
                           Boulevard
                           Between Eighteenth Street and
                           Fourteenth Street, between
Madison Street             Fourteenth Street and Ninth   —        - -
                           Street, between Ninth Street
                           and Sixth Street, and from
                           Sixth Street to Fourth Street
Mitchell Drive (Eighteenth Between Wabash Avenue and     —        - -
Street extended)           West Side Road
                           Between Eighteenth Street and
                           Fourteenth Street, between
                           Fourteenth Street and Twelfth
Monroe Street              Street, between Twelfth       —        - -
                           Street and Ninth Street, and
                           between Eighth Street and
                           Fifth Street
Monticello Road            Between west city limits and  —        - -
                           Main Street
Ohio Street                Between Sixth Street and      —        - -
                           Twelfth Street
Park Street                Between Ninth Street and      —        - -
                           Twelfth Street
                           Between Thirteenth Street and
Pontiac Street             Eleventh Street, and          —        - -
                           northbound from south city
                           limits to Thirteenth Street
Race Street                Between Eighth Street and     —        - -
                           Ninth Street
Wabash Avenue              Between Eighteenth Street and —        - -
                           Ninth Street
Wallace Avenue             Between Eighteenth Street and —        - -
                           Wabash Street
                           Southbound between Jackson
Washington Street          Boulevard and Lincolnway, and —        - -
                           northbound between Clover
                           Street and Jackson Boulevard
                           Between Mitchell Drive and
West Side Road             Wolf Point Road, and between  —        - -
                           Wolf Point Road and extended
                           south to the city limits
 
(‘79 Code, § 8-8) (Ord. 535, passed 2-22-72; Am. Ord. 45-1986, passed 3-11-86;
Am. Ord. 5-1990, passed 2-13-90; Am. Ord. 5-1991, passed 2-26-91; Am. Ord. 01-
2018, passed 4-24-18)
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to designate through streets, I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(6)
SCHEDULE III. STOP STREETS.
   The following streets shall be stop streets in the direction indicated:
Stop Intersection Type of Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Stop Intersection                           Type of Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Third Street and Clay Street                3-way          —      - -
Third Street and Fulton Avenue              4-way          —      - -
Fourth Street and Clay Street               4-way          —      - -
Sixth Street and Fulton Avenue              4-way          —      - -
Sixth Street and Madison Street             4-way          —      - -
Sixth Street and Clay Street                3-way          —      - -
Eighth Street, Race Street and Indiana      4-way          —      - -
Avenue
Ninth Street and Fulton Avenue              4-way          01-2020  2-25-20
Eleventh Street and Fulton Avenue           4-way          —      - -
Twelfth Street and Monroe Street            4-way          —      - -
Thirteenth Street and Fulton Avenue         3-way          01-2018  4-24-18
Fourteenth Street and Elm Street            4-way          08-2000  3-28-00
Fourteenth Street and Franklin Avenue       4-way          —      - -
Fourteenth Street, College Avenue and       4-way          —      - -
Wabash Road
Fifteenth Street and Jefferson Street       4-way          —      - -
Eighteenth Street and Wabash Avenue         4-way          —      - -
Bessmore Park Road and E. 50 South          3-way          02-2019  4-23-19
Frontage Drive and Apache Drive             —            26-2004  10-26-04
Frontage Drive and Rouch Place Drive        —            26-2004  10-26-04
Jackson Boulevard and Rochester Boulevard   4-way          —      - -
Lakeshore Drive and Rochester Boulevard,
westbound traffic on Lakeshore Drive and    4-way          —      - -
northbound traffic on Rochester Boulevard
shall be required to stop
Madison Street and Fourteenth Street
(Madison Street is one-way approaching
Fourteenth Street from the south, and there 3-way          —      - -
should be no traffic approaching from the
north side of the intersection)
Monroe Street and East Fourteenth Street    4-way          28-2004  10-26-04
Peace Tree Village Road and Main Street
(Peace Tree Village Road traffic must       2-way          01-2015  2-25-14
stop).
Pontiac Street and Rochester High School    3-way          05-2016  7-26-16
Drive
Potawatomi Lane and Apache Drive            —            26-2004  10-26-04
Potawatomi Lane and Rouch Place Drive       —            26-2004  10-26-04
                                                                  
 
(‘79 Code, § 8-13) (Ord. 837, passed 2-24-81; Am. Ord. 25-1985, passed 10-8-85;
Am. Ord. 5-1990, passed 2-13-90; Am. Ord. 4-1991, passed 2-26-91; Am. Ord. 27-
1997, passed 8-12-97; Am. Ord. 08-2000, passed 3-28-00; Am. Ord. 26-2004,
passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 28-2004, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 01-2014, passed 2-
25-14; Am. Ord. 05-2016, passed 7-26-16; Am. Ord. 01-2018, passed 4-24-18; Am.
Ord. 02-2019, passed 4-23-19; Am. Ord. 01-2020, passed 2-25-20)
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to designate stop streets, see I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(7)
SCHEDULE IV. ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   The following streets and alleys shall be one-way in the direction
indicated.
Street Location Direction Ord. No. Date Passed
Street                  Location                Direction  Ord. No. Date Passed
Fifteenth Street        Between Franklin Street Eastbound  09-2000  3-28-00
                        and Elm Street
Alley between Seventh   From Main Street to
Street and Eighth       Madison Street          Eastbound  —      - -
Street
Clay Street (also known From Third Street to
asJames Barkman         Fourth Street           Southbound 16-2005  10-25-05
Memorial Drive)
Elm Street              From Fifteenth Street   Northbound 09-2000  3-28-00
                        to Fourteenth Street
Jefferson Street        From Third Street to    Southbound 13-1999  5-25-99
                        Thirteenth Street
Madison Street          From Fourteenth Street  Northbound —      - -
                        to Sixth Street
Park Street             From Twelfth Street to  Northbound 12-2024  6-25-24
                        Ninth Street
Peace Tree Village Road From Main Street West   Westbound  14-2017  12-19-17
                        (entire road)
 
(‘79 Code, § 8-15) (Am. Ord. 13-1999, passed 5-25-99; Am. Ord. 09-2000, passed
3-28-00; Am. Ord. 16-2005, passed 10-25-05; Am. Ord. 14-2017, passed 12-19-17;
Am. Ord. 12-2024, passed 6-25-24)
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to designate one-way streets, see I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(4)
SCHEDULE V. OTHER PROHIBITIONS.
 
Location                                Prohibition
Alley parallel to and between Eighth    Motor vehicle traffic is prohibited.
Street and Seventh Street, from Main    Pedestrian and bicycle traffic is
Street to 105 feet east of Main Street. permitted.
Alley parallel to and between Main      Motor vehicle traffic is prohibited.
Street and Madison Street, from Eighth  Pedestrian and bicycle traffic is
Street to 83 feet north of Eighth       permitted.
Street.
Alley parallel to and between Ninth     Motor vehicle traffic is prohibited.
Street and Eighth Street, from Main     Pedestrian and bicycle traffic is
Street to 113 feet west of Main Street. permitted.
                                        Eastbound traffic from Peace Tree
Peace Tree Village Road and Main Street Village Road may not turn north onto
                                        Main Street.
 
(Ord. 01-2014, passed 2-25-14; Am. Ord. 4-2018, passed 7-24-18)
CHAPTER 76: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   No parking zones
   
II.   No parking at certain times
   
III.   Restricted parking
   
IV.   On-street zones
   
V.   Off-street zones
   
VI.   Business parking district
Cross-reference:
   Impoundment, see §
72.05
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING ZONES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in the following places.
Street Location Side Ord. No. Date Passed
Street     Location                                          Side  Ord. Date
                                                                   No.  Passed
Third      Alley between Main Street and Jefferson Street to North —  - -
Street     west city limits
Third      Clay Street to alley one-half block east of Clay  South —  - -
Street     Street
Sixth      Alley between Main and Jefferson Streets to
Street     Jefferson Street, and between Madison Street and  North —  - -
           Main Street
Sixth      Fulton Avenue and Pontiac Street                  South —  - -
Street
Seventh    Alley between Main and Jefferson Streets to       North —  - -
Street     Fulton Avenue
Eighth     Alley between Main Street and Jefferson Street to North —  - -
Street     Jefferson Street
Ninth      Between Madison Street and Main Street            North 08-  4-9-02
Street                                                             2002
East Tenth Between Main Street and Madison Street            North —  - -
Street
Eleventh   Between Fulton Avenue and Jefferson Street        North —  - -
Street
Fourteenth College Avenue to Main Street                     North —  - -
Street
Barrett    From the intersection of Barrett Road and State         29-
Road       Road 14 for a distance of 400 feet on the North   North 1999 11-9-99
           side of the road
Clay                                                               —; - -;
Street     Third Street to Fourth Street                     East  12-  11-25-
                                                                   2014 14
Elm Street Fourteenth Street to Fifteenth Street             West  —  - -
Franklin   Ninth Street to Fifteenth Street                  East  —  - -
Street
Franklin   Ninth Street to the alley between Ninth Street    West  —  - -
Street     and Tenth Street
Fulton     Between Fifth Street and Sixth Street             West  12-  11-25-
                                                                   2014 14
Madison    South ½ of block between Ninth Street and Eighth East  12-  5-11-99
Street     Street                                                  1999
Monroe     Between Eighth Street and Ninth Street; also            —; - -;
Street     between Ninth Street and Twelfth Street           East  12-  11-25-
                                                                   2014 14
Monroe     ½ block south between Ninth Street and Tenth     East  53-  11-24-
Street     Street                                                  1998 98
Pontiac    Fourth Street to Sixth Street, and Seventh Street West  12-  5-11-99
Street     to Twelfth Street                                       1999
Rouch      Between Main Street and Potawatomi Lane (south of North 01-
Place      Rouch Place Drive)                                and   2022 1-25-22
Drive                                                        South
Wabash     Ninth Street to Brown Street                      East  —  - -
Avenue
 
   (B)   Notice; penalty.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the police to attach to any vehicle
illegally parked in violation of this section a notice to the owner or operator
thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of this section and
instructing the owner or operator to report at the police station in regard to
the violation.
      (2)   Each owner or operator may, within 24 hours of the time when the
notice was attached to the vehicle pay to the city as a penalty for and in full
satisfaction of the violation, the sum of $5. The failure of the owner or
operator to make such payment of the $5 within the 24 hours, shall render the
owner or operator subject to the penalties provided for violation of this code.
('79 Code, §8-21) (Ord. 621, passed 5-27-75; Am. Ord. 837, passed 2-24-81; Am.
Ord. 13-1985, passed 5-14-85; Am. Ord. 26-1997, passed 8-26-97; Am. Ord. 12-
1999, passed 5-11-99; Am. Ord.
29-1999, passed 11-9-99) Penalty, see §70.99
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to regulate parking, see I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(1)
SCHEDULE II. NO PARKING AT CERTAIN TIMES.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified below on
any day except Sundays or holidays, on the following described streets.
 
Street         Side Location             Time              Ord. No. Date Passed
Ninth Street   Both From Main Street to  2:00 a.m. to 5:00 —      - -
                    city limits.         a.m.
Pontiac Street East From Sixth Street to 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 —      - -
                    Seventh Street       p.m.
Main Street    Both                     2:00 a.m. to 5:00 —      - -
                                         a.m.
 
(‘79 Code, § 8-22(a)) (Am. Ord. 05-2015, passed 1- -15) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to regulate parking, see I.C. 9-21-1-3(a)(1)
   Foreclosure proceedings for mechanic's liens, see I.C. 32-33-9
   Liens on motor vehicles for storage, see I.C. 32-33-10
SCHEDULE III. RESTRICTED PARKING.
   The following locations are restricted parking spaces and shall be marked
accordingly by the presence of appropriate signs adjacent thereto:
 
Location          Side Description              Time Limit Ord. No. Date Passed
City parking lots —  All city lots            12 hours   735      9-26-78
                       Adjacent to the east and
                       west alley running
                       between Fifth Street and
                       Sixth Street, being two
Main Street       East spaces located           1 hour     735      9-26-78
                       immediately north of the
                       alley and two spaces
                       located immediately
                       south of the alley
 
   (B)   Violations. In the event of a violation of either of the sections, the
Police Department shall have the authority to cause offending vehicles to be
towed from any of the parking spaces; such towing shall be at the expense of
the owner of any vehicle violating the provisions hereof. In addition thereto,
the Police Department is authorized to issue tickets for violation hereof and
the provisions otherwise provided for violations of parking limitations within
the city shall be fully applicable to any tickets issued for any violations of
the provisions of this section.
('79 Code, §8-22.1) (Ord. 735, passed 9-26-78)
Penalty, see § 70.99
SCHEDULE IV. ON-STREET ZONES.
   (A)   There are established the following on-street parking zones:
 
Street         Location                              Side  Ord. No. Date Passed
               Between the alley west of Main Street
Seventh Street and the alley between Main and        Both  —      - -
               Madison Streets
               Between Main Street and the alley
Seventh Street between Main Street and Jefferson     South —      - -
               Street
Eighth Street  Between the alley west of Main Street Both  —      - -
               and Madison Street
Ninth Street   Between the alley west of Main Street Both  —      - -
               and Madison Street
Main Street    Between Fifth Street and Ninth Street Both  —      - -
 
('79 Code, § 8-54)
SCHEDULE V. OFF-STREET ZONES.
   There are established the following off-street parking zones:
 
Location                                            Ord. No. Date Passed
Lot at northeast corner of Main and Seventh Streets —      - -
 
('79 Code, § 8-55)
SCHEDULE VI. BUSINESS PARKING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Business Parking District defined. That area of parking spaces between
the intersections of 5th Street and Main Street to 9th Street and Main Street,
on both sides of Main Street and for one-half block either side of Main Street
shall constitute the Business Parking District, except for those parking spaces
bordering the Fulton County Courthouse square.
   (B)   Permitted parking. Parking in the Business Parking District is
permitted for customers and clients of downtown businesses, including business
deliveries and pickups, and business visitations.
   (C)   Prohibited parking. It is a violation of this schedule to park in any
parking space within the Business Parking District between the hours of 7:00
a.m., and 8:00 p.m., and to be:
      (1)   An employee of any business located within the Business Parking
District, parked while during the hours of employment; or
      (2)   A resident of any apartment or residential property within the
Business Parking District, unless the resident is engaging in a business
transaction in a building other than the location of the resident’s residence.
   (D)   Penalties for violation.
      (1)   Any person who shall be found to violate this schedule shall be
subject to a fine of $25 per occurrence, plus all costs through the Ordinance
Bureau, or court.
      (2)   Any vehicle found in violation of this schedule on three or more
occasions, or in violation of Chapter 76 Parking Schedules, shall be impounded
and towed at the violator’s expense.
      (3)   Any vehicle towed under this schedule’s penalty provision may be
recovered upon payment of all penalties, towing and storage fees due by the
owner of the vehicle.
(Ord. 03-2009, passed 5-12-09)
CHAPTER 77: GOLF CART USE AND REGULATION
Section
   
77.01   Definitions
   
77.02   Intent
   
77.03   Minimum safety equipment
   
77.04   Registration and inspection
   
77.05   Financial responsibility
   
77.06   General regulations
 
   
77.99   Penalty
§ 77.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A valid current license to operate a motor vehicle issued
by the State of Indiana or any other state.
   FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Liability coverage applicable to the golf cart and
compliant with all Indiana laws applicable to a motor vehicle operated on the
public highway of the State of Indiana.
   GOLF CART. Shall have the definition provided by I.C. 9-13-2-69.7. As it now
exists, the term means: a four wheeled motor vehicle originally and
specifically designed and intended to transport one or more individuals and
golf clubs for the purpose of playing the game of golf on a golf course.
   OPERATOR. A person(s) holding a valid driver’s license issued by the State
of Indiana or another state.
(Ord. 02-2023, passed 5-23-23)
§ 77.02 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this chapter to allow for the use of golf carts on the
local streets within the city. To ensure public safety and welfare, the
operation of golf carts must comply with certain vehicle regulations. The
operation of a golf cart on city streets is strictly prohibited unless the golf
cart is operated and equipped in full compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 02-2023, passed 5-23-23) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.03 MINIMUM SAFETY EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   All golf carts operated on city streets shall have the following
minimum safety equipment:
      (1)   A rearview and sideview mirrors;
      (2)   A bright orange flag affixed to the rear of the golf cart that is a
minimum of six feet in height from the roadway;
      (3)   A slow moving vehicle sign that conforms to the provisions of I.C.
9-21-9-2, affixed to the rear of the golf cart;
      (4)   Brake lights and turn signals; and
      (5)   If operated after dark or before dawn, headlights and taillights.
      (6)   A flashing light, at the highest point of the vehicle, on at all
times (day or night).
   (B)   All of the minimum safety equipment described above shall be
functional, and in use at all times while the golf cart is in operation on city
streets.
(Ord. 02-2023, passed 5-23-23) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.04 REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   No golf cart shall be operated on any city street unless it is
registered.
   (B)   Owners of a golf cart who wish to operate it on city streets must
register the golf cart with the Rochester Police Department. The golf cart
shall undergo an initial inspection with the Rochester Police Department to
determine compliance with this chapter and proof of financial responsibility
prior to registration. Once the golf cart passes inspection, it may be
registered.
   (C)   The annual registration fee for golf carts shall be $100. The
registration, upon issuance, shall be valid for the calendar year with each
registration issued expiring December 31, of each year.
   (D)   The Rochester Police Department is directed to develop and utilize a
registration form. Such form shall contain a certification that the operator
will observe all traffic laws applicable to the operation of a motor vehicle.
The Rochester Police Department shall handle the ordering of all permit
stickers and collection of all registration fees. Registration fees shall be
placed in the City Ordinance Fund and the Rochester Police Department shall
receive all funds derived from the registration of golf carts.
   (E)   The City of Rochester Board of Public Works and Safety may provide an
exception to the registration requirements of this chapter for good cause.
(Ord. 02-2023, passed 5-23-23) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.05 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   All golf carts to be operated and used on city streets shall be insured.
Proof of financial responsibility shall be in accordance with I.C. 9-25-4-4. A
person who operates a golf cart on the city streets shall at all times maintain
the state required minimum amount of financial responsibility for the operation
of said golf cart. Proof of financial responsibility shall be carried on the
golf cart or operator at all times.
(Ord. 02-2023, passed 5-23-23) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.06 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Golf carts are prohibited from operating on any part of Main Street,
or any state road or highway with the exception of crossing the roadway at a
perpendicular angle. This prohibition includes all of Main Street, 9th Street
east of Main Street, 18th Street west of Main Street, and any part of State
Road 25 and State Road 14.
   (B)   Golf carts shall not be operated on any sidewalk, pedestrian walkway,
multi-use path, jogging path, greenway, or trail, except to cross at
intersections in a path perpendicular to the path or walkway.
   (C)   Only persons holding a valid driver’s license may operate a golf cart
on city streets. The operator must possess a valid driver’s license on their
person at all times operating the golf cart.
   (D)   The maximum occupancy of a golf cart traveling on city streets shall
be one person per bucket seat and three persons per bench seat. All persons
riding the golf cart must be seated in one of the manufacturer-designed seats,
and may not be standing or riding on the back on in any place designated for
cargo or sporting equipment. All passengers must be seated at all times.
   (E)   Golf carts must be operated in compliance with all applicable local
and state traffic laws, and the operator may be ticketed in the same manner as
motor vehicle operators.
   (F)   Golf carts may park in any public vehicle parking space in adherence
with all rules and regulations relating to the parking of vehicles. Golf carts
may be parked in private driveways and private areas designated for vehicle
parking with the permission of the property owner.
   (G)   Golf carts may not be parked or stored on a road, street, alley or
thoroughfare overnight.
   (H)   Golf carts shall not be operated on city streets during inclement
weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other
conditions.
(Ord. 02-2023, passed 5-23-23) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.07 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or a failure to comply
with any of its requirements shall subject the offender to a penalty as
follows:
      (1)   First offense - $100;
      (2)   Second offense $250;
      (3)   Third offense - $500 and revocation of registration. Registration
revocation will be in effect for a minimum of one year.
   (B)   In addition to fees, if public safety requires, the golf cart may be
towed at the owner’s expense.
   (C)   Each day of violating this chapter shall be construed as a separate
violation.
   (D)   All fines collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the
general fund of the city.
(Ord. 02-2023, passed 5-23-23)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90. ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
      
91. ANIMALS AND FOWL
      
92. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
93. FAIR HOUSING
      
94. NOISE
      
95. PARKS AND RECREATION
      
96. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
97.  TREES; VEGETATION
      
98. LOITERING OR PARKING ON OR NEAR PROTECTED PROPERTY
      
99. UNSAFE BUILDINGS
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Nuisance declared
Removal
   
90.15   Required
   
90.16   Order of removal
   
90.17   Notice
   
90.18   Removal by city
   
90.19   Impoundment
   
90.20   Redemption of impounded car
   
90.21   Sale of unclaimed vehicle
   
90.22   Use of sale proceeds
   
90.23   Towing and storage charges
Statutory reference:
   Abandoned motor vehicles, see 9-22-1-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK CAR. Any motor vehicle which:
      (1)   Shall be an “abandoned vehicle” as that term is defined in I.C. 9-
13-2-1;
      (2)   Does not bear a currently valid license plate, and is located
either on public property or on private property in a location visible from
public property and not in a garage or other building for a period of 30 days;
or
      (3)   Has the engine, transmission, differential, wheels or any other
operating component removed or disabled so as to make the vehicle inoperable
and which is located either on public property or on private property in a
place visible from public property and not in a garage or other building for a
period of 30 days.
('79 Code, § 8-77) (Ord. 455, passed 3-25-69; Am. Ord. 7-1989, passed 2-28-89)
§ 90.02 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   All junk cars are declared to be nuisances; provided, however, that no such
car shall be a nuisance if it is located in a lawfully operated junkyard
awaiting permission for junking from the State Bureau of Motor Vehicles, or if
it is in the possession of lawfully licensed automobile dealer and at his
legally recognized place of business or such other lots properly zoned for such
purpose.
('79 Code, § 8-78) (Ord. 455, passed 3-25-69)
Cross-reference:
   
Nuisances, see Ch. 94
REMOVAL
§ 90.15 REQUIRED.
   All junk cars shall be removed within ten days after the service of the
notice required by §
90.17 by the owner of the car or the owner or occupant of the real estate upon
which it is located.
('79 Code, § 8-79) (Ord. 455, passed 3-25-69)
Statutory reference:
   Removal of vehicles by local officials, see I.C.9-22-1-1 et seq.
§ 90.16 ORDER OF REMOVAL.
   Any member of the Police Department may order the removal of a junk car.
('79 Code, § 8-80) (Ord. 455, passed 3-25-69)
§ 90.17 NOTICE.
   When any member of the Police Department orders that a junk car be removed,
a notice of the order shall be placed upon the car and copies of it shall be
served upon any adult occupying the real estate on which it is located and upon
the owner of the car, if they are known. If no occupant of the real estate or
owner of the junk car can be found, then such notice may be affixed to any
building on the real estate on which the car is located; if there is no
building on the real estate, then the notice may be affixed elsewhere on the
real estate.
('79 Code, § 8-81) (Ord. 455, passed 3-25-69)
Statutory reference:
   Notice tag prepared by police officer, see I.C. 19-22-1-1 et seq.
§ 90.18 REMOVAL BY CITY.
   If a junk car is not removed within ten days after the service of the notice
required by §
90.17, then the Police Department may cause it to be removed at the expense of
the owner of the real estate or of the owner of the junk car.
('79 Code, § 8-82) (Ord. 455, passed 3-25-69)
§ 90.19 IMPOUNDMENT.  
   All junk cars which are removed by the city pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be impounded.
('79 Code, § 8-83)
Cross-reference:
   
Impoundment of vehicles, see § 71.05
§ 90.20 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED CAR.
   Within 30 days of the impoundment of a junk car pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, its owner may repossess it if he pays all expenses incurred in
its towing, impoundment and storage.
('79 Code, § 8-84) (Ord. 455, passed 3-25-69)
§ 90.21 SALE OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
   If a junk car is not repossessed by its owner within 30 days of its
impoundment, the Police Department shall sell it to the highest bidder at a
public auction which shall be held no later than ten days after one publication
of a notice of such sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
('79 Code, § 8-85) (Ord. 455, passed 3-25-69)
§ 90.22 USE OF SALE PROCEEDS.
   All proceeds from the sale of a junk vehicle pursuant to this chapter shall
be used to defray the expenses incurred in removing and impounding the vehicle.
('79 Code, § 8-86) (Ord. 455, passed 3-25-69)
Statutory reference:
   Use of sale proceeds, see I.C. 9-22-1-26 and 9-22-1-27
§ 90.23 TOWING AND STORAGE CHARGES.
   The City Council shall establish by ordinance the charges allowed for towing
and storage of abandoned vehicles, which shall be filed with the bureau of
motor vehicles and shall be available for public inspection at the office of
the city clerk.
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS AND FOWL
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Manner of keeping
   
91.03   Animal treatment; care and cruelty
   
91.04   Harboring noisy animals
   
91.05   Bite cases and quarantine
Impoundment
   
91.15   Notice of impoundment
   
91.16   Redemption of impounded animal; proof of ownership, payment of fine
required
   
91.17   Disposition of unclaimed animals
   
91.18   Lost or stray animals
   
91.19   Further requirements
Dogs and Cats
   
91.35   Rabies vaccination required
   
91.36   Emergency proclamation by Mayor; violation
   
91.37   Confinement of dogs kept for commercial breeding
   
91.38   (Reserved)
   
91.39   Confinement of cats kept for commercial breeding
Other Animals
   
91.70   Exotic and dangerous animals
   
91.71   Dangerous animals prohibited
   
91.72   Farm animals and fowl
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Statutory references:
   Powers of city to regulate, license, prohibit, capture and destroy animals,
see I.C. 36-8-2-6
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any living creature domestic or wild, except human beings.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person or persons designated by the Fulton
County Commissioners or law enforcement officer who is qualified to perform
such duties under the authority of this chapter and the state.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. A facility for the purpose of impounding and/or caring for
animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law.
   KENNEL. A place primarily for keeping four or more adult dogs or other small
animals that are ordinarily bred for sale as pets. Also could include temporary
care facility for compensation. Includes any premises where in any person
engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire,
training for a fee, or selling dogs and cats.
   OWNER. Any person, partnership or corporation owning, keeping or harboring
one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be owned if kept or harbored,
fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, company or corporation.
   PET. Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any animal or animals which:
      (1)   Molests passersby or passing vehicles;
      (2)   Attacks other animals;
      (3)   Trespasses on school grounds;
      (4)   Is repeatedly at large or unrestrained;
      (5)   Damages private or public property;
      (6)   Barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely
fashion.
   RESTRAINT. Any animal secured by a leash or lead, or under the control of a
responsible person and obedient to that person's commands, or within the real
property limits of its owner.
('79 Code, § 3-1) (Ord. 768, passed 7-10-79; Am. Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-00;
Am. Ord. 12-2008, passed 11-25-08)
§ 91.02 MANNER OF KEEPING.
   (A)   The keeping of dogs, cats and other animals shall be done in such a
manner as to be conducive to the health and safety of such animals, and to
safeguard the health, peace and decency of the public.
   (B)   All animals shall be kept under restraint at all times.
   (C)   No owner shall fail to prevent his or her animals from molesting
passersby, chasing vehicles, obstructing traffic, attacking other animals or
people, trespassing onto school grounds, or trespassing onto private or public
property in such a manner as to damage or defecate on such property.
   (D)   No owner shall fail to confine a female dog in heat within a building,
veterinary hospital or boarding kennel in such a manner that the female cannot
come into contact with male dogs except for planned breeding. The confinement
of the female shall be maintained at all times during the heat period.
   (E)   Unrestrained and public nuisance animals, abandoned animals, animals
found suffering from cruelty or lack of care as specified in this chapter,
animals used or abused in any manner prohibited by this chapter, may be seized
by the animal control officer or any law enforcement officer from any place,
public or private and impounded at the animal shelter. The owner may also be
proceeded against for violation of this chapter.
   (F)   All waste from animals shall be disposed of properly. Waste shall be
confined to the owner’s property. Any animal waste on public property by the
animal is the owner’s responsibility to clean up, excepting a disabled person
working with a service animal. This provision applies to owners of horses
lawfully used for transportation, who may meet this requirement through use of
a device reasonably designed to catch manure and prevent its deposit onto city
streets.
   (G)   Individual homes shall not harbor more than three dogs and not more
than five total animals per household without registering for a special permit
from the City Council. Each time an addition is made to the number of animals,
the City Council shall be notified by certified letter. Fish shall be exempt
from this requirement. Small mammals, birds, amphibians and reptiles (less than
one pound) are also exempt from this requirement.
   (H)   If by a license tag or other means the owner of an impounded animal
can be identified, the animal control officer, police officer or any employee
of a law enforcement agency shall immediately contact the owner by phone or
mail.
(‘79 Code, § 3-2) (Ord. 768, passed 7-10-79; Am. Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-00;
Am. Ord. 12-2008, passed 11-25-08; Am. Ord. 02-2015, passed 1-27-15) Penalty,
see §
91.99
§ 91.03 ANIMAL TREATMENT; CARE AND CRUELTY
   (A)   Every owner of an animal within the city shall:
      (1)   Keep such animal in a clean, sanitary and healthy area. No animal
shall be confined in an area so as to be forced to stand, sit or lie in its own
excreta.
      (2)   Not confine an animal in an area littered with debris or any other
obstacles which would impair, prohibit or reduce the animal's movement or cause
injury within such area of confinement.
      (3)   Confine his or her animals in an area of sufficient size to permit
such animals to exercise and move about.
      (4)   Not prevent in any way any animal from seeking proper shelter by
chaining, roping or fencing in any animal.
      (5)   Not tether a dog by a choker collar, or on a chain or similar means
of restraint less than ten feet in length or of such weight as to prevent such
animal from moving about or causing injury to such animal.
      (6)   Not fail to provide his or her animals with sufficient, wholesome
food and clean water.
      (7)   Not fail to provide his or her animal with proper, soundly and
effectively constructed shelter and protection from varying elements of the
weather at all times.
      (8)   Not fail to provide humane and veterinary care and counsel for
sick, injured or diseased animals and shall segregate such animals from the
healthy so as to prevent transmittal of any sickness or disease.
   (B)   No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork,
or otherwise abuse or mistreat any animal.
   (C)   No person shall injure or cause to be injured any animal by means of
any motor vehicle, firearm, or any other instrument or object and fail to
immediately report the existence, location, description and tag number, if any,
of the injured animal to the humane society and in doing so give his or her
name and address.
   (D)   No person shall abandon any animal on any place public or private,
including any public or private highway, or road, or upon the property of
another.
   (E)   No person shall keep or use any animal for the purpose of fighting or
cause or permit any fighting or other combat between animals. No person shall
be a party to or be present as a spectator to any such fighting or other combat
between animals. No person shall knowingly suffer or permit the use of any
building, yard, ground or any other premises belonging to any person for any
fighting or other combat between animals; and no person shall carry, haul or
deliver any animal for the aforementioned purposes.
   (F)   No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed
with food or not, so that the substance shall be liable to be consumed by any
animal.
   (G)   It shall not be considered a violation of this section for the owner
of a golf course, or its employees or agents, to take the actions prescribed in
§
130.04(E) concerning the discharge of firearms at nuisance animals.
(‘79 Code, § 3-3) (Ord. 768, passed 7-10-79; Am. Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-00;
Am. Ord. 06-2014, passed 6-3-14) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Animal cruelty, see I.C. 35-46-3-7 through 35-46-3-12
§ 91.04 HARBORING NOISY ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal which
disturbs the peace by making loud noises.
('79 Code, § 3-4)
Penalty, see § 91.99
Cross-reference:
   Noise, see
Ch. 94
§ 91.05 BITE CASES AND QUARANTINE.
   (A)   Any animal which bites a person shall be immediately, securely
confined and quarantined for a minimum period of ten days. The animal may be
quarantined on the owner's premises or in a facility of the owner’s choice at
the owner's expense, or impounded at the county facility.
   (B)   Any owner whose animal has bitten a person and keeps such animal on
their property shall:
      (1)   Securely confine such animal at all times during the quarantine
period.
      (2)   Pay any and all fees for the pathological examination of the animal
for rabies and any and all fees for boarding, shipping or other related
expenses.
   (C)   Any owner reclaiming an animal placed under quarantine shall provide
proof of rabies vaccination.
   (D)   Any person who refuses or fails to comply with the procedures and
requirements for the quarantining of their animal shall surrender such animal
to any animal control officer or law enforcement officer upon demand and may
also be proceeded against for violation of this subchapter.
(‘79 Code, § 3-5) (Ord. 768, passed 7-10-79; Am. Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-00;
Am. Ord. 04-2015, passed 1-27-15) Penalty, see §
91.99
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 91.15 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   Written notice of the fact of impoundment under the provisions of this
chapter shall be served upon the owner or keeper of any animal which is so
impounded.
('79 Code, § 3-18) (Am. Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-00)
§ 91.16 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMAL; PROOF OF OWNERSHIP, PAYMENT OF FINE
REQUIRED.
   Any person claiming an impounded animal shall upon request of the humane
officer provide proof of ownership by means of a rabies certificate of such
animal and pay all applicable fines and fees before such animal shall be
released.
('79 Code, § 3-20) (Ord. 768, passed 7-10-79; Am. Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-
00)
§ 91.17 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED ANIMALS.
   Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within three working days of
impoundment shall become the property of the animal shelter and shall be
disposed of at the discretion of the animal shelter in one of the following
manners:
   (A)   Euthanasia, using a method approved by the animal shelter.
   (B)   Release for adoption, to a new owner who shows evidence and intention
to provide the animal with humane care and abide by all laws governing animal
control and welfare.
   (C)   Release to the environment. Whenever possible wildlife shall be
relocated to their natural habitat. Wildlife shall be exempt from the three-day
holding requirement, thereby permitting immediate release.
('79 Code, § 3-24) (Am. Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-00)
§ 91.18 LOST OR STRAY ANIMALS.
   (A)   Persons finding a stray animal are to notify the animal control
officer within 48 hours. At the discretion of the animal control officer, the
animal may be kept by the finder and a found report left with the animal
control officer, to enable the finder an opportunity to return the animal to
its rightful owner.
   (B)   Any found animal may be surrendered to the animal control officer to
be held at the animal shelter for three working days, before a disposition is
made. Any animal not claimed within the three day period shall become the
properly of the animal shelter and shall be disposed of as set forth in §
91.17.
   (C)   Persons finding an animal are obligated to comply with all rules and
regulations of this chapter pertaining to humane care and treatment of animals,
while said animal is in their custody awaiting return to its actual owner.
   (D)   With the exception of the animal control officer, the finder will be
considered the found animal's owner for the purposes of this subchapter only
after the animal is in the finder's custody for 30 continuous days.
(Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-00)
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.19 FURTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   All other adoption requirements and fees shall be at the discretion of the
animal shelter.
('79 Code, § 3-26) (Ord. 768, passed 7-10-79; Am. Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-
00)
DOGS AND CATS
§ 91.35 RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor any dog which is over the age
of three months which is not immunized against rabies at least once each year.
('79 Code, § 3-37) (Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-00)
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.36 EMERGENCY PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR; VIOLATION.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor apprehends that there is danger of the existence or
spread of any dangerous disease relating to dogs, he shall issue a
proclamation, ordering and requiring all persons owning, possession or
harboring any member of the canine family to confine or muzzle said animal for
a term of not less than 30 days, nor more than 90 days following the date of
such proclamation.
   (B)   Any dog found in violation of the provisions of such proclamation
shall be destroyed on order of the Chief of Police.
('79 Code, § 3-38)
§ 91.37 CONFINEMENT OF DOGS KEPT FOR COMMERCIAL BREEDING.
   All female dogs kept for commercial breeding shall be kept housed during
their breeding period and shall not be allowed out of doors during such period.
('79 Code, § 3-39)
§ 91.38 (RESERVED).
§ 91.39 CONFINEMENT OF CATS KEPT FOR COMMERCIAL BREEDING.
   All female cats which are kept for commercial breeding purposes shall be
kept housed during their breeding period and shall not be allowed outside
during this period.
('79 Code, § 3-64 ) (Am. Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-00)
Penalty, see § 91.99
OTHER ANIMALS
§ 91.70 EXOTIC AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   No exotic, venomous or dangerous animal may be owned or housed within the
city limits. Dangerous animals include, but are not limited to, non-
domesticated cats, canines, bears, etc.
(Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-00)
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.71 DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Ownership or possession prohibited. No person shall own, keep, or
harbor a dangerous animal within the city; provided, this section shall not
apply to animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency. For
the purpose of this chapter, an animal may be declared dangerous by the animal
control officer, police officer or any officers of a law enforcement agency, if
the animal exhibits vicious behavior in present or past conduct, including but
not limited to:
      (1)   (a)   Evidence that the animal has, without provocation, bitten or
attacked a person and/or animals three times in a consecutive 12-month period;
or
         (b)   Did bite or attack, once causing wound or injuries creating a
potential danger to the health or life of the victim; or
         (c)   Could not be controlled or restrained at the time of a bite or
attack upon an animal or person; and
   
      (2)   That in order to preserve the public health, safety and welfare of
the community, the destruction of said animal is necessary.
   (B)   Determination and appeals procedure.  Whenever an animal is declared
dangerous, the animal control officer shall notify the animal's owner or
custodian of the declaration and the animal control officer's intent to
euthanize the animal unless the determination is timely appealed hereunder.
Notice of the declaration shall be served either in person or by certified or
registered mail. The animal, if not already held in quarantine, shall be
surrendered to the animal control officer.
      (1)   Any decision of the animal control officer under the provisions of
these divisions may be appealed to the Board of Public Works and Safety. The
appeal of the owner to the Board shall be in writing and be filed with the
Board of Public Works and Safety within ten days after receipt of notification
from the animal control officer that said animal has been found to be
dangerous. The disposition of any animal shall be stayed during the pendency of
such appeal. The animal shall remain in the custody of the animal control
officer during the appeal process.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a written appeal, the Board shall provide notice
and conduct an adjudicative hearing in accordance with the terms of I.C. 4-21.5
et seq. Thereafter, the Board shall render a decision that said animal is
dangerous and must be euthanized, or is not dangerous and should be returned to
the owner. The decision of the Board shall be final and binding upon the city
and upon the appellant. This decision may be appealed according to the
provisions of I.C. 4-21.5-5-1 et seq.
   (C)   Costs. The owners of any animal which is impounded and/or euthanized
under this section shall be held responsible for payment of any expenses so
incurred by the animal control officer, and failure to pay such fee to the
Department within 15 days after destruction of such animal shall constitute a
violation of the chapter.
(Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-00)
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.72 FARM ANIMAL AND FOWL.
   No farm animal or fowl may be owned or housed within the city limits.
(Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-00)
Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay a fee set by the
Fulton County Ordinance No. 032100, § 1-003 and paid through Fulton County.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is subject to fines
set out in the Violations Bureau Ordinance.
('79 Code, § 3-6) (Ord. 768, passed 7-10-79; Am. Ord. 26-2000, passed 11-28-00)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
AND PROTECTION
Section
   
92.01   Open burning prohibited
   
92.02   Residential storage of certain inflammable and explosive liquids
   
92.03   False fire alarms
   
92.04   Interference with fire hydrants
   
92.05   Inspections
   
92.06   Removal of menaces
   
92.07   Consumer fireworks
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   
Fire Department, see Ch. 32
   
Making rockets and propellants prohibited, see § 130.02
   
Shooting rockets prohibited, see § 130.03
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to establish and maintain a firefighting and fire prevention
system, see I.C. 36-8-2-3
   Fireworks, see I.C. 22-11-14
   Regulated places of entertainment, see I.C. 22-14-3
   Registration and regulation of controlled explosives, see I.C. 35-47.5-4
§ 92.01 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the open burning of any
matter or material within the city limits, with the following exceptions:
   (A)   Residents of the city may burn charcoal and/or wood in outdoor
fireplaces and grills provided that the fireplaces or grills shall be placed in
such a location as to be reasonably removed from any neighboring residence so
as to avoid any smoke or fumes therefrom becoming a nuisance for any adjacent
neighbor.
   (B)   In the event that there are such unusual circumstances as to make the
burning of a substantial amount of combustible matter desirable, any person
wishing to burn any such material shall apply to the Clerk-Treasurer for
permission to burn such combustible material. Any such applications shall be
considered by the Board of Public Works and Safety and if authorized by them
any such burning will be done under the supervision of the City Fire
Department.
('79 Code, § 5-1) (Ord. 538, passed 5-23-72; Am. Ord. 56-1986, passed 7-8-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.02 RESIDENTIAL STORAGE OF CERTAIN INFLAMMABLE AND EXPLOSIVE LIQUIDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to store any inflammable or explosive
liquids, other than that used for heating and cooking purposes, such as fuel
oil or liquefied petroleum gas in any area, if zoned as residential, other than
in approved, sealed containers or safety cans not exceeding an aggregate total
of five gallons.
('79 Code, § 5-3) (Ord. 450, passed 10-8-68)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.03 FALSE FIRE ALARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give or attempt to give or cause to
be given a false fire alarm.
('79 Code, § 5-4)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.04 INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE HYDRANTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not authorized by the Board of
Waterworks Trustees or the Superintendent of the Water Department willfully to
break, injure, open or in any other way interfere with any fire hydrant.
('79 Code, § 5-5)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.05 INSPECTIONS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department is empowered to at all times enter any
place that is kept, maintained or permitted to remain within the corporate
limits of the city, in such manner as to be a menace to the public safety from
fire, or to enter any such place as he has reasonable cause to believe contains
a menace to the public safety.
('79 Code, § 5-6)
§ 92.06 REMOVAL OF MENACES.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall, when he has determined after
an examination that any place has become a menace to the public and safety by
reason of a danger of fire, immediately notify its owners or occupants to
remedy or remove such menace at once.
   (B)   At the same time the Chief shall make a report of such action to the
Board of Public Works and Safety and if the owner or occupant fails to remedy
or remove the menace, the Board of Public Works and Safety shall take the
actions authorized by state law.
('79 Code, § 5-7)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Removal of unsafe buildings and structures, see I.C. 36-7-9-1 et seq.
§ 92.07 CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Consumer fire works shall only be used, ignited or discharged on the
following days and hours:
      (1)   Between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and two hours after sunset on June
29, June 30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6, July 7, July 8 and July 9;
      (2)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on July
4; and
      (3)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00 a.m. on
January 1.
   (B)   That consumer fireworks used, ignited or discharged on any other day
or hour except as specified in division (A) shall be a violation of this
section.
   (C)   A violation of this section may be written- against a person or
property owner.
      (1)   Person shall mean an individual, an association, an organization, a
limited liability company, or a corporation.
      (2)   Property owner shall mean any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the
whole or part of a building, a structure or land.
   (D)   (1)   Any group or individual requesting the use of consumer fireworks
on days and hours other than those previously regulated shall obtain permission
from the Rochester Common Council at a publicly conducted meeting as required
by the Open Door Law.
      (2)   Upon receiving approval from the Common Council, the group or
individual shall pay to the Clerk-Treasurer a fee of $25, which shall be
deposited into the General Fund.
   (E)   Approval of the Common Council shall designate the specific dates and
hours the consumer fireworks may be used.
(Ord. 05-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 04-2009, passed 3-10-09)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   That a violation of § 92.07 shall be subject to a fine in the amount
of $50 for the first offense, $100.00 for the second offense, and $300 for the
third offense.
   (B)   That fines for the first three offenses as described above shall be
paid to the Ordinance Violations Bureau.
   (C)   That a fourth offense or more may be filed within the county court of
jurisdiction and subject the offender to the maximum fine allowed by law for an
ordinance violation, and court costs.
(Ord. 05-2008, passed 6-24-08)
CHAPTER 93: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
93.01   Policy statement
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Unlawful practice
   
93.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
93.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions
   
93.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
93.07   Interference, coercion, or intimidation
   
93.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
   
93.09   Equal access to housing in HUD programs
   
93.10   Exemptions
   
93.11   Administrative enforcement of ordinance
 
   
93.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 22-9-1-12.1
   Commission to administer, see I.C. 22-9.5-4-1
§ 93.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   It shall be the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the federal Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 15-2014, passed 1-27-15)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Any person who:
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-2)
   COMMISSION. The Indiana Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C. 22-
9.5-4-1 et seq. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)
   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint under
I.C. 22-9.5-6. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
93.04 through
93.08 of this chapter or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that
is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families; or any vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a
residence by one or more families. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-8)
   FAMILIAL STATUS. One or more individuals (who have not attained the age of
18 years) being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody
of such individual or the written permission of such parent or other person.
The protections afforded against discrimination on this basis of familial
status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of
securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18
years.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual, with the status of such family being
further defined under FAMILIAL STATUS. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9)
   HANDICAP.
      (1)   With respect to a person shall be defined as:
         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of a person’s major life activities.
         (b)   A record of having such an impairment.
         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment.
         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
         (e)   Any other impairment defined under I.C. 22-9.5-2-10.
      (2)   The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use of or
addictions to a controlled substance as defined in Section 802 of Title 21 of
the United States Code [I.C. 22-9.5-2-10(b)]; nor does the term HANDICAP
include an individual solely because that individual is a transvestite [I.C.
22-9.5-2-10(c)].
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under Title 11 of the United States Code, receivers, and
fiduciaries. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)
   TO RENT. To lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the occupant. (I.C.
22-9.5-2-13)
(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 15-2014, passed 1-27-15)
Editor's note:
   I.C. 22-9.5-2-10 was added by P.L. 66-1990, Sec. 2, was amended by P.L. 23-
1993, Sec.139. and was repealed by P.L. 99-2007, Sec. 224.
§ 93.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, §
93.09 and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or
rental of housing set forth in I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in §
93.04 shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) below and I.C. 22-
9.5-3.
   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) below, nothing in §
93.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses
at any one time; provided that in the sale of such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or
exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24-month period. The
private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on his or her behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses
at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be
exempted from application of this section only if such house is sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or any person in the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any
such broker, agent or salesman, or person; and
         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
94.04(C), but noting in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title; or
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein, or
      (2)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent,
other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in providing sales
or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions involving the sale
or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or
      (3)   They are the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 15-2014, passed 1-27-15)
§ 93.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   As made applicable by §
93.03 and except as exempted by division (B) of that section and §
93.09, it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status or national origin.
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin.
   (C)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published
any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, or an
intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination.
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not available
for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
   (F)   (1)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap
of:
         (a)   That buyer or renter;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of:
         (a)   That person; or
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (3)   For purposes of this division, DISCRIMINATION includes:
         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by
such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification
on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford
such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months after
September 13, 1988, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a
manner that:
            1.   The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and      
         3.   All premises within such dwellings contain the following features
of adaptive design:
               a.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
               b.   Light, switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other
environmental controls in accessible locations:
               c.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
      (4)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the Americans With
Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard for buildings
and facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped
people (commonly cited as “ANSI A117.1”) suffices to satisfy the requirements
of division (F)(3)(c)3. above.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (F) requires that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.
(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 15-2014, passed 1-27-15)
Statutory reference:
   Discrimination prohibited, see I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 through 22-9.5-5-5
§ 93.05 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED
TRANSACTION means any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status.
(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 15-2014, passed 1-27-15)
Statutory reference:
   Discrimination in loans or financial assistance, see I.C. 22-9.5-5-6
§ 93.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple- listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her
in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on
account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national
origin.
(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 15-2014, passed 1-27-15)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 22-9.5-5-7
§ 93.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
93.03 through
93.06.
(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 15-2014, passed 1-27-15)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 22-9.5-5-8
§ 93.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status, or national origin and because he or she is or has been
selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in division (A) of
this section; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate; or
   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A), or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing
any denial of the opportunity to participate shall be subject to the penalty
set forth in §
93.99.
(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 15-2014, passed 1-27-15)
§ 93.09 EQUAL ACCESS TO HOUSING IN HUD PROGRAMS.
   Pursuant to 24 CFR Part 5.403 and 24 CFR Part 574.3 the definition of FAMILY
is revised to include families regardless of the actual or perceived sexual
orientation, gender identity, or marital status of its members.
(Ord. 15-2014, passed 1-27-15)
§ 93.10 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et.seq. shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those activities or
organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) of this section.
   (B)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national
origin.
      (2)   Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in
fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or
purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to
its members or from giving preference to its members.
   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply
with respect to housing for older persons.
      (2)   As used in this section, HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS means housing:
         (a)   Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary
of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the State Civil
Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program); or
         (b)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or
older; or
         (c)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55
years of age or older per unit.
(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 15-2014, passed 1-27-15)
§ 93.11 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering this
chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commission as set forth in
division (B) hereof shall be vested in the Mayor of the city.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the city, because
of a lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully administer
enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this chapter, herein
elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the provisions of this
chapter by complainants to the Indiana Civil Rights Commission (“Commission”)
for administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6 and the Mayor,
shall refer all said complaints to the Commission as provided for under
division (A) of this section to the Commission for purposes of investigation,
resolution and appropriate relief as provided for under I.C. 22-9.5-6.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the city, shall administer
their departments, programs and activities relating to housing and urban
development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter
and shall cooperate with the Mayor and the Commission to further such purposes.
   (D)   The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee shall provide information on
remedies available to any aggrieved person or complainant requesting such
information.
(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 15-2014, passed 1-17-15)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any citizen who violates the provisions of §
93.08(C) shall be fined according to local, state and federal law; and if
bodily injury results shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not
more than ten years, or both; and if death results shall be subject to
imprisonment for any term of years or for life.
(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 15-2014, passed 1-27-15)
CHAPTER 94: NOISE
Section
   
94.01   Nuisances declared
   
94.02   Noise
   
94.03   Compression brakes
Statutory reference:
   Motor vehicle noise limits, see I.C. 9-19-8-1 et seq.
   Residual power of city, see I.C. 36-1-3-4 and 36-1-3-5
§ 94.01 NUISANCES DECLARED.
   The following acts are declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance:
   (A)   The sounding of any horn, signal device or attachments on automobiles,
motorcycles, bicycle, truck, bus or other vehicle except as necessary for
warning of danger to person or property. However, this division (A) shall not
apply to public transportation vehicles, school busses, or public safety
vehicles.
   (B)   The creation of grating screeching, grinding or squeaking noises, loud
reports or shots, or other noises in the use of automobiles, motorcycles, or
other vehicles or appurtenances attached thereto.
   (C)   The creation of loud noises by the manipulation, handling and playing
of musical instruments, except in conjunction with authorized parades or public
functions.
   (D)   The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which by causing frequent or
continued noises or odor shall disturb the comfort or repose of persons in any
dwelling or apartment house or residence.
   (E)   The creation of any similar noise by any radio, phonograph or musical
instrument, or the making of any loud unnecessary or boisterous noises at any
time.
(‘79 Code, § 9-1) (Ord. 06-1997, passed 4-8-97; Am. Ord. 11-2015, passed 10-27-
15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.02 NOISE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create noise by the use of any
radio, sound truck, public address system or other similar device for the
purpose of advertising or attracting attention .
   (B)   This section shall allow the Police Department to use a sound truck or
public address system upon the streets and public places for the purpose of
directing all vehicular traffic upon them.
('79 Code, § 9-16) (Ord. 07-1997,passed 4-8-97)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.03 COMPRESSION BRAKES.
   The use of compression brakes on motor vehicles is prohibited within the
city limits unless such use is required by an emergency.
(Ord. 01-2024, passed 1-23-24)
CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Riding animals or vehicles
Department of Public Parks
   
95.15   Creation
   
95.16   Board of Park Commissioners
   
95.17   Powers and duties
City Parks
   
95.25   City parks named
   
95.26   Closing Hours
   
95.27   Refuse disposal
   
95.28   Erection of structures and marking of ground prohibited
   
95.29   Injuring of natural environment
   
95.30   Profanity
   
95.31   Manitou Mountain
   
95.32   Dogs, alcoholic beverages, and motorized bikes
   
95.33   Smoking
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to establish Parks Department, see I.C. 36-10-3
   Power of city to control parks and recreational areas, see I.C. 36-10-2-2
Cross-reference:
   Tree Board to regulate trees in parks, see §
97.28
   Parks and Recreation Capital Fund, see §
35.03
   Parks and Recreation Operating Fund, see §
35.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 RIDING ANIMALS OR VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a vehicle or an animal in any
area designated as a city park or in any other public recreational area except
on designated roadways and paths without the written consent of the Board of
Park Commissioners.
('79 Code, § 11-1) (Ord. 550, passed 11-14-72; Am. Ord. 45-1998, passed 10-27-
98)
Penalty, see § 10.99
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC PARKS
§ 95.15 CREATION.
   The Common Council adopts I.C. 36-10-3, entitled "General Park and
Recreation Law" in its entirety.
('79 Code, § 11-16) (Ord. 29-1988, passed 12-13-88; Am. Ord. 45-1998, passed
10-27-98; Am. Ord. 05-2002, passed 4-9-02)
§ 95.16 BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS.
   (A)   Under the authority of I.C. 36-10-3, there is created a Department of
Public Parks as an executive department of the city to be governed by a Board
of Park Commissioners consisting of four members to be appointed by the Mayor.
   (B)   Upon the establishment of the Board of Park Commissioners, the members
initially appointed shall be:
      (1)   One member for a term until December 31, 1988.
      (2)   One member for a term to extend to December 31, 1989.
      (3)   One member for a term to extend to December 31, 1990.
      (4)   One member for a term to extend to December 31, 1991.
('79 Code, § 11-17) (Ord. 29-1988, passed 12-13-88; Am. Ord. 45-1998, passed
10-27-98; Am. Ord. 05-2002, passed 4-9-02)
§ 95.17 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In all respects, the Department of Public Parks and the Board of Park
Commissioners shall have such powers and duties and shall perform their duties
in such manner as is set forth in I.C. 36-10-3.
('79 Code, § 11-18) (Ord. 29-1988, passed 12-13-88; Am. Ord. 45-1998, passed
10-27-98; Am. Ord. 05-2002, passed 4-9-02)
CITY PARKS
§ 95.25 CITY PARKS NAMED.
   The parks owned and maintained by the city are located and designated as
follows:
   (A)   Rochester City Park - Southwest of the city on 12th Street and Park
Road.
   (B)   Pioneer Park - North of city on Old 31 and Monticello Road.
   (C)   Mill Creek Golf Course - 701 East 6th Street.
   (D)   Lakeside Park - East State Road 25 & 14, Lake Manitou.
   (E)   Lakeview Park - East State Road 25 & 14, along Mill Race.
   (F)   Jaycee Park - East 12th Street and Monroe Street.
   (G)   Fansler Park - Corner of Clover Street and Washington.
   (H)   Sledding Hill - Between West 14th & 15th Street on Pontiac Street.
   (I)   Rochester City Pool - 701 East 6th Street.
('79 Code, § 11-51) (Ord. 45-1998, passed 10-27-98)
§ 95.26 CLOSING HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter, or remain in any city park
property after midnight or to enter before 4:00 a.m., without permission of the
Park Board.
('79 Code, § 11-52) (Ord. 45-1998, passed 10-27-98)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.27 REFUSE DISPOSAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any garbage, refuse or trash
on the grounds of the city parks and property of the Park Board. All garbage,
refuse and trash shall be deposited in receptacles provided and designated for
that purpose.
('79 Code, § 11-53) (Am. Ord. 45-1998, passed 10-27-98)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.28 ERECTION OF STRUCTURES AND MARKING OF GROUND PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to erect a tent, shed, stand
or other types of buildings, or to mark or lay out any ground for the purpose
of playing games without permission of the Park Board. It shall be unlawful to
deface or destroy, in any manner, park equipment or structures located in any
and all property under the jurisdiction of the Park Board. Penalty will be at
the discretion of the Rochester Police Chief and or the State Court System.
('79 Code, § 11-54) (Ord. 45-1998, passed 10-27-98)
 
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Criminal mischief, see I.C. 35-43-1-2
§ 95.29 INJURING OF NATURAL ENVIRONMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, bend or otherwise mutilate or
damage any tree, shrub, flower or flower bed or lawn in the city parks and
property of the Park Board.
('79 Code, § 95.19) (Ord. 45-1998, passed 10-27-98)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.30 PROFANITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use loud, vulgar, or profane language
in the city parks and property of the Park Board.
('79 Code, § 11-56)( Ord. 45-1998, passed 10-27-98)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.31 MANITOU MOUNTAIN.
   (A)   The Board of Park Commissioners shall be allowed to erect a sign with
rules established by the Board of Park Commissioners for the structure known as
Manitou Mountain, located at Rochester City Park.
   (B)   The rules shall be posted on a sign located at the entrance to Manitou
Mountain.
   (C)   The rules posted in accordance with divisions (A) and (B) of this
section shall be considered to have the same force and effect as a Rochester
City Ordinance.
   (D)   The Rochester City Police shall have the power to enforce the
violation of the rules as a violation of this section.
   (E)   The Rochester City Police shall have the power to order any and or all
persons in violation of this section to leave the Rochester City Park.
   (F)   Failure to leave Rochester City Park upon the request of any Rochester
City Police Officer shall be considered a trespass and be allowed to be
punished as such.
(Ord. 27-1998, passed 7-29-98; Am. Ord. 45-1998, passed 10-27-98)
§ 95.32 DOGS, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND MOTORIZED BIKES.
   (A)   Any person or persons walking and/or curbing their dogs will clean up
after the animal in all city parks and property of the Park Board.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to have alcoholic
beverages in all city parks and property of the Park Board.
   (C)   The use of motorized bikes is limited to roadway in all city parks and
property of the Park Board.
(Ord. 45-1998, passed 10-27-98)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.33 SMOKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to smoke inside the fenced
area of Manitou Mountain and any rest room in the city parks.
(Ord. 45-1998, passed 10-27-98)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 96: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
General Provisions
   
96.01   Spitting
   
96.02   Depositing matter on public ways
   
96.03   Placement of advertising upon public property
   
96.04   Posting of notices on utility poles
   
96.05   Sidewalk cleaning
   
96.06   Parade permits; conditions set by Chief of Police
Excavations and Construction
   
96.27   Definitions
   
96.28   Board of Public Works to administer
   
96.29   Permit
   
96.30   Restoration costs
   
96.31   Violations
   
96.40   Conformity required
   
96.41   Permit to build, replace, or repair sidewalk
   
96.42   Permit application
   
96.43   Clerk-Treasurer to forward permits
   
96.44   Standard width and thickness of sidewalks
   
96.45   (Repealed)
   
96.46   Slope of sidewalk
   
96.47   Placement of sidewalk
   
96.48   Construction of subgrade
   
96.49   Forms used in connection with sidewalks
   
96.50   Composition of concrete
   
96.51   (Repealed)
   
96.52   (Repealed)
   
96.53   Placement of expansion joints; composition; size
   
96.54   Depositing of concrete; edgers; joints
   
96.55   Driveways across sidewalks
   
96.56   Alley crossings across sidewalks
   
96.57   Inspection of materials and supervision of work
   
96.58   Cutting of sidewalk section
   
96.59   Allocation of dirt and old material; duty of contractor with reference
to grade stakes
   
96.60   Tampering with grade stakes
   
96.61   Preliminary resolution of improvement required
   
96.62   Service of notice of preliminary resolution
   
96.63   Order to repair or replace sidewalk
   
96.64   Sidewalk improvements by city
   
96.65   Lien against property benefitted
Visual Obstructions
   
96.75   Visual obstructions prohibited; exceptions
   
96.76   Enforcement
   
96.77   Abatement
   
96.78   Preexisting obstruction
Sidewalks Required
   
96.80   New buildings
   
96.81   Waiver-new buildings
   
96.82   Building permits
   
96.83   Appeal
   
96.84   Determinate variance
   
96.85   Repair of sidewalks
   
96.86   ADA requirements
Snow Removal Conditions
   
96.90   General provisions
   
96.91   Parking restrictions during snow removal periods
   
96.92   Removal and impoundment of vehicles
   
96.93   Clearing snow and ice from sidewalks
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to clean streets, alleys and public grounds, see I.C. 36-9-6-2
   Power of city to establish, maintain and control public ways, see I C. 36-9-
2-5
Editor's Note:
   Per the document entitled "Interlocal Agreement for the Administration of
the Sidewalk Code of the City of Rochester by Fulton County", adopted by the
Fulton County Commissioners on February 19, 2013, and the Rochester Common
Council on February 26, 2013, the administration of §§ 96.27 et seq. has been
turned over to the Fulton County Area Plan Director, however the affected code
sections have not been amended to reflect this change.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 SPITTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate upon any of the
sidewalks, public ways, public buildings or other places intended for the
general use of the public.
(`79 Code, § 14-1) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.02 DEPOSITING MATTER ON PUBLIC WAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter, throw or deposit any matter
upon any sidewalk, street or other public place; or to permit water to run from
a downspout directly onto a sidewalk.
(`79 Code, § 14-2) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.03 PLACEMENT OF ADVERTISING UPON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or fasten any poster, sign,
card or other advertisement upon any public building, sidewalk or pavement, or
to place, erect or maintain any sign, signboard or other advertising between
the street and the sidewalk.
(`79 Code, § 14-3) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.04 POSTING OF NOTICES ON UTILITY POLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to post or affix in any way to any
utility post or pole any bill, advertisement or poster; provided, however, that
the provisions of this section shall not apply to the posting of legal notices
or documents.
(`79 Code, § 14-4) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.05 SIDEWALK CLEANING.
   The owner or occupant of any property shall keep the sidewalks swept and
free from trash, debris or obstructions in all seasons of the year.
(Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.06 PARADE PERMITS; CONDITIONS SET BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any procession or parade to occupy, march or
proceed along any street or public way without permission of the Chief of
Police.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to fail to carry out a procession or parade in
accordance with the conditions set out by the Chief of Police.
(`79 Code, § 14-6) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Manner of conducting processions, see § 71.04
   EXCAVATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION0
§ 96.27 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXCAVATION. Any hole, hollow, or opening in, on or under any street.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
   PERVIOUS MATERIAL. Any gravel or crushed stone and shall not include any
soil, subsoil or nonporous matter.
   STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of any public street,
avenue, highway or road located in this city and established for the use of
vehicles. (1999)
(Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.28 BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS TO ADMINISTER.
   It shall be the duty of the Board of Public Works and Safety to administer
the provisions of this subchapter. But the Board shall have the power to
delegate any of its duties created by this subchapter to its clerk or other
officers, employees and agents of this city. In administrating the provisions
of this subchapter, the Board:
   (A)   Shall collect all sums of money required to be paid by this subchapter
or by the Board. The Board may delegate the collection of such sums of money to
the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   Shall conduct inspections of all excavations.
   (C)   Shall determine from time to time the unit prices to be used as a
basis for any established expense and shall determine all cost required to be
paid by this subchapter or by the Board.
   (D)   Shall issue an excavation permit to any person desiring to make an
excavation if such person has complied with the provisions of this subchapter
relative to the procurement of such permit.
   (E)   Shall keep a record of all violations of this subchapter and of all
violations of the laws of the state applicable to excavations, together with
the final disposition.
   (F)   Shall prescribe the form or forms to be utilized in administering the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (G)   May correct any work performed by any person in violation of any of
the provisions of this subchapter, determine the cost thereof, and require
payment of such cost of such person.
   (H)   May fill or compact the subsoil in, an excavation made by a person who
has failed or is failing to do so such as prescribed in this subchapter,
determine the cost thereof, and require such person to pay such cost.
   (I)   May provide barriers, lights, signs or otherwise warning of an
excavation made or being made by any person who has failed or is failing to
give warning, determine the cost thereof and require of such person the payment
of such cost.
   (J)   May issue orders concerning excavations and supervise any work
performed at any excavation made or being made for the purpose of connecting
with or tapping a sewer of this city.
   (K)   May restore to its condition prior to an excavation, the surface of
the street in, on or under which such excavation was made, determine the cost
thereof and require the person who made such excavation the payment of such
cost.
   (L)   May revoke any or all of the excavation permits of any person who has
failed or is failing to comply with any order of the Board concerning an
excavation made or being made by such person.
      (M)   May perform any other act necessary for the due administration of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.29 PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
subchapter for any person except an agent or employee of this city acting
within the scope of his employment to excavate without a permit first obtained
therefore from Building Commissioner.
   (B)   Application; information required. Any person desiring to make an
excavation may obtain an excavation permit therefore by filing with the
Building Commissioner a written and sworn application on a form or forms
prescribed by the Board, therein setting out the location, purpose, and size of
the proposed excavation, together with any other matter deemed by the Board to
be essential for the administration of its office. The seven digit number
assigned by "Holey Moley" will be required on each application.
   (C)   Fee. The permit fee is $30 to cover the cost of issuing such permit
and the inspection. (1999)
(Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.30 RESTORATION COSTS.
   The applicant shall pay the estimated cost of restoring to its condition,
prior to such proposed excavation, the surface of the street in, on or under
which such proposed excavation will be made. Such estimated costs shall be
based upon the unit price determined by the Board from time to time in
accordance with estimated cost of labor and materials necessary to restore any
such surface. (1999)
(Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.31 VIOLATIONS.
   The following acts shall constitute violations of this subchapter of the
code:
   (A)   Falsifying statements on an application for an excavation permit or to
otherwise fraudulently induce the Board of Public Works and Safety.
   (B)   Utilizing an excavation permit for making an excavation not authorized
by such permit.
   (C)   Failure to allow the Building Commissioner to inspect at any time, any
excavation made or being made by such person.
   (D)   Failure to allow the Board to supervise any work performed at any
excavation made or being made for the purpose of connecting with or tapping a
sewer of this city or failure to perform any such work as directed by the
Board.
   (E)   Failure to comply with any order of the Board relative to any
excavation made or being made by such person.
   (F)   Failure to erect or place barriers, lights, signs or other warnings of
any excavation made or being made by such person, or fail in the event the
Board shall give such warning, to pay the cost thereof required by the Board.
   (G)   Failure after such person has made an excavation and after the purpose
thereof has been accomplished:
      (1)   To fill such excavation promptly.
      (2)   To fill with subsoil that portion of such excavation which is more
than 18 inches beneath the surface of the street where such excavation is
located.
      (3)   To compact any subsoil used for filling such excavation.
      (4)   To fill with pervious material that portion of such excavation
which is located 18 inches beneath the surface of street where such excavation
is located to such surface.
   (H)   Failure, in the event the Board shall correct any work performed by
any person in violation of any provision of this subchapter, to pay the cost
thereof required by the Board.
   (I)   Failure to pay the cost required by the Board to be paid to cover the
actual cost incurred by this city by restoring to its condition, prior to an
excavation made by such person, the surface of the streets in, on or under
which such excavation was made. (1999)
(Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.40 CONFORMITY REQUIRED.
   All sidewalks that are new, replaced or repaired shall be made in conformity
with the provisions of this subchapter and the grades, plans, profiles and
specifications furnished by the Clerk-Treasurer and or Building Commissioner on
file in their office, as adopted and approved by the Common Council.
(`79 Code, § 14-36) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.41 PERMIT TO BUILD, REPLACE, OR REPAIR SIDEWALK.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, replace or repair any sidewalk
without a permit; provided, however, that no such permit shall be required when
such work is being done pursuant to a special improvement resolution.
(`79 Code, § 14-37) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.42 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring the sidewalk permit required by this subchapter shall
file an application for it with the Clerk Treasurer or Building Commissioner;
the application shall be signed by the owner (or his agent) of the property
abutting the location where the sidewalk is to be built, replaced or repaired.
(`79 Code, § 14-38) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.43 CLERK-TREASURER TO FORWARD PERMITS.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall forward all sidewalk construction, repair or
replacement permit applications filed to the Board of Public Works and Safety.
(`79 Code, § 14-39) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.44 STANDARD WIDTH AND THICKNESS OF SIDEWALKS.
   All new sidewalks for public use shall be constructed a minimum of five feet
in width and a minimum thickness of four inches.
(`79 Code, § 14-40) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.45 (REPEALED).
§ 96.46 SLOPE OF SIDEWALK.
   The surface of any sidewalk when completed shall have a sufficient slope to
drain toward the center of the street.
(`79 Code, § 14-42) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.47 PLACEMENT OF SIDEWALK
   All sidewalks shall be placed with their inner edges on the abutting
property line, unless the Plan Commission grants special permission for some
other location.
(`79 Code, § 1443) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.48 CONSTRUCTION OF SUBGRADE.
   The subgrade of a sidewalk shall be constructed to a depth below the
finished surface in accordance with the plans and specifications provided by
the Plan Commission and shall be thoroughly compacted to a firm, smooth
surface; all soft or spongy places not affording a suitable subgrade, must be
removed and replaced with a suitable material and compacted according to the
above specifications.
('79 Code, § 1444) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.49 FORMS USED IN CONNECTION WITH SIDEWALKS.
   The forms used in connection with sidewalks shall be of a material commonly
used and accepted in the concrete industry, straight and free from warp and of
sufficient strength to resist springing during the process of depositing
concrete against them. The forms shall be of the full depth of the walk and
shall be securely staked, braced and held firmly to required line and grade.
All forms shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled before concrete is placed
against them.
(`79 Code, § 1445) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.50 COMPOSITION OF CONCRETE.
   All concrete placed in connection with a sidewalk shall consist of the
industry standard of six bags of concrete per cubic yard of mix, with the
consistency and slump as would be mixed by a professional concrete supplier for
a typical job of this nature; any material and or color other than natural
concrete to be use for the construction of a sidewalk will be subject to the
approval of the Plan Commission.
(`79 Code, § 14-46) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.51 (REPEALED).
§ 96.52 (REPEALED)
§ 96.53 PLACEMENT OF EXPANSION JOINTS; COMPOSITION; SIZE.
   Expansion joints shall be placed in sidewalks at intervals not to exceed 25
feet. The preformed filler to be used in the expansion joints shall be composed
of a durable elastic material, which is considered the typical and common
material used and accepted in the concrete industry for this purpose. The
thickness of joints shall not be less than one-half inch. The length of joints
shall be equal to the sidewalk’s width and the depth shall not be less than the
thickness of the sidewalk. Preformed filler of one-half inch thickness shall be
placed where the sidewalk joins with any curb or curb gutter.
(`79 Code, § 14-49) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99; Am. Ord. 01-2017, passed 1-
24-17) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.54 DEPOSITING OF CONCRETE; EDGERS; JOINTS.
   The subgrade of a sidewalk shall be compacted and then wet down with water,
and, or lined with construction grade plastic, before the concrete is placed
therein. The concrete shall be placed within the forms upon the wet, and, or
lined subgrade to such a depth that after being compacted it shall be to the
full thickness required to fill the form. It shall be leveled off and tamped
sufficiently. It shall then be finished by means of a wood or metal float. The
finished surface may be of a smooth, or light broom finish. The edges shall be
rounded with an edger having a minimum radius of one quarter of an inch.
Traverse joints shall be cut with a saw, or with a jointer having a minimum
radius of one quarter of an inch. Traverse joints must have a minimum depth of
one half inch at intervals not greater than the width of the sidewalk being
constructed. Each concreted area between traverse joints will be considered a
"section" of sidewalk. No pouring or finishing of concrete shall be done during
freezing weather. Whenever there is danger that the temperature will reach the
freezing point a covering material must be used to prevent freezing of the
concrete before it is thoroughly cured.
(`79 Code, § 14-50) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
 Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.55 DRIVEWAYS ACROSS SIDEWALKS.
   Where driveways are to be built across the sidewalk space they shall conform
to the sidewalk grade and shall be six inches minimum in depth of the same
quality and material as specified for walks, and must be re-enforced with wire
and/or steel re-rod of the type normally and typically used and accepted in the
concrete construction industry.
(`79 Code, § 14-51) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.56 ALLEY CROSSINGS ACROSS SIDEWALKS.
   The grade and slope, thickness and type of material used, finish, and all
other decisions concerning these areas will be the responsibility of the Street
Department Superintendent.
(`79 Code, § 14-52) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.57 INSPECTION OF MATERIALS AND SUPERVISION OF WORK.
   All sidewalks made new or repaired shall be done under the supervision of
the Building Commissioner who shall inspect and report on the same before the
approval and acceptance by the Board of Public Works.
('79 Code, § 14-53) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.58 CUTTING OF SIDEWALK SECTION.
   No sidewalk section made at the time of the original construction shall be
cut in order to save a part of the original section at the time of repair, but
rather the entire section shall be replaced.
(`79 Code, § 14-54) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.59 ALLOCATION OF DIRT AND OLD MATERIAL; DUTY OF CONTRACTOR WITH REFERENCE
TO GRADE STAKES.
   Whenever any sidewalk shall have been ordered built, repaired or replaced,
the dirt removed may be used by the city in the improvement of the street on
which building or repairs are being made, or on streets, alleys, or public
places where the grading of such is of the same general plan. In case the city
does not desire to use the dirt, the property owner may remove it together with
all old material within five days from the completion of the work. In case the
property owner fails to do so, the contractor shall proceed to remove the
material and the cost thereof shall be collected as part of the cost of the
improvement. It shall be the duty of the contractor, at all times while
building, repairing, relaying or replacing any sidewalk to see to it that the
stakes indicating the grade of the sidewalk have not been tampered with.
(`79 Code, § 14-55) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.60 TAMPERING WITH GRADE STAKES.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to tamper with or in any
way interfere with any grade stake for any sidewalk or to deface or disturb any
such walk while in process of construction.
(`79 Code, § 14-56) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.61 PRELIMINARY RESOLUTION OF IMPROVEMENT REQUIRED.
   Whenever the Board of Public Works and Safety desires to construct or
improve a sidewalk, it shall adopt a preliminary resolution of improvement, and
such other plans and information as may be required by law.
(`79 Code, § 14-66) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Statutory reference:
   Preliminary resolution and other matters to be adopted by Board, see I.C.
36-9-36-4
§ 96.62 SERVICE OF NOTICE OF PRELIMINARY RESOLUTION.
   A notice of the preliminary resolution required by §
96.61 shall be served upon the property owners affected in the manner provided
by law.
(`79 Code, § 14-67) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Statutory reference:
   Service of notice of preliminary resolution, see I.C. 36-9-36-8
§ 96.63 ORDER TO REPAIR OR REPLACE SIDEWALK.
   The Board of Public Works and Safety may, by final resolution order any
property owner to repair
or replace any sidewalk by serving upon him a copy of such resolution in the
manner provided by law.
(`79 Code, § 14-68) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-9-36-17
§ 96.64 SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS BY CITY.
   If any property owner should fail to make the sidewalk improvements required
in the notice served pursuant to §
96.63 within 30 days from the date of the notice, the Board of Public Works and
Safety may cause it to be done, or to grant an extension of time for the same.
(`79 Code, § 14-69) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-9-36-17(d)
§ 96.65 LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY BENEFITTED.
   If the city should construct or repair any sidewalk pursuant to the
provisions of §
96.64, the costs thereof shall be a lien against the property benefited in the
manner provided by law.
(`79 Code, § 14-70) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Statutory reference:
   Lien allowed, see I.C. 36-9-36-40
   VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 96.75 VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   On property owned by the city, at any corner formed by intersecting
streets, it shall be unlawful to install, set out or maintain or to allow the
installation, setting out or maintenance of any sign, hedge, shrubbery, natural
growth or other obstruction to the view, higher than three and one-half feet
above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection, within that
triangular area between the property line and a diagonal line joining points on
the property lines 25 feet from the point of their intersection, or in the case
of rounded corners, the triangular area between the tangents to the curve and a
diagonal line joining points on the tangent 25 feet from the point of their
intersection. The tangents referred to are those at the beginning and at the
end of the curve at the corner.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) shall not apply to permanent buildings,
public utility poles, trees trimmed to the trunk to a line at least eight feet
above the level of the intersection, saplings, or plant species of open growth
habits and not planted in the form of a hedge, which are so planted and trimmed
as to leave at all seasons a clear and unobstructed cross-view, supporting
members of appurtenances to permanent buildings existing on the date this
chapter becomes effective, official warning signs or signals, places where the
contour of the ground is such that there can be no cross-visibility at the
intersection; or to signs mounted ten feet or more above the ground and whose
supports do not constitute an obstruction.
(`79 Code, § 14-82) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.76 ENFORCEMENT
   The enforcement of this chapter shall be under the direction of the Building
Commissioner, who shall investigate violations, give such notices as may be
required to enforce it, and perform such other duties in connection with the
enforcement of this chapter as may be required.
(`79 Code, § 14-83) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.77 ABATEMENT.
   Any obstruction maintained in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a
nuisance, and upon failure to abate within 20 days after the posting upon the
premises of notice to abate the nuisance signed by the Chief of Police, the
Chief may enter upon the premises and remove or eliminate the obstruction,
require its abatement, authorize its removal by the proper officers, provide
for the punishment of the person causing or suffering the obstruction, assess
the expenses of its removal against such person, and provide for collecting
such expenses either by causing them to be placed on the tax duplicate or by
suit.
(`79 Code, § 14-84) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.78 PREEXISTING OBSTRUCTION.
   No obstruction to cross-visibility shall be deemed to be excepted from the
application of this chapter because of its being in existence at the time of
the adoption thereof, unless expressly exempted by the terms thereof.
(`79 Code, § 14-85) (Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
   SIDEWALKS REQUIRED
§ 96.80 NEW BUILDINGS.
   No person shall construct upon any lot or tract within the city limits any
new dwelling house or building without providing for and constructing for the
use of pedestrians a concrete sidewalk not less than five feet in width, and
within the adjacent public right-of-way and parallel and adjacent to the
property lines of such lot or tract. Such sidewalk shall be constructed
according to plans and specifications as defined in the city code. The
specifications as defined in this code shall apply to all properties within the
city unless the topography of the lot or tract together with the topography of
adjacent lots or tract and the nature of the street right-of-way make it
impractical for the construction of a sidewalk as required. (1999)
(Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99; Am. Ord. 01-2017, passed 1-24-17)
§ 96.81 WAIVER - NEW BUILDING.
   In the event such dwelling house or building is to be constructed upon a lot
or tract upon which such a sidewalk presently exists, the requirement for new
construction shall be waived. (1999)
(Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.82 BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any dwelling
house or building within the city limits unless such building permit
application provides for the construction of new sidewalks or shows adequate
existing sidewalks upon the lot or tract which such new building is to be
erected. (1999)
(Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.83 APPEAL.
   Any person who considers himself aggrieved may apply to the Board of Zoning
Appeals of the city and after notice and hearing as provided by those sections
and by the rules and regulations of the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Board may
waive the provisions of those sections upon the showing of the following.
(Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.84 DETERMINATE VARIANCE - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION DEFERRED.
   (A)   Any person subject to the requirements or any person living outside of
the city limits but within the zoning boundaries who believes it impractical to
construct a sidewalk on the lot or tract at present may apply to the Board of
Zoning Appeals for a variance that is determinate with respect to the criteria
for variance and the time period during which such criteria are in effect, and
with respect to the time period during which the variance is effective. The
Board, after notice and hearing may grant a variance if construction of
sidewalks appears impractical based upon, but not limited to, the following
considerations:
      (1)   The adjacent lot or tracts are at present undeveloped, but it
appears that at some future date these lots or tracts will be developed,
increasing the need for sidewalks for the protection and convenience of
pedestrians; or
      (2)   The location of the lot or tract is such that the present
pedestrian traffic does not warrant the construction of sidewalks, but it
appears that in the future the pedestrian traffic may increase; or
      (3)   Uniformity of development of the area would best be served by
deferring sidewalk construction on the lot or tract until some future date.
   (B)   In the event that the Board authorizes a determinate variance, such
variance shall continue in effect until the date at which the Board shall set
to reconsider variances granted under the authority of this section. All such
variances which were granted by the Board shall expire at that time unless an
extension is granted. Should no extension be applied for, or the Board denies
such application for extension, the owner of the lot or tract shall be required
to construct a sidewalk on the lot or tract at that time.
   (C)   Any person who has been granted a determinate variance by the Board
and subsequently transfers to another party any recordable interest in the lot
or tract shall cause such conveyance to be made subject to the variance and
cause the variance to be noted on the instrument of conveyance to be recorded.
   (D)   In the event a variance is granted a five foot easement for future
construction of a five foot sidewalk shall be provided. (1999)
(Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.85 REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS - DUTY OF ADJACENT OWNER.
   Every owner or occupant of any house or other building, and any owner of any
vacant lot within the city, shall keep the sidewalks in front of such house,
building or vacant lot in repair. Any person neglecting or refusing to comply
with the provisions of this section, or neglecting or refusing to put the
sidewalk in front of any house, building or vacant lot owned or occupied by him
in repair after having received notice from the Building Commissioner to do so
shall be subject to general penalty provisions of this code. (1999)
(Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
§ 96.86 ADA REQUIREMENTS.
   All sidewalks installed at intersections after the passage of this chapter
are to be handicap accessible based on ADA requirements. (1999)
(Ord. 02-1999, passed 2-23-99)
SNOW REMOVAL CONDITIONS
§ 96.90 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   When, in the opinion of the City Street Department Superintendent and
the Mayor, the actual or expected precipitation of snow will create hazardous
or dangerous roadway conditions for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, the Mayor
shall have the authority to declare a snow removal condition.
   (B)   A snow removal condition shall be declared by the Mayor by issuing a
media release to the local radio station and news media.
   (C)   The snow removal condition shall continue in full force and effect
until the Mayor declares it to be over by issuing a media release to the local
radio station and news media.
(Ord. 21-2001, passed 11-13-01)
§ 96.91 PARKING RESTRICTIONS DURING SNOW REMOVAL PERIODS.
   When a snow removal condition has been declared, the following traffic
regulations will be in effect for all city streets:
   (A)   All regular parking restrictions will remain in full force and effect
on streets where parking is only permitted on one side and areas of no parking.
   (B)   On even-numbered days parking will only be permitted on the side of
the street with even-numbered street addresses.
   (C)   On odd-numbered days parking will be permitted only on the side of the
street with odd-numbered street addresses.
   (D)   These restrictions will remain in force until the snow removal
condition has been declared over or the snow has been removed from curb to curb
for the entire length of the street.
(Ord. 21-2001, passed 11-13-01)
§ 96.92 REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
   The Police Department is authorized to remove, or have removed, vehicles
from a city street to the nearest garage or place of safety, including another
place on the street under the following circumstances or conditions:
   (A)   If a person attempts to or does congest, obstruct or unduly restrict a
free, clear and unimpeded movement of traffic by parking, unparking, stopping,
standing or driving his registered vehicle.
   (B)   If a person should fail to remove his registered vehicle from any
street or alley within the city after a 12-hour period after the declaration of
a snow removal emergency.
(Ord. 21-2001, passed 11-13-01)
§ 96.93 CLEARING SNOW AND ICE FROM SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   The occupant and/or owner of any premises, and the owner of any
unoccupied premises, are required to keep the sidewalks in front of or adjacent
to such premises cleared, so far as is practicable and reasonable, from snow
and ice in order to facilitate pedestrian use of such sidewalks. The word
“occupant,” as used in this section, shall be deemed to mean the person
occupying for business, residence or other purposes the first floor of any
building situated on the premises so occupied; and if the first floor of any
building is not occupied, then such premises shall be deemed and held to be
unoccupied and the owner or lessee of the entire premises shall be required to
keep the sidewalks in front of or adjacent to the premises reasonably cleared
from snow and ice.
   (B)   In case snow or ice has accumulated or fallen on any sidewalk or is
continuing to fall after 7:00 p.m., it shall be removed, if practical to do so,
or a sufficient path be cleared by the occupant or owner within 24 hours. If
any snow or ice has fallen or accumulated on any sidewalk after 7:00 a.m., it
shall be removed or a path cleared by the occupant or owner within 24 hours, if
the snow has ceased to fall by that time. In either of the foregoing events,
the occupant and/or owner shall be deemed and held to have complied with the
provisions of this section.
   (C)   The city may remove any accumulate snow or ice from any property at
the expense of the owner thereof if the owner has failed to do so within five
days after service of the required notice to do so.
   (D)   Whenever there exists any accumulate snow or ice on any property, the
city may order the owner to remove them by sending him a notice to do so, or if
the owner cannot be found, by posting the notice on the property.
   (E)   A fine of $50 shall be imposed for violation of this chapter.
   (F)   If the city shall be required to remove any accumulated snow or ice
pursuant to this section a $100 per hour charge shall be imposed.
   (G)   If any property owner fails to pay the expenses incurred in removing
any accumulate snow or ice from his property pursuant to this chapter for a
period of 30 days, the Clerk-Treasurer shall certify the amount due from such
person to the County Auditor and the amount of such charges shall be placed
upon the tax duplicate by the County Auditor and collected as taxes are
collected.
(Ord. 06-2007, passed 5-8-07)
CHAPTER 97: TREES; VEGETATION
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Tree classification
   
97.02   Tree species to be planted
   
97.03   Spacing of street trees
   
97.04   Distance of trees from curbs and sidewalks
   
97.05   Distance of trees from street corners and fire hydrants
   
97.06   Distance of trees from utilities
   
97.07   Public tree care
   
97.08   Tree topping
   
97.09   Pruning of trees overhanging streets or right-of-way
   
97.10   Replacement of trees removed
   
97.11   Removal of trees by private citizen prohibited
   
97.12   Removal of stumps
   
97.13   Tree planting by private citizens
City Tree Board
   
97.25   Creation and establishment of City Tree Board
   
97.26   (Reserved)
   
97.27   Compensation
   
97.28   Duties and responsibilities
   
97.29   Interference with Board
   
97.30   Board decisions subject to review by Common Council
Weeds
   
97.40   Removal of weeds and rank vegetation by city
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 TREE CLASSIFICATION.
   All trees located in public areas of the city shall be classified as
follows:
   STREET TREES. All trees, shrubs, bushes, or other woody vegetation located
on land lying between the property lines on either side of all streets within
the city.
   PARK TREES. All trees, shrubs, bushes, or other woody vegetation located in
public parks or other areas owned and maintained by the city.
(‘79 Code, § 16-1) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10)
§ 97.02 TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
   (A)   Large trees (50 feet minimum).
      (1)   Marmo Freeman Maple.
      (2)   Sugar Maple (Legacy, Green Mountain or Commemoration).
      (3)   Oak (Bur, White or Red).
      (4)   American Beech (Samara tin).
      (5)   Sweetgum.
   (B)   Medium trees (30 feet to 40 feet).
      (1)   Ginko (male only).
      (2)   American Hornbeam.
      (3)   Buckeye.
   (C)   Small trees (Up to 30 feet).
      (1)   Traditional serviceberry.
      (2)   Winter King Green Hawthorne.
      (3)   Prairifire Crabapple.
      (4)   Canada Red Flowering Cherry.
   (D)   Trees to avoid planting in city tree lawn.
      (1)   Lombardy Poplar - fast growing subject to canker disease and die
within 15 years.
      (2)   White Birch - Bronze birch borer, life span ten years.
      (3)   Mountain Ash - short life span, susceptible to disease.
      (4)   Sycamore - too messy, suffers Anthracnose.
      (5)   Elms - Dutch Elm disease.
      (6)   Pin Oak - Iron Chlorosis.
      (7)   Silver Maple - too weak.
      (8)   Willow - invasive root system, requires too much water.
      (9)   Pines, spruce, evergreen - obstruct view of street.
      (10)   Russian Olive - Stem canker disease.
      (11)   River Birch - requires too much water.
(‘79 Code, § 16-2) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10; Am. Ord. 03-2014, passed 5-27-14; Am.
Ord. 10-2017, passed 10-24-17)
§ 97.03 SPACING OF STREET TREES.
   (A)   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three size
classes listed in §
97.02, and no street trees may be planted closer together than the following:
      (1)   Small trees, 25 feet;
      (2)   Medium trees, 30 feet;
      (3)   Large trees, 40 feet.
   (B)   Any exception must have written permission from the City Tree Board.
(‘79 Code, § 16-3) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.04 DISTANCE OF TREES FROM CURBS AND SIDEWALKS.
   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will
be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in §
97.02, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the
following:
   (A)   Small trees, two feet;
   (B)   Medium trees, three feet;
   (C)   Large trees, four feet.
(‘79 Code, § 16-4) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.05 DISTANCE OF TREES FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No street tree shall be planted within 35 feet of any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street
tree shall be planted within ten feet of a fire hydrant.
('79 Code, § 16-5) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.06 DISTANCE OF TREES FROM UTILITIES.
   No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in §
97.02 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility
wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer
line, transmission line or other utility.
('79 Code, § 16-6) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.07 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets and public grounds, as
may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry
and beauty of such public grounds.
   (B)   The City Tree Board may remove or cause to be removed any tree or part
thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which, by reason of its nature, is
injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other
public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insects or other
pests.
   (C)   The city or public utilities may trim or remove any trees which
endanger the public, inhibit the passage on city streets, or interfere with
utilities and public infrastructure if the Mayor or Operations Manager
reasonably believes that public safety requires action prior to the next
regularly scheduled city Tree Board meeting. Topping and the severe cutting
back of limbs may be allowed under emergency conditions. the city may act
without prior notification to the property owner in such circumstances.
(‘79 Code, § 16-7) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 13-2000, passed 7-11-00; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10; Am.
Ord. 11-2012, passed 8-28-12)
§ 97.08 TREE TOPPING.
   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property.
TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from
this section at the determination of the City Tree Board.
(‘79 Code, § 16-8) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.09 PRUNING OF TREES OVERHANGING STREETS OR RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   The city shall have the authority to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the spread of light along the street from a
streetlight or interferes with the visibility of any traffic, traffic-control
device or sign. There shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of
the street or sidewalk.
(‘79 Code, § 16-9) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10)
§ 97.10 REPLACEMENT OF TREES REMOVED.
   The Tree Board shall have the authority to replace any tree removed pursuant
to §
97.07. Any tree replaced shall comply with §
97.02 Tree Species to be Planted and §
97.03 Spacing of Street Trees.
(Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10)
§ 97.11 REMOVAL OF TREES BY PRIVATE CITIZENS PROHIBITED.
   Private citizens shall not remove any street trees without the written
authorization from the Tree Board. Street trees removed without authorization
shall constitute a violation of this chapter subject to the penalty set forth
in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.12 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of
the ground.
(‘79 Code, § 16-11) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10)
§ 97.13 TREE PLANTING BY PRIVATE CITIZENS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit the planting of street
trees by adjacent property owners or prevent the planting of trees in park
areas or other public areas of the city by individuals; however, any street
trees shall be planted only in accordance with §§
97.02 through
97.06, and any park trees shall be planted only by special written permission
of the City Park Board, which special permission shall designate the areas and
types of trees to be planted.
(‘79 Code, § 16-12) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
CITY TREE BOARD
§ 97.25 CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY TREE BOARD.
   There is created a City Tree Board. The City Sidewalk and Tree Commission
created under §
70.05 shall serve as the City Tree Board.
(‘79 Code, § 16-21) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10; Am. Ord. 05-2019, passed 7-23-19; Am.
Ord. 46-2024, passed 11-26-24)
§ 97.26 (RESERVED).
§ 97.27 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Tree Board shall serve without compensation.
(‘79 Code, § 16-23) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10)
§ 97.28 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Tree Board to
study and investigate the conditions of trees and shrubs along the streets and
to carry out any beautification project regarding plantings that will enhance
the community. At appropriate times the Tree Board shall prepare and submit to
the Common Council any appropriate plans for planting and maintenance of street
trees and shrubs within the city and to make any appropriate recommendations
for action. When requested by the Common Council, the Board shall consider,
investigate and make recommendations to the Common Council upon any special
matter or question coming within its area.
   (B)   The Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized to take any action
authorized to be taken by the Tree Board, subject to the same review under §
97.30.
(‘79 Code, § 16-24) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10; Am. Ord. 11-2012, passed 8-28-12; Am.
Ord. 03-2015, passed 1-27-15)
§ 97.29 INTERFERENCE WITH BOARD.
   Any person interfering with the work of the Tree Board or any of its agents
or who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty
set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(‘79 Code, § 16-25) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.30 BOARD DECISIONS SUBJECT TO REVIEW BY COMMON COUNCIL.
   All actions or decisions taken or made by the Tree Board shall be subject to
review by the Common Council. Any citizen may appeal any ruling or order made
by the Tree Board to the Common Council. In the event of any such appeal, the
Common Council shall hear the matter and make a final decision as to any matter
to be determined or action to be taken.
(‘79 Code, § 16-26) (Ord. 12-1990, passed 5-22-90; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 8-
26-97; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed 12-14-10)
WEEDS
§ 97.40 REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND RANK VEGETATION BY CITY.
   (A)   The Rochester Police Department shall be responsible for the
administration of this section.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
      AGRICULTURAL CROPS, INCLUDING HAY AND PASTURE. Shall not be considered as
weeds or other rank vegetation.
      OWNER or LANDOWNER. That individual, corporation, partnership, or other
entity, recorded in the records of the Auditor of Fulton County as the owner of
record for the purpose of being responsible for the payment of property taxes
upon the real estate where weeds or rank vegetation are found to exist.
      RANK VEGETATION. Includes any vegetative growth found growing profusely
and unmanageably in excess of the height restrictions herein provided.
      WEED. Includes any deleterious, unhealthful or noxious vegetative growth
found growing within the city; or any tree, grass, shrub, flower, or vine;
which, from an aesthetic or functional viewpoint, is incompatible with
vegetation found in the vicinity, or which presents a danger to public health
and safety, or which create by their presence a nuisance to surrounding
properties.
   (C)   Violation of this section shall occur when weeds or rank vegetation in
a given location are found to exist in an average height in excess of eight
inches.
   (D)   Owners of real property within the city are required to cut and remove
weeds and other rank vegetation growing upon their property. The owner’s
responsibility shall not be extinguished by reason of real property being
occupied by tenants.
      (1)   Should the owner fail to cut and remove such weeds and rank
vegetation, or fail to cause such cutting and removal to be accomplished, and
should such weeds and rank vegetation exceed the height restriction set out in
division (C) above, the Department shall issue a written notice to the owner
ordering such cutting and removal. Such notices shall be served upon the
landowner by sending such notice to the landowner by certified mail, first
class mail or the equivalent service permitted under I.C. 1-1-7-1 addressed to
the owner’s last known address by a sworn officer of the city. The notice shall
specify the vegetation to be removed and shall establish time parameters for
completion of the cutting and removal. In no case shall the time allowed to
bring the property into compliance be less than five days from the date upon
which the notice is mailed.
      (2)   If an initial notice of the violation of this section was provided
by certified mail, first class mail or equivalent service the city may also
include a continuous abatement notice posted at the property at the time of
abatement instead of requiring additional notice by certified mail. A
continuous abatement notice serves as notice to the real property owner that
each subsequent violation during the same year for which the initial notice of
the violation was provided may be abated by the city or its contractors.
   (E)   If the landowner fails to cut and remove the vegetation within the
time prescribed in the written notice, the city, or contractors under contract
to the city to provide cutting and removal services, may enter upon real
property to abate the violations of this section found to exist upon the real
property, as described in the notice letter previously issued.
   (F)   In cases where cutting and removal of weeds or other rank vegetation
is accomplished by the city, or by contractors under contract to the city, the
Department in charge of administering this section shall make a certified
statement of the actual cost incurred by the city to abate the violation. Such
costs may include charges for the removal and for administrative costs related
thereto. The statement shall be delivered to the owner of the property by
certified mail, addressed to the landowner’s last known address, and the owner
shall pay the amount so charged to the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (G)   If the landowner fails to pay the amount within ten days after
receiving the statement of costs referenced in division (F) above, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall certify to the County Auditor the amount of the bill, plus any
additional administrative costs incurred in the certification. The Auditor
shall place the total amount certified on the tax duplicate for the property
affected, and the total amount, including accrued interest, shall be collected
as delinquent taxes are collected and shall be disbursed to the general fund of
the city.
   (H)   Should any notice or statement required to be served upon a landowner
by certified mail under this section be returned as undeliverable or refused,
the city may cause the same to be served by a law enforcement officer of the
city, who shall make his or her return upon such service. The provisions for
service of required notices and statements set out in this division are
supplemental to the provisions set out elsewhere in this section, and are
intended to authorize the use of personal service at the city’s option where
reason exists to believe that personal service may be achieved on the landowner
after service by mail has proved to be unsuccessful. Nothing in this division
shall be construed as requiring the city to attempt such service as a
precondition to abating the violation, provided that the attempt to make
service by certified mail has been made.
(Ord. 08-2016, passed 8-23-16)
CHAPTER 98: LOITERING OR PARKING ON OR NEAR PROTECTED PROPERTY
Section
   
98.01   Definition
   
98.02   Blocking entrances prohibited
   
98.03   Prohibited noise
   
98.04   Repeatedly driving through parking area, dangerous riding, prohibited
   
98.05   Prohibited entrance of property
   
98.06   Liability of parent/legal guardian
   
98.07   Posting of signs
 
   
98.99   Penalty
§ 98.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this section, PROTECTED PROPERTY is defined as any
business, church, organization, city property or other property accessed by the
public (excluding parks).
(Ord. 39-1998, passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 03-2017, passed 7-25-17; Am. Ord. 12-
2017, passed 11-28-17)
§ 98.02 BLOCKING ENTRANCES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be a violation of this section to block entrances or exits to any
parking area providing access to a protected property, whether by vehicle,
persons, or barricades, in any manner that causes difficulty in entering or
exiting the parking area. This section does not apply to blocked entrances or
exits resulting from municipal or private repairs on or near a protected
property, or blocked entrances or exits otherwise created at the proper
direction of the owner or manager of a protected property.
(Ord. 39-1998, passed 9-8-98)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.03 PROHIBITED NOISE.
   It shall be a violation of this section to create, directly or indirectly,
any loud, excessive, or other unseemly noise on or near the premises of any
protected property.
(Ord. 39-1998, passed 9-8-98)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.04 REPEATEDLY DRIVING THROUGH PARKING AREA, DANGEROUS RIDING, PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to drive a
motor vehicle repeatedly through any parking area providing access to a
protected property without transacting business.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to ride a
bicycle, skateboard, in-line skates, scooter, or other wheeled conveyance on a
protected property or private property in a manner other than for
transportation, including stunts, tricks, performance riding, or any manner
that presents increased danger, risk or hazard to the rider or bystanders
beyond normal bicycle transportation, without the permission of the property
owner.
(Ord. 39-1998, passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 03-2017, passed 7-25-17; Am. Ord. 12-
2017, passed 11-28-17) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.05 PROHIBITED ENTRANCE OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to enter on or near a
protected property, unless the person does so for the purpose of conducting
business or does so with the consent of the owner or manager of the protected
property.
(Ord. 39-1998, passed 9-8-98)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.06 LIABILITY OF PARENT/LEGAL GUARDIAN.
   A parent or legal guardian is deemed to violate this chapter when a child
under the age of 17 residing with that parent or legal guardian engages in a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 39-1998, passed 9-8-98)
§ 98.07 POSTING OF SIGNS.
   It shall be the duty of the owner or manager of a protected property to
conspicuously post at least one sign notice displaying the fact that the
protected property is regulated by the terms of this section.
(Ord. 39-1998, passed 9-8-98)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating the terms of this section shall be subject to a fine
not exceeding $15 for a first offense or $25 for any second or subsequent
offense.
(Ord. 39-1998, passed 9-8-98)
CHAPTER 99: UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Section
   
99.01   Definitions
   
99.02   Title
   
99.03   Public nuisance
   
99.04   Adoption of state law by reference
   
99.05   Authority
   
99.06   Order and notice
   
99.07   Hearing and review
   
99.08   Emergency orders
   
99.09   Manners of performance
   
99.10   Costs
   
99.11   No work without permission
   
99.12   Inspection warrants
   
99.13   Violations
 
   
99.99   Penalty
§ 99.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The City Building Commissioner or authorized
designee.
   HEARING AUTHORITY. The Board of Public Works and Safety shall serve as the
hearing authority for disputes from the rules and regulations set forth in this
chapter.
   SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. Any right in real property that may be
affected in a substantial way by actions authorized by this chapter, including
a fee interest, a life estate interest, a future interest, a present possessory
interest, or an equitable interest of a contract purchaser.
   UNSAFE BUILDING or STRUCTURE. Any building or structure or part of a
building or structure that is:
      (1)   In an impaired structural condition that makes it unsafe to person
or property;
      (2)   A fire hazard;
      (3)   A hazard to public health;
      (4)   A public nuisance;
      (5)   Dangerous to person or property because of a violation of a statute
or ordinance concerning building condition or maintenance;
      (6)   Vacant and not maintained in a manner that would allow human
habitation, occupancy or use under the requirements of a statute or an
ordinance; or
      (7)   In any of the conditions or possesses any of the defects described
below, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that life,
health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered:
         (a)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of
exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide
safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;
         (b)   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway
or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as
to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;
         (c)   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof
due to all dead and live loads is more than one and one-half times the working
stress or stresses allowed in the Building Code for new buildings of similar
structure purpose or location;
         (d)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire,
earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the
structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before
such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the Building Code
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;
         (e)   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely
to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property;
         (f)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance
or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the
Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location
without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the Building Code for such
buildings;
         (g)   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or
settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have
materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case
of similar new construction;
         (h)   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof
because of:
            1.   Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
            2.   Faulty construction;
            3.   The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the
ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;
            4.   The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or
            5.   Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely
collapse;
         (i)   Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any
portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being
used;
         (j)   Whenever the exterior walls, or other vertical structural
members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the
base;
         (k)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation,
shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members,
or 50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, enclosing or
outside walls or coverings;
         (l)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire,
wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to
become:
            1.   An attractive nuisance to children, or
            2.    A harbor for trespassers;
         (m)   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists
or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition
applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations
of this city, as specified in the Building Code, the Uniform Building Code, One
and Two Family Building Code or any law or ordinance of this state or city
relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings;
         (n)    Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not
erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any non-
supporting part, member or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting part,
member or portion less than 66% of the strength, fire resisting qualities or
characteristics or weather resisting qualities or characteristics required by
law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and
occupancy in the same location;
         (o)   Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities, or otherwise is determined by the City Building Commissioner to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to
cause sickness or disease;
         (p)   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections
or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Chief of the Fire
Department or the City Building Commissioner to be a fire hazard;
         (q)   Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to
constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity
jurisprudence;
         (r)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
   UNSAFE PREMISES. Both an unsafe building and tract of real property on which
the building is located.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 9-25-01; Am. Ord. 06-2023, passed 7-25-23)
§ 99.02 TITLE.
   This chapter, and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto, shall be
known as the "Unsafe Building Ordinance of the City of Rochester, Indiana," may
be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as this chapter.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 9-25-01)
§ 99.03 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   All buildings or portions thereof within the city which are determined after
inspection by the City Building Commissioner to be unsafe as defined in this
chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by
repair, rehabilitation, demolition and removal.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 9-25-01)
§ 99.04 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28, now existing or as hereafter amended, is
adopted by reference as a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 9-25-01)
§ 99.05 AUTHORITY.
   The City Building Commissioner shall be authorized to administer and to
proceed under the provisions of this chapter in ordering the repair or removal
of any buildings found to be unsafe as specified therein or as specified
hereafter.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 9-25-01)
§ 99.06 ORDER AND NOTICE.
   (A)   The City Building Commissioner is authorized to issue an order
relative to any unsafe premises, including:
      (1)   Vacating of an unsafe building;
      (2)   Sealing an unsafe building;
      (3)   Extermination of vermin in and about the unsafe premises;
      (4)   Removal of trash, debris, or fire hazardous material in and about
the unsafe premises;
      (5)   Repair or rehabilitation of an unsafe building to bring it into
compliance with standards for building condition or maintenance required for
human habitation, occupancy, or use by a statute, a rule adopted under I.C. 4-
22-2, or an ordinance;
      (6)   Removal of part of an unsafe building;
      (7)   Removal of an unsafe building, commonly known as demolition; and
      (8)   Requiring, for an unsafe building that will be sealed for a period
of more than 90 days:
         (a)   Sealing against intrusion by unauthorized persons and the
effects of weather;
         (b)   Exterior improvements to make the building compatible in
appearance with other buildings in the area; and
         (c)   Continuing maintenance and upkeep of the building and premises
in accordance with standards established by ordinance.
   (B)   The order shall contain information required by I.C. 36-7-9-5.
   (C)   An order requiring sealing a building under I.C. 36-7-9-5(a) requires
notification to each person holding any fee interest or life estate; for other
orders under I.C. 36-7-9-5 each person having a substantial property interest
in the unsafe premises must be notified. Notification procedure shall be as
stated in I.C. 36-7-9-25.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 9-25-01)
§ 99.07 HEARING AND REVIEW.
   If required, a hearing and review shall be provided as set forth in I.C. 36-
7-9-7 and I.C. 36-7-9-8.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 9-25-01)
§ 99.08 EMERGENCY ORDERS.
   Emergency action in order to protect life, safety or property may be taken
without issuing an order or giving notice, but shall be taken in accordance
with I.C. 36-7-9-9. The action is limited to removal of any immediate danger.
The city may recover costs of the action by filing suit in circuit or superior
court against persons a holding fee interest or life estate in the premises at
the time. As an alternative, the city may bring a civil action under I.C. 36-7-
9-17 and I.C. 36-7-9-22, alleging the existence of unsafe premises presenting
an immediate danger to the community sufficient to warrant emergency action.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 9-25-01)
§ 99.09 MANNERS OF PERFORMANCE.
   Manners of performance of work including bids and notification are to be in
accordance with I.C. 36-7-9-12. All work for the reconstruction, repair, or
demolition of buildings and other structures shall be performed in a good
workmanlike manner according to the accepted standards and practices in the
trade. The provisions of the building laws, as defined in I.C. 22-12-1-3,
adopted as rules of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission shall be
considered standard and acceptable practice for all matters covered by this
chapter or orders issued pursuant to this chapter by the City Building
Commissioner.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 9-25-01)
§ 99.10 COSTS.
   Costs for work performed under this chapter are the responsibility of the
fee interest or life estate holders in the unsafe premises. Costs shall be
determined on the basis of the factors listed in I.C. 36-7-9-12. Unpaid costs
are subject to the procedures in I.C. 36-79-13 and I.C. 36-7-9-13.5, and may
result in a judgment, special tax assessment, and/or lien on real or personal
property or persons responsible for said costs.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 9-25-01)
§ 99.11 NO WORK WITHOUT PERMISSION.
   No person, firm, or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or
occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises, or
cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or any order issued by the City Building
Commissioner.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 9-25-01)
§ 99.12 INSPECTION WARRANTS.
   The City Building Commissioner may obtain an inspection warrant from the
court in cases when the owner or possessors refuse the City Building
Commissioner permission to inspect as provided in I.C. 36-7-9-16.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 9-25-01)
§ 99.13 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to:
   (A)   Remain in, use, or enter a building in violation of this chapter;
   (B)    Knowingly interfere with or delay the carrying out of an order made
under this section;
   (C)   Knowingly obstruct, damage, or interfere with persons engaged or
property used in performing any work or duty under this chapter; or
   (D)   Fail to comply with I.C. 36-7-9-27 regarding information on transfers
of property interest.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 9-25-01)
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other penalty is
otherwise specifically provided shall be fined not more than $1,000. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or
continues.
(Ord. 14-2001, passed 9-25-01)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   AMUSEMENTS
      
111.   AUCTIONS
      
112.   JUNK DEALERS
      
113.   PAWNBROKERS
      
114.   TAXICABS
      
115.   TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
      
116.   GARAGE AND YARD SALES
      
117.   ADULT USE STANDARDS
      
118.   STREET SOLICITATION PERMIT
      
119.   COMMERCIAL USE OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to license and regulate businesses generally, see I.C. 36-8-2-
10
   Power of city to charge license fees, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(5)
CHAPTER 110: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
110.01   License required; fee; exception
Statutory reference:
   Regulation by state Fire Marshall, see I.C. 22-14-3.
   Power of city to regulate and license fairs, sporting events, and the like,
see I.C. 36-8-2-10
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, engage or maintain any
of the following businesses without a license from the Clerk-Treasurer and
without paying to the Clerk-Treasurer the indicated license fee:
      (1)   Pool, billiard or card tables:
         (a)   First table   $5
         (b)   For each additional table   $3
      (2)   Bowling alleys:
         (a)   First alley   $5
         (b)   For each additional alley   $3
      (3)   Theaters   $25
      (4)   Skating rinks   $50
      (5)   Circuses, carnivals or other similar amusements or shows, per
day   $25
   (B)   Unless otherwise indicated, all such licenses shall be obtained and
all such fees paid, annually.
   (C)   No carnival or circus sponsored by a local civic or charitable
organization shall be required to pay the license fee required by division (A).
('79 Code, § 7-16)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 111: AUCTIONS
Section
   
111.01   License required; exceptions
   
111.02   Application; notification of Police Chief
   
111.03   License fee; term of temporary license
   
111.04   Fraud and misrepresentation
   
111.05   False bidders, cappers and puffers
   
111.06   Use of mechanical instruments prohibited
   
111.07   Sunday auctions
   
111.08   Revocation of license upon noncompliance
§ 111.01 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispose of, offer for
sale at public auction or cause to permit to be sold, disposed of or offered
for sale at public auction any goods, merchandise, or other wares without a
license issued by the Clerk-Treasurer
   (B)   The provisions of this division (A) above shall not apply to local
charitable or civic organizations, nor shall it apply to the sale of any
property under legal process or under the terms of a mortgage by the mortgagee
or his assigns, nor to sales by executors, administrators, guardians, trustees
or receivers acting under a court order, or to sales by or on behalf of
pawnbrokers of unredeemed pledges; or to warehousemen or garage keepers to
enforce their liens for labor and materials on chattels so exposed for sale; or
to any other lien to goods sold as provided by law to enforce any lien, or to
sales made by public officers in the line of duty, or to sales of household
goods for the actual owner therein, or to sales of real estate.
('79 Code, § 7-28)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.02 APPLICATION; NOTIFICATION OF POLICE CHIEF.
   (A)   Any person desiring an auctioneer's license shall file an application
with the Clerk-Treasurer containing the applicant's name, the location of the
proposed auction, the type of merchandise to be sold, and whether it is a
permanent or temporary business.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the Chief of Police of every such
application.
('79 Code, § 7-29)
§ 111.03 LICENSE FEE; TERM OF TEMPORARY LICENSE.
   (A)   Every person desiring an auctioneer's license shall pay the
appropriate fee listed below to the Clerk-Treasurer:
      (1)   Annual fee for livestock auction   $25
      (2)   Temporary fee for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, per
day   $5
   (B)   A temporary license may be issued for a period not exceeding ten days.
('79 Code, § 7-30)
§ 111.04 FRAUD AND MISREPRESENTATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom an auctioneer's license has been
issued to use fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation in the sale of or in the
offering for sale of any goods, wares or merchandise.
('79 Code, § 7-31)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.05 FALSE BIDDERS, CAPPERS AND PUFFERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom an auctioneer's license
has been issued to use false bidders, cappers or puffers.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      FALSE BIDDERS, CAPPERS or PUFFERS. Persons with whom an arrangement or
understanding exists that they shall simulate the acts of any interested bidder
and shall enhance the bids, start the bidding, bid a prepared price for an
article or by trickery to induce others to bid during an auction.
('79 Code, § 7-32)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.06 USE OF MECHANICAL INSTRUMENTS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any bells, buzzers, or any
variety of mechanical instrument to attract attention at a licensed auction.
('79 Code, § 7-33)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.07 SUNDAY AUCTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold a public auction on a Sunday.
('79 Code, § 7-34)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.08 REVOCATION OF LICENSE UPON NONCOMPLIANCE.
   In addition to any other penalty provided by law, if any of the provisions
of this chapter are not being complied with, the Chief of Police shall cause
the offending auction to be discontinued, and the Mayor shall revoke its
license in the manner provided by law; after such license is revoked, no
portion of the license fee shall be refundable.
('79 Code, § 7-35)
CHAPTER 112: JUNK DEALERS
Section
   
112.01   License required
   
112.02   License application
   
112.03   License fee
   
112.04   Transfer of license
§ 112.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of dealing in
junk without a license issued by the Clerk-Treasurer.
('79 Code, § 7-63)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.02 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Every person who desires the license required by this chapter shall apply to
the Clerk-Treasurer upon a form furnished by the Clerk-Treasurer; on the
application form the applicant shall state all information necessary for the
Clerk-Treasurer to determine whether the license should be issued.
('79 Code, § 7-64)
§ 112.03 LICENSE FEE.
   Every person desiring a junk dealer's license shall pay an annual license
fee of $10 to the Clerk-Treasurer.
('79 Code, § 7-65)
§ 112.04 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A junk dealer's license shall not be transferable.
('79 Code, § 7-66)
CHAPTER 113: PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
113.01   License required
   
113.02   License application
   
113.03   Bond required prior to issuance of license
   
113.04   License fee
§ 113.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of being a
pawnbroker without a license issued by the Clerk-Treasurer.
('79 Code, § 7-78)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.02 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Every person who desires the license required by this chapter shall apply to
the Clerk-Treasurer upon a form furnished by the Clerk-Treasurer. On the
application form, the applicant shall state all information necessary for the
Clerk-Treasurer to determine whether the license should be issued.
('79 Code, § 7-79)
§ 113.03 BOND REQUIRED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Prior to the issuance of any pawnbroker's license the applicant shall
furnish the city with a bond in the penal sum of not less than $1,000.
('79 Code, § 7-80)
§ 113.04 LICENSE FEE.
   Every person desiring a pawnbroker's license shall pay an annual license fee
of $25 to the Clerk-Treasurer.
('79 Code, § 7-81)
CHAPTER 114: TAXICABS
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Definition
   
114.02   Insurance required
   
114.03   Drivers to display photograph
   
114.04   Exterior identification of taxicab company
Licensing Provisions
   
114.15   License required
   
114.16   Persons prohibited from obtaining license
   
114.17   License application
   
114.18   License fee
   
114.19   Refund and proration of license fee; payment
   
114.20   Transfer of license
   
114.21   Safety inspection; certificate of inspection prerequisite to license;
display of certificate
   
114.22   License suspension and revocation
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to license and regulate, see I.C. 36-9-2-4
§ 114.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TAXICAB. Any vehicle used to carry passengers for hire within the limits of
the city to destinations designated by passengers but not operating on fixed
schedules or routes.
('79 Code, § 15-1)
§ 114.02 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   No taxicab shall be operated unless it is covered by a bond or liability
insurance policy in the amount of $100,000 for personal injuries, $300,000 per
occurrence, and $25,000 property damage.
('79 Code, § 15-9)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.03 DRIVERS TO DISPLAY PHOTOGRAPH.
   Each driver of a taxicab shall display in their taxicab in a position
visible to the occupants of the cab a recent photograph of him.
('79 Code, § 15-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.04 EXTERIOR IDENTIFICATION OF TAXICAB COMPANY.
   Every taxicab shall have the name of its company painted on the exterior of
the body in letters of a suitable size so that the vehicle can be readily
identified.
('79 Code, § 15-11)
Penalty, see § 10.99
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 114.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab without a
license.
('79 Code, § 15-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.16 PERSONS PROHIBITED FROM OBTAINING LICENSE.
   No taxicab license shall be issued or held by anyone who is not a person of
good character or who has been convicted of a felony or whose license to
operate a motor vehicle has been revoked during the preceding year, nor shall
such a license be issued to or held by any firm or corporation if any officer
or stockholder thereof is ineligible for the license.
('79 Code, § 15-3)
§ 114.17 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Every person desiring a taxicab license shall make application for the
license to the Clerk-Treasurer upon a form furnished by the Clerk-Treasurer. On
the application the applicant shall give the following information:
   (A)   Name.
   (B)   Whether a corporation.
   (C)   The names of all corporate officers.
   (D)   Their addresses.
   (E)   The corporate business address.
   (F)   Evidence of financial responsibility.
   (G)   Whether convicted of a felony.
   (H)   A form showing the approval of the vehicle to be used issued by the
Chief of Police.
('79 Code, § 15-4)
§ 114.18 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee for a taxicab shall be $10 for the first taxicab
owned by the licensee and $5 for each additional cab.
('79 Code, § 15-5)
§ 114.19 REFUND AND PRORATION OF LICENSE FEE; PAYMENT.
   No refund of a taxicab license fee shall be allowed, but upon the original
issuance of the license, if it is issued after the beginning of the calendar
year, the fee shall be prorated monthly on the basis of the portion of the year
remaining. All taxicab license fees shall be paid when the application for the
license is made.
('79 Code, § 15-6)
§ 114.20 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No taxicab license shall be transferred from one taxicab to another, or from
one person to another; provided, however, that with the permission of the Chief
of Police a license may be transferred from a taxicab which is no longer to be
used as such to its replacement.
('79 Code, § 15-7)
Penalty, § 10.99
§ 114.21 SAFETY INSPECTION; CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION PREREQUISITE TO LICENSE;
DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE.
   At the time of the presentation of an application for a taxicab license, or
upon its renewal, a thorough and complete check and inspection shall be made of
the taxicab by the Chief of Police to determine if it is in a safe condition
for the transportation of passengers. The Clerk-Treasurer shall not issue a
taxicab license unless a certificate from the Chief of Police attesting to the
passing of this inspection is presented with the license application. Such
certificate shall be prominently displayed in the taxicab at all times.
('79 Code, § 15-8)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.22 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   Any license issued under the terms of this chapter may be suspended or
revoked by the Mayor in the manner provided by law in the event that the
taxicab is found not to be in a safe and clean condition, or if there has been
any fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining the license, or for any other
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
('79 Code, § 15-12)
Statutory reference:
   Hearing complaints against person licensed by city, see I.C. 36-4-5-5
CHAPTER 115: TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
General Provisions
   
115.01   Definition
   
115.02   Identification
Licensing Provisions
   
115.15   License required
   
115.16   License application
   
115.17   Submission of information to police
   
115.18   License fee
   
115.19   Background check of applicant; license approval
   
115.20   Investigation by Chief of Police; delay in license issuance
   
115.21   Approval of applicant; issuance of license
   
115.22   Effect of license
   
115.23   Group license prohibited
   
115.24   Exhibition of license
   
115.25   License revocation
Statutory reference:
   Transient Merchant Law of Indiana, see I.C. 25-37-1-1 et seq.
   Power of city to license transient merchants, see I.C. 36-8-2-10, 25-37-1-11
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. All persons both as principals and agents, who engage
in, do or transact any temporary or transient business in this state, either in
one locality or in traveling from place to place in this state, offering for
sale or selling goods, wares or merchandise, and including those who, for the
purpose of carrying on such business, hire, lease or occupy any permanent or
mobile building, structure, or real estate for the exhibition by means of
samples, catalogues, photographs and price lists or sale of such goods, wares,
or merchandise but shall not include any person who grows the goods, wares or
merchandise which he or she sells or offers for sale. The term does not include
nonprofit corporations, churches, church associations, or any other entity
which is excluded from the definition of a TRANSIENT MERCHANT under I.C. 25-37-
1-2.
(‘79 Code, § 7-93) (Am. Ord. 09-2012, passed 8-28-2012)
§ 115.02 IDENTIFICATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to fail to identify himself
properly when he makes contact with a prospect.
('79 Code, § 7-104)
Penalty, see § 10.99
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 115.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a transient merchant
without a license issued by the Clerk-Treasurer.
('79 Code, § 7-94)
Penalty, see § 10.99
 § 115.16 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a transient merchant's license shall apply to the Clerk-
Treasurer upon a form furnished by the Clerk-Treasurer. On the application
form, the applicant shall state his full name, his residence, his age, the type
of work that he expects to do, for whom he is selling and one character
reference. In addition, he shall furnish such additional information as may be
required by the application form.
('79 Code, § 7-95)
§ 115.17 SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION TO POLICE.
   Before a transient merchant's license is issued, the applicant shall give
the Police Department that same information that he gave to the Clerk-
Treasurer, and he shall give the Police Department a photograph of himself and
allow the police to fingerprint him.
('79 Code, § 7-96)
§ 115.18 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   All persons desiring a transient merchant’s license shall pay a fee
based upon the duration of the license. Such fees shall be as follows:
 
License Duration Fee
Six Months       $500
 
   (B)   All such fees shall be paid when the application for the license is
made.
(‘79 Code, § 7-97) (Am. Ord. 09-2012, passed 8-28-12)
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to charge license fee, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(5), 25-37-1-11
§ 115.19 BACKGROUND CHECK OF APPLICANT; LICENSE APPROVAL.
   No transient merchant's license shall be issued before the expiration of
five days, unless the Police Department shall sooner be able to check the
character, qualifications and record of such applicant. If the applicant is
found to be in good order the Department shall then approve a card, to be
furnished by the Clerk-Treasurer bearing a photograph of the applicant similar
to the one on file in the Police Department. The license shall be signed by the
Clerk-Treasurer and the Chief of Police.
('79 Code, § 7-98)
§ 115.20 INVESTIGATION BY CHIEF OF POLICE; DELAY IN LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   The Chief of Police may make such investigations of each and every applicant
for a transient merchant's license as the Chief may deem proper and if, in his
opinion, a longer time than is provided in this subchapter is required, he
shall be at liberty to refuse to authorize the issuance of such a license until
such investigation is completed.
('79 Code, § 7-99)
§ 115.21 APPROVAL OF APPLICANT; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Upon satisfactory evidence being submitted to the Chief of Police that the
applicant for a transient merchant's license is a fit and proper person to
engage in such business, and upon payment of the required fee, the applicant
shall be issued the license in a form approved by the Clerk-Treasurer and the
Chief of Police, and bearing their signatures and a photograph of the
applicant.
('79 Code, § 7-100)
§ 115.22 EFFECT OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The granting of a transient merchant’s license shall in no way be
interpreted as a recommendation for any article or thing, tangible or
intangible, which such merchant may have to offer the public.
   (B)   The granting of a transient merchant’s license shall entitle the
licensee to transact business from the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday.
(‘79 Code, § 7-101) (Am. Ord. 09-2012, passed 8-28-12; Am. Ord. 08-2015, passed
4-22-15)
§ 115.23 GROUP LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   An individual transient merchant's license shall be issued for each
applicant and each applicant must appear in person under his own signature. No
one person shall be permitted to apply for a group or crew of sales
representatives.
('79 Code, § 7-102)
§ 115.24 EXHIBITION OF LICENSE.
   Every holder of a transient merchant's license shall exhibit it at the
request of any person, and shall immediately upon making contact with a
prospect exhibit it.
('79 Code, § 7-103)
Penalty, § 10.99
§ 115.25 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   A transient merchant's license may be revoked by the Mayor after notice and
hearing, for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the license
application.
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on business as a transient merchant.
   (C)   Violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
   (E)   Conducting of such business in an unlawful manner so as to constitute
a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or
general welfare of the public.
   (F)   Attempting to solicit from, or conducting business with, the occupant
of a home displaying a sign prohibiting solicitation.
(‘79 Code, § 7-105) (Am. Ord. 08-2015, passed 4-22-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Power of Mayor to revoke licenses, see I.C. 36-4-5-5
CHAPTER 116: GARAGE AND YARD SALES
Section
   
116.01   Duration of sale
§ 116.01 DURATION OF SALE.
   In any residential district of the city, any garage sale or yard sale may be
conducted by an owner or tenant of any tract of real estate being used for
residential purposes for a total of no more than seven days in any one calendar
year.
('79 Code, § 7-110)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 117: ADULT USE STANDARDS
Section
General Provisions
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Location
Licensing Provisions
   
117.15   Licensing
   
117.16   Issuance of license for an adult entertainment business
   
117.17   Revocation or suspension of adult entertainment business license
   
117.18   Appeal; hearing
Restrictions
   
117.25   Advertising
   
117.26   Additional restrictions on certain activities
 
   
117.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following words, phrases, and terms shall have
the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as a substantial amount of its
stock or its dollar volume in trade, books, magazines, periodicals, or other
printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, tapes, records, or other forms of audio or audio representations which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, theater, restaurant or similar
establishment which features live performances by topless or bottomless
dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers,
where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified  sexual activities or by exposure of specified anatomical areas or
which regularly feature films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides tapes,
records, or other photograph representations which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by
patrons.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS.  A bookstore, motion picture theater, mini
motion picture theater, motion picture arcade, cabaret, drive-in theater, live
entertainment arcade, or other non-specified business which, as a substantial
part of their business activities, sell or provide depictions of or provide
activities which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified
sexual activities or by exposure of specified anatomical areas.
   SUBSTANTIAL AMOUNT or SUBSTANTIAL PORTION. Thirty percent or more of the
inventory, receipts, or projection or performance time is devoted to or derived
from the activities regulated herein.
(Ord. 21-2000, passed 10-10-00)
Statutory reference:
   Obscenity and pornography, see I.C. 35-49-1 et seq.
§ 117.02 LOCATION.
   Adult bookstores or adult entertainment businesses shall be sited a minimum
of 1,000 feet from any church, park, or school.
(Ord. 21-2000, passed 10-10-00)
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 117.15 LICENSING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, or carry
on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, in or upon any
premises in the city, the operation of an adult bookstore or adult
entertainment business as herein defined, without first having obtained a
separate license for such an adult entertainment business from the Chief of
Police.
   (B)   Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate, or conduct an
adult entertainment business shall file an application in duplicate under oath
with the Chief of Police upon a form provided by the city and pay a filing fee
of $500 to the Clerk-Treasurer, who shall issue a receipt which shall be
attached to the application filed with the Chief of Police.
   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall attach a copy of this chapter to each permit
issued, so that this chapter is incorporated by reference therein.
   (D)   If a permit is not issued, the Clerk-Treasurer may refund that portion
of the filing fee not used to reimburse the city for background investigation
costs, but in no event will more than $400 be refunded.
      (1)   The application for a license to operate an adult entertainment
business shall set forth the exact nature of the entertainment to be offered,
the proposed place of business and facilities therefore, and the name and
address of each applicant.
      (2)   The application shall be filed by the individual or individuals who
will operate the adult entertainment business. If the entity seeking the
license is not an individual, the following information must be provided for
each officer or director of the entity, as well as the individual employed by
such entity as manager or a similar position.
      (3)   In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for such a license
shall furnish the following information:
         (a)   Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
         (b)   Two portrait photographs of the applicant at least two inches by
two inches;
         (c)   Fingerprints;
         (d)   Business, occupation, or employment data for the three years
immediately preceding the date of application;
         (e)   A copy of the Indiana liquor license and a copy of the liquor
license application, if any;
         (f)   Previous adult entertainment business or liquor establishment
business history;
         (g)   Any criminal convictions, except minor traffic violations; and
         (h)   A copy of the birth certificate for each individual who will be
performing as an entertainer in the adult cabaret or adult live entertainment
arcade, within five days of the individual's commencement of work.
   (E)   The license shall be displayed in a prominent location at the
establishment during business hours and shall be subject to examination or
inspection by the general public and any other person at all times.
(Ord. 21-2000, passed 10-10-00)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.16 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE FOR AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall issue a permit for an adult entertainment
business within 30 days following receipt of application if all requirements of
this chapter for an adult entertainment business are met, and may issue such a
license unless he or she finds that:
      (1)   The operations as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would
not comply with all applicable ordinances including, but not limited to, the
building, health, planning, housing, zoning, and fire codes;
      (2)   The applicant and any other person who will be directly engaged in
the management and operation of an adult entertainment business has been
convicted of a felony, or an offense involving sexual misconduct with children,
or any obscenity, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a
lewd or unlawful act, prostitution, or pandering or other sex crimes as defined
by I.C. 35-42-4-1 et seq., or comparable statues in other states;
   (B)   If the Chief of Police fails to issue the permit within the time
provided, the application is deemed denied.
   (C)   If the Chief of Police denies issuance of a license for an adult
entertainment business, the applicant may appeal the denial as described in §
117.18.
   (D)   Existing adult entertainment businesses shall comply.  Existing adult
entertainment businesses shall have 90 days from passage and publication of
this chapter to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 21-2000, passed 10-10-00)
§ 117.17 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT LICENSE.
   (A)   Any adult entertainment business license may be revoked or suspended
by the Chief of Police if the Chief finds that:
      (1)   The licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter
regulating adult entertainment businesses;
      (2)   The licensee violates or has violated within the last ten years any
state statute pertaining to obscenity, public indecency, sex crimes, or
allowing minors to perform as employees, or the licensee knowingly or under
circumstances where the licensee should have known of the offending conduct,
employs individuals who violate or have violated any such state statute;
      (3)   The licensee has knowingly furnished false or misleading
information, or withheld relevant information on any application for any
license or permit required by this chapter, or knowingly caused or suffered
another to furnish or withhold such information on his or her behalf;
      (4)   The licensee knowingly or under circumstances where the licensee
should have known of the offending conduct, permitted any violation of
applicable state or municipal law to occur on the licensed premises.
   (B)   The notice of revocation shall be sent by certified mail to the
licensee at the address on the permit at least ten days in advance of the
revocation date.
(Ord. 21-2000, passed 10-10-00)
§ 117.18 APPEAL; HEARING.
   (A)   When an application for an adult entertainment business permit is
denied, or a permit is revoked, the applicant or licensee may within 14 days of
notice thereof, request a hearing before the city Board of Public Works and
Safety, by written application to the Mayor's office at P.O. Box 110 (320 Main
St., Rochester, IN 46975);
   (B)   A hearing shall be scheduled for the next public meeting of the Board
of Public Works and Safety. The applicant or licensee may present evidence and
argument and cross-examine witnesses and may be represented by counsel.
(Ord. 21-2000, passed 10-10-00)
RESTRICTIONS
§ 117.25 ADVERTISING.
   (A)   No adult entertainment business shall be conducted in any manner that
permits, from outside the establishment, the observation of any activities or
materials depicting, describing or relating to topless or bottomless dancers,
go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers or form of
entertainment.
   (B)   No adult entertainment business shall advertise said business on the
outside of such premise by means of materials which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by
patrons therein.
   (C)   No outside loud speakers may be utilized, nor may the music or
entertainment be conducted at sound levels such that the content of the lyrics
or commentary is discernible outside or beyond the premises.
(Ord. 21-2000, passed 10-10-00)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.26 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   If an adult entertainment business provides booths or enclosed area
for viewing the entertainment, the booth or enclosed area must be of
transparent glass or plastic, or have a glass or plastic door that forms one
entire side of the booth or enclosure, that allows continuous unobstructed
monitoring of all areas of the booth or enclosure;
   (B)   Any adult entertainment business which provides for live entertainment
shall prohibit the touching of any specified anatomical areas of such
entertainers by the patrons of the establishment. This shall be accomplished
by, among other things, physical barriers, the size of the stage, or whatever
additional measures are necessary to ensure the separation of entertainers from
patrons.
(Ord. 21-2000, passed 10-10-00)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter shall be punishable according to the general
penalty provisions of the municipal code, in addition to any other remedies,
which the city may have, and the City Attorney is authorized to prosecute any
such violations, or seek mandatory injunctive relief to prohibit or discontinue
such violations, in his or her discretion.
(Ord. 21-2000, passed 10-10-00)
CHAPTER 118: STREET SOLICITATION PERMIT
Section
General Provisions
   
118.01   Definition
   
118.02   Identification
Permit Provisions
   
118.15   Permit required
   
118.16   Permit application
   
118.17   Submission of information to police
   
118.18   Permit fee
   
118.19   Background check of applicant; permit approval
   
118.20   Investigation by Chief of Police; delay in permit issuance
   
118.21   Approval of applicant; issuance of permit
   
118.22   Effect of permit
   
118.23   Exhibition of permit
   
118.24   Permit revocation
 
   
118.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Regulation of solicitations, see I.C. 36-8-2-11
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 118.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      STREET SOLICITATION. Any person or organization which desires to solicit
from vehicles or individuals upon public ways within the city shall make
application for a street solicitation permit on a form as provided by the city.
STREET SOLICITATION days may be conducted subject to the following regulations.
(Ord. 04-2003, passed 2-11-03)
§ 118.02 IDENTIFICATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any street solicitor to fail to identify himself
properly when he makes contact with a prospect.
(Ord. 04-2003, passed 2-11-03)
PERMIT PROVISIONS
§ 118.15 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, group or organization to operate
as a street solicitor without a street solicitor's permit issued by the Clerk-
Treasurer.
   (B)   Street solicitation applications shall specify the locations where
street solicitations are sought to be conducted. No street solicitation may be
conducted at a location not approved in the street solicitation permit.
   (C)   Not more than one street solicitation permit may be issued for a given
location on any given day.
   (D)   Street solicitation permits may be requested not more than 364 days
prior to the first day upon which a street solicitation will occur.
   (E)   If multiple organizations file for street solicitation permits for the
same location, preference shall be given to the applicant first applying.
   (F)   Street solicitations are prohibited between dusk and dawn.
   (G)   No organization may receive more than two street solicitation permits
in a calendar year.
   (H)   Street solicitors may not solicit from occupants of any vehicle which
has the green light.
   (I)   All organizations which are issued street solicitation permits shall
be liable for any injuries to any person or property during the solicitation
which is causally related to an act or ordinary negligence of the soliciting
agency.
   (J)   All persons engaged in street solicitations must be at least 16 years
of age and shall wear a high visibility vest.
(Ord. 04-2003, passed 2-11-03)
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.16 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a street solicitor's permit shall apply to the Clerk-
Treasurer upon a form furnished by the Clerk-Treasurer. On the application
form, the applicant shall state his full name, his residence, his age, for whom
he is soliciting and one character reference. In addition, he shall furnish
such additional information as may be required by the application form.
(Ord. 04-2003, passed 2-11-03)
§ 118.17 SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION TO POLICE.
   Before a street solicitor's permit is issued, the applicant shall give the
Police Department that same information that he gave to the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 04-2003, passed 2-11-03)
§ 118.18 PERMIT FEE.
   (A)   All persons desiring a street solicitor's permit shall pay a non-
refundable $10 fee.
   (B)   All such fees shall be paid when the application for the license is
made.
(Ord. 04-2003, passed 2-11-03)
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to charge license fee, see I.C. 25-37-1-11, I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)
(5)
§ 118.19 BACKGROUND CHECK OF APPLICANT; PERMIT APPROVAL.
   No street solicitor's permit shall be issued before the expiration of five
days, unless the Police Department shall sooner be able to check the character,
qualifications and record of such applicant. If the applicant is found to be in
good order the Department shall then approve the permit. The permit shall be
signed by the Clerk-Treasurer and the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 04-2003, passed 2-11-03)
§ 118.20 INVESTIGATION BY CHIEF OF POLICE; DELAY IN PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   The Chief of Police may make such investigations of each and every applicant
for a street solicitor's permit as the Chief may deem proper and if, in his
opinion, a longer time than is provided in this subchapter is required, he
shall be at liberty to refuse to authorize the issuance of such a permit until
such investigation is completed.
(Ord. 04-2003, passed 2-11-03)
§ 118.21 APPROVAL OF APPLICANT; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   Upon satisfactory evidence being submitted to the Chief of Police that the
applicant for a street solicitor's permit is a fit and proper person to engage
in such activity, and upon payment of the required fee, the applicant shall be
issued the permit in a form approved by the Clerk-Treasurer and the Chief of
Police.
(Ord. 04-2003, passed 2-11-03)
§ 118.22 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   The granting of a street solicitor's permit shall in no way be interpreted
as a recommendation or endorsement of any charitable or religious organization
to whom the permit is issued.
(Ord. 04-2003, passed 2-11-03)
§ 118.23 EXHIBITION OF PERMIT.
   Every holder of a street solicitor's permit shall exhibit it at the request
of any person, and shall immediately upon making contact with a prospect
exhibit it.
(Ord. 04-2003, passed 2-11-03)
§ 118.24 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   A street solicitor's permit may be revoked by the Mayor after notice and
hearing, for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the permit
application.
   (B)   Violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
   (D)   Conducting of such solicitation in an unlawful manner so as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health,
safety or general welfare of the public.
(Ord. 04-2003, passed 2-11-03)
Statutory reference:
   Power of Mayor to revoke licenses, see I.C. 36-4-5-5
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, group or organization who engages in street solicitation without
obtaining the proper permit shall be subject to a penalty fine not to exceed
$50.
(Ord. 04-2003, passed 2-11-03)
CHAPTER 119: COMMERCIAL USE OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
Section
   
119.01   Definition
   
119.02   Activity prohibited
 
   
119.99   Penalty
§ 119.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY. Activity that is concerned with or engaged in commerce,
and is not restricted to activities designed to produce a financial profit.
(Ord. 11-2018, passed 11-27-18)
§ 119.02 ACTIVITY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as described in division (B), no person shall use any real
property or improvements owned by the city, or any of its subsidiaries, for the
purpose of commercial activity, or for the selling or offering for sale, goods
or services to the general public.
   (B)   Any person seeking to engage in the activity described in division (A)
may obtain the permission of the Board of Public Works in advance, except for
such activity within a city park, which permission may be obtained from the
City Board of Park Commissioners.
   (C)   It shall not be considered a violation of this chapter for a person to
post written notices, advertisements, or offers for commercial activity at a
location intended for dissemination of such information.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter supersedes a person’s obligation to comply
with any applicable responsibilities under Title XI.
(Ord. 11-2018, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord. 20-2024, passed 8-27-24)
§ 119.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a penalty fine not
to exceed $100.
(Ord. 11-2018, passed 11-27-18)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130. GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Nuisances prohibited
   
130.02   Making rockets and propellants
   
130.03   Shooting rockets
   
130.04   Discharge of firearms, air rifles, archery equipment, and the like
   
130.05   Destroying city property
   
130.06   Interference with officers and employees
   
130.07   Regulating sale of pseudoephedrine related products
§ 130.01 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, cause, permit, keep
or maintain within the limits anything whatever which is injurious to the
general health, welfare and safety of the public.
('79 Code, § 10-1)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   
Nuisances, see Title IX passim
   
Placement of explosives in trash container, see § 50.20
§ 130.02 MAKING ROCKETS AND PROPELLANTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to make any homemade rocket
or rocket propellant.
('79 Code, § 10-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Prohibiting sale and regulating use of fireworks, see I.C. 22-11-14-1 et
seq.
Cross-reference:
   
Fire prevention and protection, see Ch. 92
§ 130.03 SHOOTING ROCKETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to shoot any rocket into
the air.
('79 Code, § 10-3)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Prohibiting sale and regulating use of fireworks, see I.C. 22-11-14-1 et
seq.
§ 130.04 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS, AIR RIFLES, ARCHERY EQUIPMENT, AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any pistol, revolver,
rifle, shotgun or firearm of any type; provided, however, that the provisions
of this section shall not apply to any police officer engaged in the discharge
of his duty.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifles, air
pistols or revolvers, or any other gun operated by CO 2 or other gaseous
propellants.
   (D)   No person shall hunt by the discharge of bows and arrows or use
archery devices of any kind except under the following conditions.
      (1)   All use of bows and arrows and archery equipment shall be in
compliance with all state hunting regulations, where applicable.
      (2)   Discharging of bows is permitted during daylight hours only, except
for licensed bow fishing.
      (3)   All targets must have an adequate backstop or be otherwise shielded
by the person’s own property to minimize the risk of injury to person or
property of others.
      (4)   No discharging of bows within 25 feet of neighbor’s property.
      (5)   No discharging of bows at targets of more than 75 feet.
      (6)   Discharging of bows allowed only in rear and side yards.
      (7)   No discharging of bows in city parks or other public property.
   (E)   It shall not be unlawful for the owner of a golf course, or its
employees or agents, to discharge a .410 or 20 gauge shotgun to remove animal
pests or nuisances, if the owner informs the Chief of Police in advance and
obeys all other county, state, and federal laws regarding the use of any
firearms.
(‘79 Code, § 10-4) (Am. Ord. 10-2009, passed 8-25-09; Am. Ord. 18-2012, passed
10-23-12; Am. Ord. 06-2014, passed 6-3-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.05 DESTROYING CITY PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, mar or injure any city
property.
('79 Code, § 10-5)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.06 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, harass, hinder or
hamper any city officer or employee who is engaged in the official performance
of his or her duties as such, or any vendor, contracted person or employee or
agent of the same, engaged in the performance of a duty owed to the city.
(‘79 Code, § 10-6) (Am. Ord. 10-2016, passed 9-27-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.07 REGULATING SALE OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE RELATED PRODUCTS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PHARMACIST. An individual who is licensed as a pharmacist in Indiana
under I.C. 25-26.
      PHARMACY. Any facility, department, or other place where prescriptions
are filled or compounded and are sold, dispensed, offered, or displayed for
sale and which has as its principal purpose the dispensing of drug and health
supplies intended for the general health, welfare, and safety of the public,
without placing any other activity on a more important level than the practice
of pharmacy.
   (B)   Dispensation. Except under a valid prescription, before dispensing a
product containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine, a pharmacist or pharmacy in
the city shall make a professional determination as to whether or not there is
a legitimate medical and pharmaceutical need for the product containing
ephedrine or pseudoephedrine.
   (C)   Determining factors. The determination made under division (B) may be
based on factors, including without limitation:
      (1)   Prior medication-filling history;
      (2)   Patient screening; and
      (3)   Any other tools that provide professional reassurance to the
pharmacist that a legitimate medical and pharmaceutical need exists.
   (D)   Non-prohibiting factors. Division (B) does not prohibit a pharmacist
from dispensing a product containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine to a person
solely because the person:
      (1)   Has not utilized the services of the pharmacist frequently; or
      (2)   Has not established a pharmacist-patient relationship with the
pharmacist before the instance of dispensing.
   (E)   Exception for products with designated methamphetamine deterrent
capabilities. A pharmacist or pharmacy may dispense an ephedrine or
pseudoephedrine product with designated methamphetamine deterrent capabilities
without complying with the requirements of division (B) and the dispensing of
such a product will not constitute a violation of this section.
   (F)   A pharmacist or pharmacy, or both, found to be in violation of this
section may be subject to a fine as permitted by I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10) and §
10.99 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Res. 11-2015, passed 8-25-15; Am. Ord. 01-2016, passed 2-1-16)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
152.   ZONING
      
153.   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
      
154.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Enforcement of building standards — state law adopted
   
150.002   Fire limits
   
150.003   Building or occupation of structures within fire limits
Building Code
   
150.015   Title
   
150.016   Purpose
   
150.017   Authority
   
150.018   Scope
   
150.019   Adoption of rules by reference
   
150.020   Fees
   
150.021   Entry by Building Commissioner or representative
   
150.022   Stop order
   
150.023   Certificate of occupancy
   
150.024   Workmanship and demolition
   
150.025   Violation
   
150.026   Right of appeal
   
150.027   Remedies
Building Permits; Inspections
   
150.040   Required
   
150.041   Application for permits
   
150.042   Work done in compliance with other regulations
   
150.043   Review of application
   
150.044   Inspection of work; reinspection
   
150.045   Inspection assistant
Electricians
   
150.055   License required
   
150.056   License application; fee
   
150.057   Bond
   
150.058   Enforcement referral
Plumbing Contractors
   
150.070   Registration required
   
150.071   Registration information required
   
150.072   Registration fee
   
150.073   Bond
   
150.074   Cancellation of registration
   
150.075   Display of registration
   
150.076   Enforcement referral
House Movers
   
150.085   License required
   
150.086   License application; information required
   
150.087   License fee
   
150.088   Bond
   
150.089   Notification of utilities
Underground or Buried Utilities
   
150.095   Purpose
   
150.096   Designation
   
150.097   Restrictions
   
150.098   Exceptions
 
   
150.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission, see I.C. 22-12-2-1 et seq.
Editor’s Note:
   Per the document entitled “Interlocal Agreement for the Administration of
the Rochester Building Code and Unsafe Building Ordinance by Fulton County”,
adopted by the Fulton County Council on August 19, 2008, and the Rochester
Common Council on August 25, 2008, the administration of §§ 150.001 et seq. and
150.015 et seq. has been turned over to the Fulton County Area Plan Office,
however the affected code sections have not been amended to reflect this
change.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 ENFORCEMENT OF BUILDING STANDARDS — STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions thereof, I.C. 36-7-9, entitled “Enforcement
of Building Standards,” together with all the subsections thereof, is adopted
by the Common Council in its entirety.
   (B)   Under the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9, the Rochester City Plan
Commission shall be the Executive Department to administer the provisions of
this section. In addition, the Building Commissioner shall be the enforcement
authority all as provided in I.C. 36-7-9. In addition the Building Commissioner
shall be responsible for the administration of the provisions.
   (C)   All of the procedures, requirements and other conditions set forth in
I.C. 36-7-9 shall be followed in any action taken under this section.
('79 Code, § 4-1) (Ord. 30-1988, passed 12-13-88)
§ 150.002 FIRE LIMITS.
   The following described boundaries shall be the fire limits:
      Commencing at the intersection of the center of Madison Street, with the
center of the alley running east and west, between Ninth Street and Tenth
Street; thence west along center of the alley to the center of the alley
running north and south between Main Street and Jefferson Street; thence north
along the center of the alley to the center of the alley running east and west,
between Third and Fourth Streets; thence east to the alley running north and
south between Main and Madison Streets; thence south along the center of the
alley to the center of the alley running east and west between Sixth and
Seventh Streets; thence east along the center of the alley to the center of
Madison Street; thence south along the center of Madison Street to the place of
beginning.
('79 Code, § 4-2)
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to establish fire limits, see I.C. 36-7-10-2
Cross-reference:
   
Fire prevention and protection, see Ch. 92
§ 150.003 BUILDING OR OCCUPATION OF STRUCTURES WITHIN FIRE LIMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build or occupy any building or
structure within the fire limits which is made of wood, or has wooden shingles;
however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to preexisting uses or
occupancies.
('79 Code, § 4-3)
Penalty, see § 150.999
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.015 TITLE.
   This subchapter, and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto, shall
be known as the “Building Code of the City of Rochester, Indiana,” may be cited
as such, and will be referred to herein as “this code.”
(‘79 Code, § 4-16) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88; Am. Ord. 03-2013, passed 4-
23-13)
§ 150.016 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards for the protection
of life, health, environment, public safety and general welfare, and for the
conservation of energy in the design and construction of buildings and
structures.
('79 Code, § 4-17) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88)
§ 150.017 AUTHORITY.
   The Building Commissioner is authorized and directed to administer and
enforce all of the provisions of this code. Whenever in this code it is
provided that anything must be done to the approval of or subject to the
direction of the Building Commissioner or any other officer of the city, this
shall be construed to give the officer only the discretion of determining
whether this code has been complied with; and no such provision shall be
construed as giving any officer discretionary powers as to what this code shall
be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by ordinances or to enforce
this code in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner. Any variance from adopted
building rules are subject to approval under I.C. 22-13-2-7(b).
('79 Code, § 4-18) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88)
Cross-reference:
   
Enforcement of building standards, see § 150.001
§ 150.018 SCOPE.
   (A)   The provisions of this code apply to the construction, alteration,
repair, use, occupancy, and addition to all buildings and structures, other
than industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under I.C.
22-15-4, in the city.
   (B)   As used in this chapter, the term REPAIR shall not include the
replacement of roofing material or windows which does not require the
alteration or replacement of structural supports in either the roof or walls of
the building.
('79 Code, § 4-19) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88; Am. Ord. 7-1995-A, passed 6-
27-95)
§ 150.019 ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Building rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission as set out in the following articles of Title 675 of the Indiana
Administrative Code are incorporated by reference in this code and shall
include later amendments to those articles as the amendments are published in
the Indiana Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with effective dates as
fixed therein:
      (1)   Article 13 — building codes:
         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards.
         (b)   Indiana Building Code.
         (c)   Indiana Building Code Standards.
         (d)   Indiana Handicapped Accessibility Code.
      (2)   Article 14 — one- and two-family dwelling codes:
         (a)   Council of American Building Officials One and Two Family
Dwelling Code.
         (b)   CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code; Amendments.
         (c)   Standard for Permanent Installation of Manufactured Homes.
      (3)   Article 16 — plumbing code: Indiana Plumbing Code.
      (4)   Article 17 — electrical codes:
         (a)   Indiana Electrical Code.
         (b)   Safety Code for Health Care Facilities.
      (5)   Article 18 — mechanical code: Indiana Mechanical Code.
      (6)   Article 19 — energy conservation codes:
         (a)   Indiana Energy Conservation Codes.
         (b)   Modifications to the Model Energy Codes.
      (7)   Article 20 — swimming pool code: Indiana Swimming Pool Code.
   (B)   Copies of adopted building rules, codes and standards are on file in
the office of the Building Commissioner.
('79 Code, § 4-20) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88)
Cross-reference:
   
Electricians, see §§ 150.055 et seq.
   
Fire prevention and protection, see Ch. 92
   
Plumbing contractors, see §§ 150.075 et seq.
§ 150.020 FEES.
   The fees to be charged under this subchapter shall be as follows:
   (A)   Building permits.
      (1)   Residential. $0.50 per $1,000 in construction costs, with a $10
minimum permit fee.
      (2)   Commercial. $0.50 per $1,000 in construction costs, with a $10
minimum permit fee.
      (3)   A charge of 50% of the original permit shall be assessed should
renewal of a building permit be required.
   (B)   Inspections.
      (1)   Residential. $20 per inspection plus $0.05 per square foot in
excess of 1,5000 square feet. If re-inspection is required for non-compliance
with code requirements, an additional inspection fee shall be charged for each
inspection.
      (2)   Commercial. $20 per inspection plus $0.03 per square foot for
inspections covering areas in excess of 15,000 square feet. Each visit of the
Building Commissioner which is required to inspect commercial property shall be
considered a separate inspection which shall be invoiced and paid prior to
occupancy.
   (C)   Condemnation. A fee of $15 shall be charged for all condemnation
inspections related to the demolition of property.
('79 Code, § 4-21) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88; Am. Ord. 7-1995-A, passed 6-
27-95)
§ 150.021 ENTRY BY BUILDING COMMISSIONER OR REPRESENTATIVE.
   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Commissioner or his
duly authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times any building,
structure or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon him by this
code.
('79 Code, § 4-22) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88)
§ 150.022 STOP ORDER.
   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code, the
Building Commissioner may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on
any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done; and any such
persons shall forthwith stop the work until authorized by the Building
Commissioner to proceed with the work.
('79 Code, § 4-23) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88)
§ 150.023 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure constructed after
the adoption of this code shall be issued unless the building or structure was
constructed in compliance with the provisions of this code. It shall be
unlawful to occupy any such building or structure unless a full, partial or
temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building
Commissioner.
('79 Code, § 4-24) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.024 WORKMANSHIP.
   (A)   All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and
other structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner according
to accepted standards and practices in the trade.
   (B)   The regulations set forth in this division (B) and the provisions
hereunder apply to the following geographic locations (“corridor”): the section
of Main Street that extends north and south from 4th Street to 9th Street
encompassing the area east and west of Main Street ending at the north-south
alley lying mid-block between Main and Madison, as well as, Main and Jefferson
- all extending from 4th Street to 9th Street. The entire block situated
between 7th and 8th Streets between Madison Street and Main Street, as well as,
the entire courthouse square.
      (1)   Brick and/or ornamental, decorative masonry material will be used
for all new exterior wall reconstruction and construction for any building or
structure visible from any alley or street. All materials must be conducive to
the historical intent of the corridor as defined by the City Common Council. No
other construction material is allowed.
      (2)   Historically ornamental elements include awnings, cornices, column,
mullion, parapet, pediment, window hood, etc. may be repaired and replaced by
using the original construction material or a material with a historically
similar texture, color, appearance, and style in order to maintain historical
compatibility within the corridor.
      (3)   Historic buildings, structures, and sites shall be maintained to
meet the applicable requirements established under city legislation and Indiana
statute for buildings generally so as to prevent the loss of historic material
and the deterioration of important character defining details and features.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to prevent the
ordinary repairs and maintenance of any building, structure, or site, provided
that such repairs or maintenance do not result in a conspicuous change in the
design, form, proportion, mass, configuration, building material, texture,
color, location, or external visual appearance of any structure, or part
thereof.
      (5)   Any pitched roof visible from a street or alley will be constructed
from roofing material consisting of one color and will be neutral in shade. All
materials and colors must be conducive to the historical intent of the corridor
as defined by the Rochester Common Council.
      (6)   Any property owner or other interested party desiring changes in
the exterior appearance of buildings or structures within this corridor subject
to view from a public way by additions, reconstruction, alteration and/or
maintenance including the involvement of exterior color change shall apply for
a city building permit prior to making such changes. Said building permit
application may require sketches, drawings, photographs, descriptions, or other
information be submitted to the office of the Building Commissioner. If an
applicant is denied a permit or believes that one of these guidelines is unduly
restrictive, not in keeping with the historicity of the applicant’s building,
or otherwise should not be required for the applicant’s project, the applicant
may request that the Rochester Common Council grant the applicant a variance
from the particular guideline.
   (C)   All demolition debris/rubbish shall be completely removed and disposed
of in a legal and proper manner within 14 days of the start of the demolition
process. Where a demolition permit is required, all demolition sites will have
some type of barrier to signify to the public that a hazard exists (rope, tape,
fencing, and the like), which will completely enclose/surround the work site.
Where a demolition permit is required, any demolition site open more than five
days must have construction barricades, as defined by the Indiana Department of
Homeland Security, and not to be less than six feet in height. The demolition
site will be completely backfilled with suitable material, graded and seeded
with a vegetative cover within 30 days of the start of demolition. Any building
demolished in a commercial district will be completed by a contractor that is
legally bonded and insured.
(‘79 Code, § 4-25) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88; Am. Ord. 13-2013, passed 10-
22-13; Am. Ord. 03-2016, passed 5-17-2016) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.025 VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner,
lessee, sublessee or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building
or structure, other than fences, in the city or cause or permit the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of the building code.
('79 Code, § 4-26) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.026 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   All persons shall have the right to appeal any order of the Building
Commissioner first through the City Plan Commission and then to the State Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission in accordance with the provisions of
I.C. 22-13-2-7 and I.C. 4-21.5-3-7.
('79 Code, § 4-27) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88)
§ 150.027 REMEDIES.
   The Building Commissioner shall in the name of the city bring actions in the
circuit or county courts for mandatory and injunctive relief in the enforcement
of and to secure compliance with any order or orders made by the Building
Commissioner, and any such action for mandatory or injunctive relief may be
joined with an action to recover the penalties provided for in the building
code.
('79 Code, § 4-28) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88)
BUILDING PERMITS; INSPECTIONS
§ 150.040 REQUIRED.
   (A)   A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, alteration
or repair of any building or structure, the cost of which exceeds $1,500, using
forms furnished by the Building Commissioner; and all fees required by this
code shall be paid to the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   Division (A) above notwithstanding, a permit shall be obtained prior
to the construction, relocation, or an alteration which results in an increase
in height, of any fence; further, a permit shall be obtained prior to the
installation of any service entrance or electrical wiring in any building or
structure.
('79 Code, § 4-41) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88; Am. Ord. 7-1995-A, passed 6-
27-95)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.041 APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.
   No building permit shall be issued for the foregoing purposes unless the
application for a permit is accompanied by a plat or sketch of the proposed
location showing lot boundaries, and by plans and specifications showing the
work to be done. In addition, a copy of a design release, issued by the State
Building Commissioner and the State Fire Marshal pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3-1,
shall be provided to the Building Commissioner before issuance of a permit for
construction covered by the design release.
('79 Code, § 4-42) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88)
§ 150.042 WORK DONE IN COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   All work done under any permit shall be in full compliance with all other
regulations pertaining thereto; and in addition to the fees for permits, there
shall be paid the fees prescribed in such regulations.
('79 Code, § 4-43) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.043 REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
   Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Building Commissioner
shall:
   (A)   Review all building permit applications to determine full compliance
with the provisions of this code.
   (B)   Review all building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be
reasonably safe from flooding.
   (C)   Review building permit applications for major repairs within the
floodplain area having special flood hazards to determine that the proposed
repair uses construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to
flood damage, and uses construction methods and practices that will minimize
flood damage.
   (D)   Review building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements within the floodplain area having special flood
hazards to assure that the proposed construction (including prefabricated and
mobile homes) is protected against flood damage; is designed (or modified) and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure,
and flood damage; and uses construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.
('79 Code, § 4-44) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88)
§ 150.044 INSPECTION OF WORK; REINSPECTION.
   After the issuance of any building permit, the Building Commissioner shall
make, or shall cause to be made, inspections of the work being done as are
necessary to ensure full compliance with the provisions of this code and the
terms of the permit. Reinspection of work found to be incomplete or not ready
for inspection are subject to assessment of reinspection fees as prescribed in
this code.
('79 Code, § 4-45) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88)
§ 150.045 INSPECTION ASSISTANT.
   The Chief of the Fire Department, or his designated representative, shall
assist the Building Commissioner in the inspection of fire suppression,
detection and alarm systems and shall provide reports of such inspection to the
Building Commissioner.
('79 Code, § 4-46) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88)
ELECTRICIANS
§ 150.055 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any wiring or repairing of wiring
upon any building or structure, attachment, device or apparatus of any kind
whatever, for the use of electric current without an annual license issued by
the Clerk-Treasurer.
('79 Code, § 4-61)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.056 LICENSE APPLICATION; FEE.
   All those who desire the license required by this subchapter shall apply to
Clerk-Treasurer upon a form provided by the Clerk-Treasurer giving such
information as may be required on the form. Along with the application, the
applicant shall pay a license fee of $10.
('79 Code, § 4-62)
§ 150.057 BOND.
   In addition, the applicant for the license required by this subchapter shall
file and submit and tender with his application a good and sufficient bond in
the penal sum of $500 payable to the city, with sureties to the approval of the
Mayor, covering the period of the license as applied for, and all renewals
thereof conditioned upon the faithful and honest performance by the applicant
as his duties as a licensed electrician, and the observance and obedience to
all the terms, conditions, rules, regulations and ordinances in force.
('79 Code, § 4-63)
§ 150.058 ENFORCEMENT REFERRAL.
   Any duty or action under this subchapter assigned to the Clerk-Treasurer may
be designated by the city to another entity. That entity shall be considered
the designee of the office of the Clerk-Treasurer for this purpose.
(Ord. 03-2013, passed 4-23-13)
PLUMBING CONTRACTORS
§ 150.070 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of being a
plumbing contractor without registering each year with the Clerk-Treasurer.
('79 Code, § 4-71)
Penalty, see § 150.999
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to regulate plumbing, see I.C. 36-7-2-4
   State registration and licensing of plumbers, see I.C. 25-28.5-1-1 et seq.
   Power of city to require registration of plumbing contractors, see I.C. 25-
28.5-1-33
§ 150.071 REGISTRATION INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   Every individual registering with the Clerk-Treasurer as a plumbing
contractor shall give the Clerk-Treasurer his name and address and any
additional information as may be required on the registration form.
('79 Code, § 4-72)
§ 150.072 REGISTRATION FEE.
   Every person upon his initial registration with the Clerk-Treasurer as a
plumbing contractor shall pay the Clerk-Treasurer a fee of $25; however, the
person may renew the registration upon the payment of a renewal fee of $10.
('79 Code, § 4-73)
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to charge reasonable registration fee, see I.C. 25-28.5-1-33
§ 150.073 BOND.
   Any person registering or re-registering as a plumbing contractor with the
Clerk-Treasurer shall execute and deliver to the city a surety bond in the
penal sum of $1,000, approved by the Mayor and conditioned upon the
registrant's faithful compliance with all laws regarding plumbing, street
excavations and pavement replacement and repair and which contains an agreement
to pay all damages, costs and expenses that may be caused by the negligence of
the person through failure to comply with the provisions of the laws.
('79 Code, § 4-74)
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to require bond, see I.C. 36-7-2-4
§ 150.074 CANCELLATION OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Grounds for cancellation. The Clerk-Treasurer shall cancel the
registration of any plumbing contractor for any fraud or deceit by the
contractor in obtaining it, or for any misconduct by him in the practice of
plumbing, or for the violation of any provisions of this code or of any other
ordinance concerning plumbers, plumbing, street excavations and paving repairs;
the Clerk-Treasurer may also cancel the registration if the registrant ceases
to engage in the business of being a plumbing contractor. ('79 Code, § 4-75)
   (B)   Appeal. 
      (1)   Any plumbing contractor whose registration with the Clerk-Treasurer
has been canceled may appeal from that action by filing a request with the
Mayor for a hearing upon the charges upon which his registration was canceled.
      (2)   The Mayor shall fix a date for and shall hold a hearing on the
charges with the date of the hearing being not less than five days or more than
30 days from the time when the request for a hearing was filed. ('79 Code, § 4-
76)
   (C)   Right of contractor at hearing. At the hearing before the Mayor on the
cancellation of a plumbing contractor's registration, the plumbing contractor
shall have the right to appear and be represented by counsel, to cross-examine
witnesses against him, and to produce evidence in his defense. ('79 Code, § 4-
77)
   (D)   Actions of Mayor. If, after the required hearing before the Mayor on
the cancellation of a plumbing contractor's registration, the Mayor finds that
the charges against the plumbing contractor are sustained, he shall confirm its
suspension or cancellation. ('79 Code, § 4-78)
   (E)   Reinstatement. Any person whose plumbing contractor's registration
with the Clerk-Treasurer has been canceled or suspended shall not be allowed to
be re-registered with the Clerk-Treasurer except upon the written
recommendation of the Mayor. ('79 Code, § 4-79)
§ 150.075 DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any plumbing contractor to fail to display the
registration certificate as may be issued to him by the Clerk-Treasurer in a
conspicuous place in his place of business.
('79 Code, § 4-80)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.076 ENFORCEMENT REFERRAL.
   Any duty or action under this subchapter assigned to the Clerk-Treasurer may
be designated by the city to another entity. That entity shall be considered
the designee of the office of the Clerk-Treasurer for this purpose.
(Ord. 03-2013, passed 4-23-13)
HOUSE MOVERS
§ 150.085 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of moving
buildings or other structures upon any of the streets or public ways without a
license issued by the Clerk-Treasurer.
('79 Code, § 7-47)
Penalty, see § 150.999
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to license and regulate businesses, occupations and
professions generally, see I.C. 36-8-2-10
§ 150.086 LICENSE APPLICATION; INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   Every person who desires the license required by this subchapter shall apply
to the Clerk-Treasurer upon a form furnished by the Clerk-Treasurer; on the
application form the applicant shall state all information necessary for the
Clerk-Treasurer to determine whether the license should be issued.
('79 Code, § 7-48)
§ 150.087 LICENSE FEE.
   Every person desiring the license required by this subchapter shall pay an
annual license fee of $10 to the Clerk-Treasurer.
('79 Code, § 7-49)
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to charge license fee, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(5)
§ 150.088 BOND.
   Prior to the issuance of the license required by this subchapter the
applicant for the license shall provide a bond in the amount of at least
$2,000.
('79 Code, § 7-50)
§ 150.089 NOTIFICATION OF UTILITIES.
   Prior to moving a building upon the streets a house mover shall give 24
hours notice to all utilities operating within the city of the type of building
being moved, the route to be followed and its final destination.
('79 Code, § 7-51) Penalty, see §
150.999
UNDERGROUND OR BURIED UTILITIES
§ 150.095 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to adopt a local policy regarding the
designation of locations within the city as underground or buried utility areas
pursuant to I.C. 8-1-32.3-15(c)(1).
(Res. 06-2017, passed 4-27-17; Am. Res. 07-2017, passed 7-6-17)
§ 150.096 DESIGNATION.
   The city, through its BOW, hereby determines that the city, developers and
homeowners located within the city limits have previously made investments to
ensure utility lines are located or buried underground and, therefore, in an
effort to continue this policy, the entire city, that being all city-owned
street right-of-ways located within the city corporate boundary, are hereby
designated as areas strictly for underground or buried utilities pursuant to
I.C. 8-1-32.3-15(c)(1).
(Res. 06-2017, passed 4-27-17; Am. Res. 07-2017, passed 7-6-17)
§ 150.097 RESTRICTIONS.
   With respect to the construction, placement, or use of a small cell facility
and the associated support structure, the BOW hereby restricts and prohibits
the placement of a new utility pole or a new wireless support structure in a
city right-of-ways, except as otherwise permitted in §
150.098.
(Res. 06-2017, passed 4-27-17; Am. Res. 07-2017, passed 7-6-17)
§ 150.098 EXCEPTIONS.
   Notwithstanding the restrictions and prohibitions contained in §
150.097, the following provisions shall be met and the following exceptions are
hereby permitted:
   (A)   Collocation of small cell facilities on existing utility poles and
wireless support structures within the city are allowed;
   (B)   Repair and/or replacement of existing utility poles and wireless
support structures within the city is allowed;
   (C)   A petition for a request to install new utility poles or new wireless
support structures within the city may be filed with the BOW which shall hold a
public hearing on such petition within 30 days of filing, and upon which a
decision shall be made by the BOW within 60 days of such filing;
   (D)   Upon receipt of a petition for the construction, placement, or use of
a small cell facility on one or more new utility poles or one or more new
wireless support structures in the city, the city shall post notice of the
petition on the city’s internet website with a statement that the petition is
available to public upon request; and
   (E)   The prohibition or other restrictions with respect to the placement of
new utility poles or new wireless support structures within the city shall be
applied in a nondiscriminatory manner.
(Res. 06-2017, passed 4-27-17; Am. Res. 07-2017, passed 7-6-17)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this code, for which no other
penalty is set forth, shall be subject to the penalty set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   If any person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the provisions
of the building code set forth in §§
150.015 et seq., or shall do any act prohibited therein, or shall fail to
perform any duty lawfully enjoined, within the time prescribed by the Building
Commissioner, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any lawful order given
by the Building Commissioner in connection with the provisions of this code for
each such violation, failure or refusal, the person, firm or corporation shall
be fined in any sum not less than $50 nor more than $500. Each day of such
unlawful activity as is prohibited by the first sentence of this section shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   If any person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the provisions
of §
150.024, do any act prohibited therein or fail to perform any duty lawfully
enjoined, within the time prescribed by the Building Commissioner, or shall
fail, neglect or refuse to obey any lawful order given by the Building
Commissioner in connection with the provisions of this code for each such
violation, failure or refusal, such person, firm or corporation shall be fined
$250. Each day of such unlawful activity shall constitute a separate offense.
(‘79 Code, § 4-29) (Ord. 31-1988, passed 12-13-88; Am. Ord. 13-2013, passed 10-
22-13; Am. Ord. 03-2016, passed 5-17-16)
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
   
151.001   Adoption by reference
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer, being marked and designated as the “Rochester Subdivision
Control Ordinance,” as prepared by the Rochester Plan Commission, be and is
hereby adopted as the Subdivision Control Ordinance or Subdivision Regulations
of the city; for the establishment of reasonable standards and procedures for
subdivisions and re-subdivisions as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, amendments and terms of said
Subdivision Control Ordinance are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this section.
(Ord. 12-2000, passed 5-23-00; Am. Ord. 18-2007, passed 11-27-08; Am. Res. 04-
2021, passed 7-27-21; Am. Res. 08-2022, passed 8-23-22; Am. Res. 08-2023,
passed 11-28-23)
CHAPTER 152: ZONING
Section
   
152.001   Adoption by reference
§ 152.001 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer, being marked and designated as the “Rochester Zoning Ordinance
of 2000,” as prepared by the Rochester Plan Commission, be and is hereby
adopted as the Zoning Code for the city; for the purpose of guiding the city in
accordance with the goals, objectives, and strategies stated within the city’s
Comprehensive Plan as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions, amendments and terms of said Zoning Code are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section.
(Ord. 11-2000, passed 5-23-00; Am. Ord. 19-2007, passed 11-27-07; Am. Ord. 20-
2007, passed 11-27-07; Am. Res. 10-2018, passed 11-27-18; Am. Res. 04-2021,
passed 7-27-21; Am. Res. 08-2022, passed 8-23-22; Am. Res. 08-2023, passed 11-
28-23; Am. Ord. 33-2024, passed 2-25-25)
CHAPTER 153: FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Statutory authorization
   
153.02   Findings of fact
   
153.03   Statement of purpose
   
153.04   Objectives
   
153.05   Definitions
   
153.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
153.07   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data
   
153.08   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
153.09   Compliance
   
153.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.11   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground elevations
   
153.12   Interpretation
   
153.13   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
153.20   Designation of Administrator
   
153.21   Permit procedures
   
153.22   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
153.30   General standards
   
153.31   Specific standards
   
153.32   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
153.33   Critical facility
   
153.34   Standards for identified floodways
   
153.35   Standards for identified fringe
   
153.36   Standards for SFHA’s without established base flood elevation and/or
floodways/fringes
   
153.37   Standards for flood prone areas
Variance Procedures
   
153.45   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board
   
153.46   Duties of Variance and Appeal Board
   
153.47   Variance procedures
   
153.48   Conditions for variances
   
153.49   Variance notification
   
153.50   Historic structure
   
153.51   Special conditions
 
   
153.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Indiana Legislature has in I.C. 36-7-4 granted the power to local
government units to control land use within their jurisdictions. Therefore, the
Common Council of the City of Rochester does hereby adopt the following
floodplain management regulations.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to
other lands which are inadequately elevated, inadequately floodproofed, or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
   (B)    Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters.
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage.
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
   (F)   Make federal flood insurance available for structures and their
contents in the county by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are:
   (A)   To protect human life and health.
   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects.
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in floodplains.
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight
areas.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.05 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   A ZONE. Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding is
runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A ZONES, flood
waters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant
threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as ZONE A, ZONE AE, ZONES A1-A30,
ZONE AO, ZONE AH, ZONE AR and ZONE A99 on a FIRM. The definitions are presented
below:
      (1)   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no base
flood elevation or depths are shown.
      (2)   ZONE AE and A1-A30. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood elevations are
shown within these zones. (ZONE AE is on new and revised maps in place of ZONES
A1-A30.)
      (3)   ZONE AO. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.
      (4)   ZONE AH. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between one and
three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are
shown within this zone.
      (5)   ZONE AR. Areas that result from the decertification of a previously
accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of
being restored to provide base flood protection.
      (6)   ZONE A99. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of an under-
construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of special flood
hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction of a protection
system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to consider it complete for insurance
rating purposes. ZONE A99 may only be used when the flood protection system has
reached specified statutory progress toward completion. No base flood
elevations or depths are shown.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE).
      (1)   A structure with a floor area 400 square feet or less that is
located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use
of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
      (2)   ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should constitute a minimal initial
investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have
minimal flood damage potential. Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are detached
garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is
connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls, is new construction.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the 1% annual chance flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BOUNDARY RIVER. The part of the Ohio River that forms the boundary between
Kentucky and Indiana.
   BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of a boundary river.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the regular
program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to
develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding
might be too great. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited to,
schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or
hazardous waste.
   D ZONE. Unstudied areas where flood hazards are undetermined, but flooding
is possible. Flood insurance is available in participating communities but is
not required by regulation in this zone.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including
but not limited to:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a structure or any
addition to a structure;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more than
180 days;
         (c)   Installing utilities, erection ofwalls and fences, construction
of roads, or similar projects;
         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes,
dams, channel improvements, etc.;
         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling
operations;
         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction ofbridges or culverts;
         (g)   Storage of materials; or
         (h)   Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT. Does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing
roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent
structures.
   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter
walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls), pilings, or
columns (posts and piers).
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A certified statement that verifies a structure’s
elevation information.
   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The first phase under which a community participates in
the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FTA)
has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic report
provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FBFM
(where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area acknowledged by a community as being
susceptible to inundation by water from any source. (See FLOOD.)
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory flood plus two
feet at any given location in the SFHA. (See FREEBOARD.)
   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake, or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory
flood. The FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the fringe districts.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The Fulton County Plan Commission office and
staff.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited
to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in
flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in
any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS are also referred to
as FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS, FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE, FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
ORDINANCE, and FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING). A method of protecting a structure that
ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with walls that
are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated debris impact
forces.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for non-
residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or above
the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional engineer or
architect.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently
carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood.
   FRINGE. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.
   HARDSHIP. (As related to variances of this chapter) means the exceptional
hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The
Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual, and
peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is
not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps,
personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as
a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be
resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURES. Any structures individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and
Structures.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially
damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to
bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local flood
damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation,
relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All renewal and new
business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after June 1,
1997, will include ICC COVERAGE.
   LETTER OF FINAL DETERMINATION (LFD). A letter issued by FEMA during the
mapping update process which establishes final elevations and provides the new
flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD initiates the six-month
adoption period. The community must adopt or amend its floodplain management
regulations during this six-month period unless the community has previously
incorporated an automatic adoption clause.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A general term used to refer to the several
types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by
letter. They include LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA), LETTER OF MAP REVISION
(LOMR), and LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). The definitions are
presented below:
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment by letter to the
currently effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in
a SFHA through the submittal of property specific elevation data. A LOMA is
only issued by FEMA.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the
currently effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations, and elevations.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An official revision
by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA’s determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the
BFE and excluded from the SFHA.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest elevation described among the following:
      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure.
      (2)   The top of the basement floor.
      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of
the structure.
      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or
pillars.
      (5)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement,
below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure provide any
resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:
         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic
flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters by
providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows) in a
minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has more than one enclosed area,
each shall have openings on exterior walls;
         (b)   The total net area of all openings shall be at least one square
inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; the bottom of all such
openings shall be no higher than one foot above the exterior grade or the
interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher; and
         (c)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parking of
vehicles and building access.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a
willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market
will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent certified appraisal,
replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value), or
adjusted assessed values.
   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to
people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of mitigation
is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the cost of
disaster response and recovery.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF 1929. As corrected in 1929 is a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within
the floodplain.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced after the effective date of the community’s first floodplain
ordinance.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
   NON-BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of any river or stream other than
a boundary river.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88). As adopted in 1993 is a
vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, canalization,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its propensity to snare
or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being
carried downstream.
   ONE PERCENT (1%) ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with
the letter A is subject to the 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. (See REGULATORY FLOOD.)
   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a community’s FEMA
map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood elevations, floodplain
boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and planimetric features. These
changes typically occur as a result of structural works or improvements,
annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas, or correction to base
flood elevations or SFHAs.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community’s participation in the NFIP
where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and
higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations
determined in a FIS.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is acceptable
to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at any location is
as defined in §
153.07. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known by the term BASE FLOOD, 1% ANNUAL
CHANCE FLOOD, and 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SECTION 1316. That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as
amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be provided
for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a duly
constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to
be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that
intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in
flood prone areas.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdiction of the
county subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the city are
generally identified as such on the Fulton County, Indiana and Incorporated
Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated August 16, 2012 as well as any future
updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency with the most recent date. (These areas are shown on a FIRM as Zone A,
AE, A1- A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO).
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred repetitive loss
or substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not include improvements of structures to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code requirements.
   SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP because
the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain management
regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
SHADED X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B Zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded (the 100-year flood). UNSHADED X ZONES (C Zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.
   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FIRM that reflects the severity or type
of flooding in the area.
   ZONE A. (See definition for A ZONE.)
   ZONE B, C, AND X. Areas identified in the community as areas of moderate or
minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area. However,
buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated rainfall
coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is available in
participating communities but is not required by regulation in these zones.
(ZONE X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and C.)
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and known flood prone areas within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.
   This chapter’s protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best
available regulatory flood data is listed below.
   (A)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for the
studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the city shall be as delineated on the
1% annual chance flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Fulton County,
Indiana and Incorporated Areas dated August 16, 2012 and the corresponding
Flood Insurance Rate Map dated August 16, 2012 as well as any future updates,
amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
with the most recent date.
   (B)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for each
of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the city, delineated as an “A Zone” on
the Fulton County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map
dated August 16, 2012 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions,
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date,
shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the
subject site is greater than one square mile. Whenever a party disagrees with
the best available data, the party needs to replace existing data with better
data that meets current engineering standards. To be considered, this data must
be submitted to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and
subsequently approved.
   (C)   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of identification
on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits of
any watercourse in the community’s known flood prone areas shall be according
to the best data available as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater
than one square mile.
   (D)   Upon issuance of a letter of final determination (LFD), any more
restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall be utilized
for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing all
previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally
altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within the SFHA shall
hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.11 DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND ELEVATIONS.
   (A)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped floodplain
(SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation provided on
the profiles shall govern.
   (B)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood
elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated accordingly.
   (C)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is above the
base flood elevation and not located within the floodway, that site shall be
considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied.
The property owner shall be advised to apply for a LOMA.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.12 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.13 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any
liability on the part of the city, the Indiana Department of Natural Resources,
or the State of Indiana, for any flood damage that results from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.20 DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Common Council of the city hereby appoints the Fulton County Plan
Commission office and staff to administer and implement the provisions of this
chapter and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.21 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following:
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen
fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing. Specifically the following information is required:
   (A)   Application stage.
      (1)   A description of the proposed development.
      (2)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately
locate property and structure(s) in relation to existing roads and streams.
      (3)   A legal description of the property site.
      (4)   A site development plan showing existing and proposed development
locations and existing and proposed land grades.
      (5)   Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD 88 or NGVD.
      (6)   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any non-residential
structure will be floodproofed.
      (7)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development. A hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering study is required and any watercourse changes submitted to DNR for
approval and then to FEMA as a Letter of Map Revision. (See §
153.22(B)(6) for additional information.)
   (B)   Construction stage. Upon establishment of the lowest floor of an
elevated structure or structure constructed on fill, it shall be the duty of
the applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor, as built. Said certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land
surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the lowest floor elevation survey data submitted.
The applicant shall correct deficiencies detected by such review before any
further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the surveyor failure to
make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order
for the project. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the elevation
certification shall be at the applicant’s risk. Upon establishment of the
floodproofed elevation of a floodproofed structure, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a floodproofing
certificate. Certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision
of a registered professional engineer and certified by same. (The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the floodproofing certification submitted.) The
applicant shall correct any deficiencies detected by such review before any
further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the floodproofing
certification or failure to make correction required shall be cause to issue a
stop-work order for the project.
   (C)   Finished construction. Upon completion of construction, an elevation
certification (FEMA Elevation Certificate Form 81-31 or any future updates)
which depicts the “as-built” lowest floor elevation is required to be submitted
to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project includes a floodproofing
measure, floodproofing certification (FEMA Floodproofing Certificate Form 81-65
or any future updates) is required to be submitted by the applicant to the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 07-2016)
§ 153.22 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter,
which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      (2)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and complete
substantial damage determinations.
      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects subject to
§§
153.34 and
153.36(A), and maintain a record of such authorization (either copy of actual
permit/authorization or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment).
      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have been
received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit. Copies
of such permits/authorizations are to be maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit.
      (5)   Maintain and track permit records involving additions and
improvements to residences located in the floodway.
      (6)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain Coordinator
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of
such notifications to FEMA.
      (7)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local
permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Change (LOMC),
copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization, and floodplain analysis and
regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal permit documents,
and “as-built” elevation and floodproofing data for all buildings constructed
subject to this chapter.
      (8)   Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Change (LOMC) or Physical
Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA maps of the
community.
      (9)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the floodcarrying capacity is not
diminished.
      (10)   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance.
      (11)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in
accordance with §
153.21.
      (12)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new or
substantially improved structures have been floodproofed in accordance with §
153.21.
      (13)   Perform necessary inspections to ensure that all applicable
ordinance and floodplain development requirements have been satisfied.
Inspections shall involve the establishment of the flood protection grade
reference mark at the development site; the establishment of the structure’s
footprint/establishment of the lowest floor; and upon completion and submission
of the required finished construction elevation certificate. Authorized county
officials shall have the right to enter and inspect properties located in the
SFHA.
      (14)   Stop-work orders.
         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator, work on any
building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall immediately cease.
         (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner
of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work, and
shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
      (15)   Revocation of permits.
         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit or approval,
issued under the provisions of this chapter, in cases where there has been any
false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application
or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit upon
determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the
structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in
conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 153.30 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all SFHAs and known flood prone areas the following provisions are
required.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces.
   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage below the FPG.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, utility meters, and other service facilities shall be located at/
above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and
telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities
may be located below the FPG.
   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (G)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (H)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure
that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the
requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter.
   (J)   Parking lots, driveways, and sidewalks within the SFHA shall be
constructed with permeable materials.
   (K)   Whenever any portion of the SFHA is authorized for use, the volume of
space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the BFE
shall be compensated for and balanced by an equivalent volume of excavation
taken below the BFE. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to the
volume of storage lost (replacement ratio of 1 to I) due to the fill or
structure.
      (1)   The excavation shall take place in the floodplain and in the same
property in which the authorized fill or structure is located.
      (2)   Under certain circumstances, the excavation may be allowed to take
place outside of but adjacent to the floodplain provided that the excavated
volume will be below the regulatory flood elevation, will be in the same
property in which the authorized fill or structure is located, will be
accessible to the regulatory flood water, will not be subject to ponding when
not inundated by flood water, and that it shall not be refilled.
      (3)   The excavation shall provide for true storage of floodwater but
shall not be subject to ponding when not inundated by flood water.
      (4)   The fill or structure shall not obstruct a drainage way leading to
the floodplain.
      (5)   The grading around the excavation shall be such that the excavated
area is accessible to the regulatory flood water.
      (6)   The fill or structure shall be of a material deemed stable enough
to remain firm and in place during periods of flooding and shall include
provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any increased runoff or
drainage resulting from its placement.
      (7)   Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and filled shall be
submitted prior to the actual start of construction or any site work; once site
work is complete, but before the actual start of construction, the applicant
shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a certified survey of the
excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and excavation comply with
this subchapter.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.31 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required:
   (A)   In addition to the requirements of §
153.30, all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood
damage below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the
following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of any structure having a floor area
greater than 120 square feet.
      (2)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure where the
cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the
existing structure (excluding the value of the land).
      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure where the
costs of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the value of the
land) before damage occurred.
      (4)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days.
      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. This division (A)(5) does not apply to returning the
existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was
removed to avoid flood damage.
      (6)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss structure.
      (7)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure with a
previous addition or improvement constructed since the community’s first
floodplain ordinance.
   (B)   Residential structures. New construction or substantial improvement of
any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor;
including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood
elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of division (D)
below.
   (C)   Non-residential structures. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential structure (or
manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation) or be
floodproofed to or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be
used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of
division (D) below. Structures located in all A Zones may be floodproofed in
lieu of being elevated if done in accordance with the following:
      (1)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account
flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures, and impacts
from debris or ice. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator as set forth in §
153.22(B)(12).
      (2)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention
and without an outside source of electricity.
   (D)   Elevated structures. New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated structures shall have the lowest floor at or above the FPG. Elevated
structures with fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed to preclude finished
living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs must
meet the following minimum criteria:
      (1)   Provide a minimum of two openings located in a minimum of two
exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
everyone square foot of enclosed area).
      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one foot above the
exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening,
whichever is higher.
      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of flood waters in
both directions.
      (4)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow
for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
      (5)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned
or finished into separate rooms.
      (6)   The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be at an elevation
at or higher than the exterior grade.
      (7)   Openings are to be not less than three inches in any direction in
the plane of the wall. This requirement applies to the hole in the wall,
excluding any device that may be inserted such as typical foundation air vent
device.
      (8)   Property owners shall be required to execute a flood openings/
venting affidavit acknowledging that all openings will be maintained as flood
vents, and that the elimination or alteration of the openings in any way will
violate the requirements of this division (D). Periodic inspections will be
conducted by the Floodplain Administrator to ensure compliance. The affidavit
shall be recorded in the office of the Fulton County Recorder.
      (9)   Property owners shall be required to execute and record with the
structure’s deed a non-conversion agreement declaring that the area below the
lowest floor (where the interior height of the enclosure exceeds six feet)
shall not be improved, finished or otherwise converted; the community will have
the right to inspect the enclosed area. The non-conversion agreement shall be
recorded in the office of the Fulton County Recorder.
   (E)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or nonresidential
structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in accordance with the
following:
      (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep
before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with either the
Standard or Modified Proctor Test method. The results of the test showing
compliance shall be retained in the permit file.
      (2)   The fill shall extend ten feet beyond the foundation of the
structure before sloping below the BFE.
      (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is
used, the slopes shall be no steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
      (5)   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be at or
above the FPG.
      (6)   Fill shall be composed of clean granular or earthen material.
   (F)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following
requirements:
      (1)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on
a site outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a
flood:
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood
waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as
required for elevated structures in division (D) above.
         (c)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame
or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
      (2)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on
a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been
substantially damaged by a flood:
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the lowest floor
of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in division (D) above.
         (c)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame
or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
      (3)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:
         (a)   Be on site for less than 180 days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (defined as being on
its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions); or
         (c)   Meet the requirements for “manufactured homes” as stated earlier
in this section.
   (G)   Accessory structures. Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such structures must meet
the following standards:
      (1)   Shall not be used for human habitation.
      (2)   Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials.
      (3)   Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of flood waters.
      (4)   Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to or above the FPO.
      (6)   Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as
required for elevated structures in division (D) above.
   (H)   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. All above ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral
movement.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.32 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the SFHA and/
or limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.
   (F)   All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of SFHA
for pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency responders).
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.33 CRITICAL FACILITY.
   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible,
located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new critical facilities
shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site. Floodproofing and
sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be
displaced by or released into flood waters. Access routes elevated to or above
the FPG shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.34 STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   Located within SFRAs, established in §
153.07, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters, which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and has erosion potential. If the site is in an
identified floodway, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant
to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications,
to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1 a permit for
construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources is
required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any excavation,
deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the floodway. This
includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading, clearing, paving
and the like undertaken before the actual start of construction of the
structure. However, it does exclude nonsubstantial additions/improvements to
existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26
allows construction of a non-substantial addition/improvement to a residence in
a non-boundary river floodway without obtaining a permit for construction in
the floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. Please note that
if fill is needed to elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior
approval for the fill is required from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.)
   (B)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until a
permit or letter of authorization (when applicable) has been issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in
the floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway or letter of
authorization has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources,
the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit,
provided the provisions contained in §§
153.30 through
153.37 have been met. The floodplain development permit cannot be less
restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources. However, a community’s more
restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence.
   (C)   No development shall be allowed, which acting alone or in combination
with existing or future development, that will adversely affect the efficiency
of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway. This adverse affect is
defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory flood of at least
0.15 of a foot as determined by comparing the regulatory flood elevation under
the project condition to that under the natural or pre-floodway condition as
proven with hydraulic analyses.
   (D)   For all city initiated and/or mandated projects involving channel
modifications or fill (including levees) the city shall submit the data and
request that the Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory
flood data per mapping standard regulations found at 44 CFR § 65.12.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.35 STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FRINGE.
   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit provided the
provisions contained in §§
153.30 through
153.37 have been met. The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of
any new or substantially improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.36 STANDARDS FOR SFHAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND/OR
FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.
   (A)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile.
      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the drainage area
upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along
with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources for review and comment.
      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
either a permit for construction in a floodway (including letters of
authorization) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 1%
annual chance flood elevation and the recommended flood protection grade has
been received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
      (3)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper permit
for construction in a floodway (including letters of authorization) or
floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development, a
floodplain development permit may be issued provided the conditions of the
floodplain development permit are not less restrictive than the conditions
received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the provisions
contained in §§
153.30 through
153.37 have been met.
   (B)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile.
      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the drainage area upstream
of the site is less than one square mile, the Floodplain Administrator shall
require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the limits of
the floodplain and 1% annual chance flood elevation for the site.
      (2)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in §§
153.30 through
153.37 have been met.
   (C)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and shall not increase flood
damages or potential flood damages.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.37 STANDARDS FOR FLOOD PRONE AREAS.
   All development in known flood prone areas not identified on FEMA maps, or
where no FEMA published map is available, shall meet applicable standards as
required per §§
153.30 through
153.37.
(Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-2016, passed 8-23-16)
VARIANCE PROCEDURES
§ 153.45 DESIGNATION OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
   The City of Rochester Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals
and requests for variances from requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.46 DUTIES OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
   The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator
in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by
the decision of the Board may appeal such decision to the Circuit or Superior
Court of Fulton County.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.47 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
   (A)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   (B)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
   (C)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
   (D)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
   (E)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
   (F)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
   (G)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
   (H)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
   (I)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment of
transport of the flood waters at the site; and
   (J)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.48 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause.
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship.
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
   (B)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to §
153.34 or §
153.36(A) may be granted.
   (C)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §
153.34 or §
153.36(A) will require a permit from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.
   (D)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of §
153.31, may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot of
one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.
   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (F)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration of any
structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the flood protection grade and the
elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of
the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation (see §
153.49 ).
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or
the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request (see §
153.49).
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.49 VARIANCE NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows the lowest
floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade shall be
given written notice by the Floodplain Administrator that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the flood
protection grade will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
      (2)   Such construction below the flood protection grade increases risks
to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the variance
applicant in the Office of the Fulton County Recorder and shall be recorded in
a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of
land.
   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.50 HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic
structures” upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an “historic
structure” and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.51 SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
   Upon the consideration of the factors listed in §§
153.45 through
153.50, and the purposes of this chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or failure to
comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit or conditions
of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. All violations
shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such in accordance with
the provisions of the Zoning Code. All violations shall be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $2,500.
   (A)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the violation
continues to exist.
   (B)   The Fulton County Plan Commission shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 04-2008, passed 6-24-08; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 4-24-12; Am. Ord. 07-
2016, passed 8-23-16)
CHAPTER 154: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
   
154.001   Adoption by reference
§ 154.001 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer, being marked and designated as the “Comprehensive Plan of the
City of Rochester,” as prepared by the Rochester Plan Commission, be and is
hereby adopted as the Comprehensive Plan for the city; for the development of
the city as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions, amendments and terms of said Comprehensive Plan are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section.
(Res. 26-1999, passed 9-28-99; Am. Ord. 17-2007, passed 11-27-07)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   BONDS
      
III.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
      
IV.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
      
V.   VACATIONS
      
VI.    ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Annexing lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of Deere Run Addition in
21-1991  10-9-91     addition to a certain unplatted tract of land northwest of
                     the addition and additional unplatted land located to the
                     south of Lot 1.
                     Annexing certain described territory of located in Section
28-1991  11-26-91    3, Township 30 North, Range 3 East, beginning at the
                     southwest corner of Section 3.
20-1995  9-26-95     Annexing certain described property to the city.
                     Annexing territory adjacent and contiguous to the south
29-1996  10-22-96    and east of the present city boundaries, on the east side
                     of Lake Manitou.
                     Annexing territory adjacent and contiguous to the south
30-1996  10-22-96    and west of the present city boundaries, on the west side
                     of Lake Manitou.
18-1998  6-23-98     Annexing the northwest fraction, west of the Michigan
                     Road, of Section 33, Michigan Road Lands.
20-1998  6-23-98     Annexing a parcel of land in the northwest quarter of
                     Section 33, Michigan Road Lands.
32-1998  7-28-98     Annexing a parcel of land in the east half of Section 33
                     of the Michigan Road Lands.
                     Annexing territory adjacent and contiguous to the south of
33-1998  7-28-98     the present city boundaries, commonly known as the south
                     side of Hickory Lane.
                     Annexing territory adjacent and contiguous to the south of
07-2001  5-8-01      the present city boundaries, commonly known as Man-
                     Chester Meadows.
09-2004  8-24-04     Annexing territory adjacent and contiguous to the south of
                     the present cityboundaries, commonly known as GasAmerica.
                     Annexing territory adjacent and contiguous to the east of
20-2004  12-7-04     the present cityboundaries, between the Fort Wayne Road
                     and the old railroad bed which has been removed, and two
                     additional parcels of land.
                     Annexing territory adjacent and contiguous to the south of
12-2005  11-8-05     the present city boundaries, east of Southway 31 and south
                     of the Oakwood and Manchester Meadows subdivisions.
45-2024  12-17-24    Annexing territory located at 382-388, 390-396, 392, 421,
                     431, 441, 450 Blacketor Drive.
                    
 
TABLE II: BONDS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.     Date Passed Description
                         Authorizing the issuance of waterworks revenue bonds
19-1995      9-12-95     for the purpose of providing funds to pay the cost of
                         certain additions, extensions, and improvements to the
                         municipal waterworks.
25-1995      11-28-95    Amending Ord. 19-1995 concerning the issuance of
                         waterworks revenue bonds.
28-1997      8-26-97     Authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds.
                         Authorizing the issuance and sale of an aggregate
34-1997      - -97       principal amount not to exceed $4,240,000, economic
                         development revenue bonds series 1997 as limited
                         obligations of the city.
36-1997      11-12-97    Amending and restating Ordinance No. 13-1994.
                         Authorizing the issuance and sale of bonds for the
                         purpose of providing funds to be used for the purchase
37-1997      11-12-97    and remodeling of the Burton Building to house the
                         city's office, the police department and the water
                         department.
38-1997      11-12-97    Appropriating the proceeds of the general obligation
                         bonds.
Res. 43-1998 10-12-98    Bond resolution of the Board of Park Commissioners of
                         the city.
44-1998      10-13-98    Approving bonds of the Park and Recreation District of
                         the city.
Res. 1-1998  12-7-98     Appropriating the proceeds of bonds of the Rochester
                         Park and Recreation District.
                         Authorizing the issuance of sewage works refunding
04-1999      2-23-99     revenue bonds for the purpose of providing for the
                         collection, segregation and distribution of the
                         revenues of the sewage works.
                         Authorizing the issuance of sewage works refunding
07-2010      10-12-10    revenue bonds for the purpose of refunding Sewage
                         Works Revenue Bonds of 1997.
                         Authorizing the issuance of waterworks revenue bonds
06-2013      5-28-13     to provide funds to pay for the cost of certain
                         additions, extensions and improvements to the
                         municipal waterworks.
                         Authorizing the issuance of sewage works bonds for the
01-2021      1-26-21     acquisition, construction, installation and equipping
                         of certain improvements and extensions of the sewage
                         works.
                         Authorizing the issuance of waterworks refunding
03-2021      3-23-21     revenue bonds to provide funds for the refunding of
                         certain previously issued and currently outstanding
                         waterworks revenue bonds.
Res. 30-2024 10-7-24     Bond resolution of the Water Board of the city.
                         Authorizing the issuance of waterworks revenue bonds
34-2024      10-22-24    for the purpose of providing funds to pay the cost of
                         certain additions, extensions and improvements to the
                         municipal waterworks.
                        
 
TABLE III: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.     Date Passed Description
                         Declaratory resolution for the designation of the
23-1994      8-23-94     Economic Revitalization Area #10 (application of
                         Rochester Metal Products Corp.)
                         Declaratory resolution for the designation of the
24-1994      10-25-94    Economic Revitalization Area #11 (application of Moore
                         Business Forms, Inc.)
                         Confirmatory resolution concerning the application of
25-1994      11-22-94    Moore Business Forms for the designation of Economic
                         Revitalization Area #11.
                         Confirmatory resolution concerning the application of
30-1994      9-27-94     Rochester Metal Products Corp. for the designation of
                         Economic Revitalization Area #10.
8-1995       6-13-95     Authorizing an Economic Revitalization Area within the
                         city for Rochester Heat Treating Company.
                         Declaratory resolution for the designation of Economic
27-1995      11-14-95    Revitalization Area #11 (application of Lau - A
                         division of Tomkins Industries, Inc.)
                         Confirmatory resolution concerning the application of
28-1995      11-28-95    Lau - A division of Tomkins Industries, Inc. for the
                         designation of Economic Revitalization Area #11.
Res. 20-1997 7-7-97      Designation of Economic Revitalization Area No. 11 and
                         tax abatement filed by Wynnfield Crossing, LLC.
                         Declaratory resolution for the designation of Economic
Res. 21-1997 7-8-97      Revitalization Area #11, application of Wynnfield
                         Crossing, LLC.
                         Confirmatory resolution concerning the application of
Res. 23-1997 8-12-97     Wynnfield Crossing LLC for the designation of Economic
                         Revitalization Area #11, and approval of tax
                         abatement.
Res. 08-1998 3-24-98     Declaratory resolution for the designation of Economic
                         Revitalization Area, application of Karen N. Hoff.
                         Declaratory resolution for the designation of Economic
Res. 09-1998 3-24-98     Revitalization Area #13, application of Wilson's Corn
                         Products, Inc.
                         Application for designation of Economic Revitalization
Res. 10-1998 4-6-98      Area and Tax Abatement filed by Wilson's Corn
                         Products, Inc.
                         Confirmatory resolution concerning the application of
Res. 11-1998 4-14-98     Wilson Corn Products, Inc. for the designation of
                         Economic Revitalization Area #13, and approval of tax
                         abatement.
Res. 15-1998 5-4-98      Application for designation of Economic Revitalization
                         Area and Tax Abatement filed by Wellness Center.
Res. 16-1998 5-12-98     Confirming the declaration of Economic Revitalization
                         Area No. 14, applicant Karen N. Hoff.
                         Declaratory resolution for the designation of Economic
Res. 03-1999 2-23-99     Revitalization Area No. 14, application of E & B
                         Paving, Inc.
                         Confirmatory resolution concerning the application of
Res. 08-1999 3-9-99      E & B Paving, Inc. for the designation of Economic
                         Revitalization Area No. 14, and approval of tax
                         abatement.
                         Declaratory resolution for designation of Economic
Res.15-2002  7-9-02      Revitalization Area application of Topps Safety
                         Apparel, Inc.
                         Granting of tax abatement for a period of ten years
Res. 16-2002 7-23-02     for Topps Safety Apparel, Inc. for property designated
                         as Economic Revitalization Area.
13-2005      9-27-05     Designating Indian Mills Plaza, Phase II, an Economic
                         Development Target Area.
                         Granting a deduction from assessed valuation for
Res. 14-2005 9-27-05     improvements to real estate (Indian Mills Plaza, Phase
                         II) located within an Economic Development Area toGMF
                         Rentals & Services LLC.
                         Designating all land zoned General Commercial within
18-2005      11-8-05     the city limits at the south edge of the city on both
                         sides of State Road 25 South an Economic Development
                         Target Area.
                         Granting of tax abatement for a period often years for
Res. 03-2006 3-28-06     Vision Properties, LLP.inconnection with the proposed
                         redevelopment of real estate improvements on Lot #2,
                         Indian Hills Plaza (Phase I).
                         Approving an amended declaratory resolution and
Res. 04-2014 5-27-14     economic development plan regarding the Main Street
                         Area economic development area.
Res. 05-2014 6-24-14     Approving expansion of the Main Street Area economic
                         development area.
Res. 11-2014 9-3-14      Designation a portion of the city as an economic
                         revitalization area.
                         Confirming the designation of a portion of the city
                         (American Axle & Manufacturing, Inc. property) as an
Res. 14-2014 10-28-14    economic revitalization area and approving SB-
                         1 granting tax deductions for ten years for
                         redeveloped or rehabilitated property and five years
                         for new manufacturing equipment installed.
Res. 03-2015 2-24-15     Designating a portion of the city as an economic
                         revitalization area.
                         Designating a portion of the city (TI Rochester
Res. 09-2015 5-26-15     Realty, LLC property) as an economic revitalization
                         area.
                         Confirming the designation of the TI Rochester Realty,
Res. 10-2015 6-23-15     LLC property as an economic revitalization area and
                         approving SB-1 granting tax deductions for ten years.
Res. 07-2016 5-12-16     Designation of economic revitalization area on the
                         application of Ad-Vance Magnetics, Inc.
                         Designation of Main Street- Downtown Economic
Res. 08-2016 5-12-16     Revitalization Area as requested by the Fulton County
                         Economic Development Corp.
                         Confirming application of Ad-Vance Magnetics, Inc. for
Res. 09-2016 5-24-16     the designation of economic revitalization area and
                         approval of tax abatement.
                         Confirming application of Rochester Metal Products for
Res. 05-2017 4-25-17     the designation of economic revitalization area and
                         approval of tax abatement.
                         Repealing Res. 01-2009. The city shall no longer
Res. 12-2017 10-24-17    assign any economic development area within the
                         jurisdiction of the Rochester Redevelopment Authority
                         to the Fulton County Redevelopment Commission.
                         Designating the Main Street-Downtown Economic
Res. 09-2018 11-27-18    Revitalization Area, as defined by Resolution 08-2016,
                         as a slum and blight area in need of redevelopment.
Res. 08-2020 10-27-20    Designating certain real property as an economic
                         revitalization area.
Res. 11-2020 12-22-20    Confirming economic revitalization area described in
                         Res. 08-2020, and approving a tax abatement.
Res. 02-2021 4-27-21     Designating certain property as an economic
                         revitalization area.
Res. 03-2021 5-25-21     Confirming economic revitalization area described in
                         Res. 02-2021, and approving a tax abatement.
Res. 01-2022 1-25-22     Designating certain property as an economic
                         revitalization area.
Res. 03-2022 2-22-22     Confirming economic revitalization area described in
                         Res. 01-2022, and approving a tax abatement
Res. 15-2024 6-25-24     Designating certain real estate as described in
                         Exhibit A as an economic revitalization area.
Res. 24-2024 8-27-24     Designating 1329 College Ave as an economic
                         revitalization area.
                        
 
TABLE IV: REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date     Description
No.  Passed
1-   3-28-95  Authorizing the sale of certain park lands owned by the city.
1995
32-  12-11-95 Authorizing the sale of certain park lands owned by the city.
1995
01-  2-27-96  Authorizing the sale of certain park lands owned by the city.
1996
Res.          Property owned by the Water Works Board and leased to Rochester Metal
20-  8-27-02  Products, Corp. may be leased for a term longer than three years.
2002
Res.
25-  10-26-04 Authorizing the purchase of the Gerig Round Barn.
2004
Res.
04-  4-4-11   Authorizing the execution of a warranty deed transferring 76.6 acres of land
04-           to the city.
2011
Res. 3-22-    Exercising the city’s reversionary rights to certain land, thereby requiring
06-  2011     Fulton County to transfer the subject property by warranty deed to the city.
2011
Res.          Expressing an interest in the purchase of real property at 505 West 13th
14-  11-26-13 Street for the Department of Public Parks.
2013
Res.
05-  5-24-22  Accepting jurisdiction over Minnow Creek.
2022
Res. 9-8-
09-  22    Recognizing North Shore Drive.
2022
             
 
TABLE V: VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
23-  11-26- Vacating the alley located on the south side of Deere Run Addition, which
1991 91     extends east from Bessmore Park Road.
31-  12-30- Vacating the alley located in Lakeside Addition of Lake Manitou at the end of
1991 91     Park Place Road to the channel.
3-   1-28-  Vacating the north south alley located in the block bounded on the north by
1992 92     Highway 14 and on the south by Barrett Road, commencing at the point where the
            alley intersects the two roads.
3-   4-12-  Vacating the undeveloped portions of Cleveland Avenue and Jay Street and two
1994 94     alleys which run from Cleveland Avenue to Monticello Road to the north.
6-          Vacating a portion on an unnamed street located between the northern boundary
1994 5- -94 of Lots #57, 58, 59, 60 and the southern boundary of Lot #61 in Lily Park
            Addition.
7-   5-24-  Vacating a portion on East 13th Street in the Robbins and Harter Addition.
1994 94
29-  9-27-  Vacating the south half of a 30 foot wide unnamed street located between the
1994 94     northern boundary of lots #56, 57, 58, 59, 60 and the southern boundary of Lot
            #61 in Lily Park Addition.
31-  9-27-  Vacating Fifth Street and Alley.
1994 94
22-  7-8-97 Vacating an alley which runs from State Road 14 to the north to Colonial Pond
1997        to the south.
39-  11-25- Vacating the ten foot alley located between Lots 98 and 99 in New Plat of
1997 97     Rochester.
06-  3-24-  Vacating the ten foot alley located between Lots 279 & 280 and Lots 314 & 315
1998 98     of Robbins in Harter's First Addition.
30-  7-14-  Vacating the ten foot easement located along the west edge of Lots 2, 3 and 4
1998 98     of Elk's Golfview Addition.
31-  7-14-  Vacating the ten foot alley located between Lots 14 & 33 of New Plat to the
1998 98     city.
34-  8-11-  Vacating the ten foot alley located between Lot #18 and Outlot #2 of Wallace's
1998 98     Addition.
35-  8-25-  Vacating the public alley located between Lots 80 and 81 in New Plat in the
1998 98     city.
49-  11-24- Vacating a portion of the north south alley located between Center Street and
1998 98     Boulevard Street.
24-  9-28-  Vacating the east-west alley between Lots 1, 2, 7 and 8 in Calaway's Addition.
1999 99
07-  7-25-  Vacating the alley between Lots 607 and 600 in Robbins and Harter's Third
2000 00     Addition.
18-  7-25-  Vacating two alleys between Lots 599 and 608, and between Lots 598, 599, and
2000 00     608 in Robbins and Harter's Third Addition.
03-  2-27-  Vacating the north-south alley from Eighth Street to Ninth Street in the
2001 01     Robbins and Harter's Additions.
09-  5-22-  Vacating the unimproved portion of platted Ohio Street, south of Sixth Street,
2001 01     between Lots 86 and 87.
03-  1-13-  Vacating the east-west alley from State Highway 25 to the west, bounded by
2004 04     Peach Tree Road on the south and Lots 43 through 48 in Victoria Park on the
            north.
14-  7-27-  Vacating the north-south alley running from Colonial Bay to the previously
2004 04     vacated portion (Ord. 22-1997) running south from State Road 14.
16-  9-14-  Vacating the east-west alley between 5th and 6th Streets from Jefferson Street
2004 04     west to the alley.
01-  1-10-  Vacating the north-south alley at 1419 College Avenue in the block bounded by
2006 06     College Avenue on the west and by a north-south alley off Wabash Road between
            Lots 22 and 23 in Mackey’s Addition on the east.
05-  6-13-  Vacating part a portion of the east/west 2nd Street that dead ends into Lucas
2006 06     Street between Clayton Avenue and Lucas Street.
            Vacating an east/west ten foot alleyway running between Bancroft Street and the
11-  8-25-  railroad right-of-way, south of Lot 574 Robbins and Harters 3rd Addition;
2009 09     vacating a north/south alleyway running south of Lot 574 Robbins and Harters
            3rd Addition extending to 12th Street.
17-  10-27- Vacating an east/west alleyway running from Jefferson Street to Mike Anderson’s
2009 09     parking lot, north of Lot 15 and Lot 20 in Calaway’s Addition, commonly known
            as 1629 Jefferson Street.
09-  8-9-11 Vacating a ten foot alleyway beginning at the south right-of-way of State Road
2011        14 and traveling in a generally southern direction to Colonial Pond.
04-         Vacating an ten foot alley running northwest / southeast, adjoining and lying
2012 4-3-12 adjacent on the easterly side of Lot 6 in the Original Plat of Smiths Addition
            to the city.
06-  5-22-  Vacating a 30 foot unnamed, platted road right-of-way within Sportsman’s Park
2012 12     Addition to Lake Manitou, as recorded on page 19A in Plat Book 3, in Fulton
            County, Indiana.
05-  5-28-  Vacating part of an east-west alleyway in Lots 15,16,17 and 18 in the Oakwood
2013 13     Addition to the city.
07-  7-22-  Vacating a 146-foot long section of 16th Street lying north of Lot 17 in
2014 14     Mackey’s 2nd addition being 60 feet wide.
            Vacating a 15-foot alleyway running north and south, lying directly adjacent
            and to the west of Lot 18 Fieser’s Addition; extending, from the north, at the
06-  2-24-  centerline of the formerly platted Cleveland Avenue, and running south
2015 15     approximately 134.5 feet to end at the southern property line of a tract of
            land described as held within the Northeast Corner of Lot 2 Aults Addition
            North of the Railroad in 31 MRL; all within the Original & Subsequent Plats of
            the city.
08-  10-24- Vacating a ten foot north/south alley lying between Lot 506 and 507 and running
2017 17     the same length as Lots 506 and 507, located in A.J. Homes’ Addition, a platted
            subdivision located in the city.
02-  6-26-  Vacating a ten-foot, east-west alley lying between Lot 60 and Lot 61, and
2018 18     running the same length as Lots 60 and 61, in a platted subdivision.
01-  2-26-  Vacating a 60-foot wide east-west right-of-way, 145 feet in length, lying
2019 19     between Lot 19 and Lot 20, located in Improvement Co. Addition as a portion of
            5th Street, in a platted subdivision.
05-  1-26-  Vacating a portion of a platted unnamed road in Ferndale Park plat, as
2020 21     described in Ord. 05-2020.
            Vacating a 10-foot east-west alleyway lying directly adjacent and to the north
03-  9-27-  of Lot 57 OP extending from the east, at the centerline of the formerly platted
2022 22     Main Street and running west approximately 165 feet to the western property
            line of Lot 57 OP.
01-  2-28-  Vacating that portion of North Lake Center Drive (25 feet wide right-of-way)
2023 23     lying adjacent to and immediately west of Lot 3BB as said lot is known and
            designated on the North Lake Center Second Replat.
13-  6-25-  Vacating a 30-foot-wide and 130 feet in length portion of the drive running
2024 24     east and west lying directly parallel with Lots 22a (Carvey replat) and 21 of
            Lily’s Park.
21-  9-24-  Vacating a 30-foot-wide and approximately 395 feet in length running north and
2024 24     south lying directly parallel between Lot 4 Shobes 3rd Fairview Heights, Lot 20
            Shobes 3rd Fairview Heights and Lots 15 through 19 Fairview Heights.
23-  8-27-  Vacating the undeveloped portion of Jay Street bordered by Lots 409 through 411
2024 24     on the west and Lots 406 through 408 on the east of Lords Addition.
           
 
TABLE VI: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
            Repealing the city zoning map adopted in 1970 and adopting the new
10-  6-12-  Rochester Zoning Map prepared and approved 6-3-91. All territory not
1991 91     previously included in said map to be designated an A Agricultural
            District; all previous zoned territory to remain the same.
12-  6-25-  Rezoning lots 13 and 14 in Loomis Addition, together with a tract of land
1991 91     adjacent and immediately to the west of these lots from R-1 to R-2.
22-  11-12- Rezoning a tract of land in Section 3, Township 30 North, Range 3 East,
1991 91     beginning at the southwest corner of Section 3 from A to I.
            Rezoning two tracts of land in Section 4, Township 30 North, Range 3 East,
6-   3-10-  one beginning at the southeast corner of the Northeast Quarter of Section
1992 92     4, the other beginning east of the intersection of the south line of the
            Northeast Quarter of Section 4 and the centerline of State Route 25 from A
            to I.
17-  6-9-92 Rezoning south two acres and five acres of uniformed width off of the
1992        entire east side of the described parcel of land from R to L-B.
32-  11-10- Rezoning real estate located north of the northwest corner of the
1992 92     intersection of Lucas and Wentzel Streets from A to I.
5-   2-23-  Rezoning real estate beginning on the north line of Section 16, Township 30
1993 93     North, Range 3 East, 48 rods west of the northeast corner of the Northwest
            Quarter of the Northeast Quarter from L-B to R-1.
6-          Rezoning tract of land in Section 6, Township 30 North, Range 3 East,
1993 3-9-93 beginning 1,080 feet north of the southwest corner of the Northwest Quarter
            of Section 6 from A to R-2.
13-  8-11-  Correcting of error in Ord. 575, passed in 1973, by designating 27 acres of
1993 93     a total 55 acres owned by Walter W. and Edith E. Kronberg as R-
            2 Residential usage rather than G-B Business.
16-  9-14-  Rezoning part of the south half of the Northeast Quarter of Section 33,
1993 93     Michigan Road Lands from A to G-B.
17-  10-26- Rezoning 300 feet of uniform width of the entire east side of a part of the
1993 93     tract of land located in the Northeast Quarter of Section 33, Michigan Road
            Lands from A to G-B.
18-  10-26- Rezoning a part of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of
1993 93     Section 15, Township 30 North, Range 3 East from R-1 to R-2.
5-   5-10-  Rezoning a part of the southwest corner of Lot number 9 of Olson Road
1994 94     Addition to Sunny Acres Plat from A to R-1.
22-  8-8-94 Rezoning a parcel of land in the Northwest Quarter of Section 6 from A to
1994        I.
26-  9-13-  Rezoning a parcel of land known as 802 Jefferson from GB to R-2.
1994 94
27-  9-13-  Rezoning a part of the Northwest Quarter of Section 18 from R-2 and G-B to
1994 94     A.
28-  9-27-  Rezoning a part of Section 33 as A to allow the keeping of horses on a five
1994 94     acre tract in the southwest corner of the real estate.
33-  11-8-  Rezoning a part of Elks Golfsview Addition Lot 9 from R-1 to R-2.
1994 94
34-  11-8-  Rezoning a parcel of land in the Northwest corner of the Northwest Quarter
1994 94     from Agricultural to Industrial.
38-  12-13- Rezoning a tract of land in part of the southeast fractional quarter of
1994 94     Section 32, Michigan Road Lands from LB to GB.
46-  12-27- Rezoning a tract of land in the southeast fractional quarter of Section 32
1994 94     from LB to GB.
2-   3-28-  Rezoning a parcel of land commonly known as 3616 Manitou Park Road from R-
1995 95     1 to R-2.
3-   3-28-  Rezoning a parcel of land commonly known as the north side of CR 50
1995 95     southwest of Westside Drive from A to R-2.
6-   5-9-95 Rezoning a parcel of land in the southeast quarter of the Southwest Quarter
1995        of Section 4 from I to R-2.
11-  7-11-  Rezoning a parcel of land commonly known as the south side of Fort Wayne
1995 95     Road 1500 feet east of SR 25 from A to I.
12-  7-11-  Rezoning a parcel of land commonly known as the west side of CR 300 E.
1995 95     between Smith Ct. and Ford Ct. from A to R-1.
13-  7-11-  Rezoning a parcel of land commonly known as 1702 Main St. from LB to GB.
1995 95
14-  7-11-  Rezoning a parcel of land commonly known as 1520 E. 9th St. from LB to GB.
1995 95
21-  10-10- Rezoning a parcel of land commonly known as 1338 S. Wabash Road from A to
1995 95     R-1.
26-  11-28- Rezoning a parcel of land commonly known as 1342 Lucas Street from I to A.
1995 95
04-  6-25-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as the east side of S.R. 25 North of
1996 96     U.S. 31 from Agriculture to General Business.
11-  7-23-  Rezoning a parcel of land in the southeast quarter of Section 16, Township
1996 96     30 North, Range 3 east from A to R-1.
18-  8-13-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as 2981 N. 450 from Agriculture to
1996 96     Residential-1.
19-  8-13-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as 2199 S. 500 E. from Agriculture to
1996 96     Residential-1.
15-  8-20-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as south side of E. 18th St. 1300 feet
1996 96     east of Old 31 from A to R-2.
16-  8-20-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as S.R. 25 south adjacent to south side
1996 96     of Walmart from Agriculture to General Business.
17-  8-20-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as 2460 Main St. from Agriculture to
1996 96     General Business.
22-  9-10-  Rezoning all that part of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section
1996 96     18, Township 30 north, Range 3 east lying north of the right of way of U.S.
            31 from R-2 and G-B to A.
28-  11-12- Rezoning real estate commonly known as the northeast corner of Wabash and
1996 96     18th St. from Agriculture to Residential-2.
09-  4-22-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as the NW corner of 50 E. & U.S. 31
1997 97     from Agriculture to Industrial.
12-  6-24-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as 2620 Country Club Dr. from R-1 to R-
1997 97     2.
05-  3-10-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as 929 S. Cr. 400 E from A to R-1.
1998 98
12-  4-28-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as 4631 S.R. 14 from Agriculture to
1998 98     Residential 1.
13-  4-28-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as the south side of Hickory Lane from
1998 98     Agriculture to Residential 1.
29-  7-14-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as 1267 S. 400 E from A to RI.
1998 98
40-  9-22-  Rezoning a parcel of land in the fractional northwest quarter of Section 6,
1998 98     Township 30 North, Range 3 East from Industrial to Residential-2.
41-  9-22-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as 3039 E. 200 N. from Agriculture to
1998 98     Residential 1
42-  10-13- Rezoning real estate commonly known as 425 Monticello Rd. Lots 6, 7, 8 and
1998 98     9 from Industrial to Residential-1.
51-  11-24- Rezoning real estate commonly known as 1507 Meridian Rd. from Residential-
1998 98     2 to Industrial.
1-   2-23-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as 2754 Old 31 North from A & R-1 to
1999 99     GB.
06-  3-9-99 Rezoning real estate commonly known as 17.54 A. North of the Old Sealed
1999        Power, 1552 N. Wentzel, from Agriculture to Industrial.
07-  3-9-99 Rezoning real estate commonly known as 2754 Old 31 North from Agriculture
1999        to Local Business.
09-  4-13-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as 350 N., 1/8 mile east of Old 31,
1999 99     from Agriculture to Residential-1.
16-  7-13-  Rezoning the first property east of 2047 E. 200 N. from Agriculture to
1999 99     Residential-1.
21-  8-10-  Rezoning real estate commonly known as 815 Mitchell Drive from Agriculture
1999 99     to Residential-1.
05-  - - 00 Rezoning real estate three lots east of College St. and south of 13th
2000        Street from Residential-2 to Local Business.
16-  10-9-  Rezoning north side of S.R. 14 east of Save A Lot from Agriculture to
2001 01     Office Commercial.
02-  2-12-  Rezoning south side of Ft. Wayne Rd. east of 2903 E. Ft. Wayne Rd. from
2002 02     Agriculture to I-Industrial.
21-  9-4-02 Rezoning north side of S.R. 14 west of Olde Orchard Ridge (S.R. 14 and
2002        Sweetgum) from Agriculture to Institutional.
22-  9-24-  Rezoning north side of S.R. 14 west of Olde Orchard Ridge (S.R. 14 and
2003 02     Sweetgum) from Agriculture to Institutional.
02-  1-14-  Rezoning land south of Manchester Meadows 18th St. and east of Action Glass
2003 03     Old 31S from Agriculture to R-2 Multifamily.
03-  4-12-  Rezoning four lots in Sportsman’s Park Addition to Lake Manitou, commonly
2005 05     known as 2609 Goose Pond Road, from General Commercial (GC) to Lake
            Residential (R-3).
02-  4-27-  Rezoning Lot numbers 71 and 72 commonly known as 128 W 6th Street, from
2007 07     Office Commercial (OC) to Old City Residential (R-4).
Res.
01-  - -    Adopting amendments to the Fulton County Zone Ordinance and Zone Map.
2017
Res.
04-  - -    Adopting amendments to the Fulton County Zone Ordinance and Zone Map.
2017
Res.
10-  - -    Adopting and approving amendments to the Fulton County Zone Ordinance.
2017
           
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to 1979 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Cite Code Section
I.C. Cite               Code Section
1-1-7-1                 97.40
3-5-1-1 et seq.         31.15,
                        31.45
3-10-6-1 et seq.        31.15,
                        31.45
3-13-8-1 et seq.        31.04
4-21.5 et seq.          91.71
4-21.5-1 et seq.        91.71
4-21.5-3-7              150.026
4-21.5-5-1 et seq.      91.71
4-22-2                  99.06
4-33-13-5(f)            35.08
5-3-1                   10.19
5-4-1-1                 31.01
5-4-1-1.2               31.03
5-4-1-5.1               31.02
5-4-1-8                 31.01,
                        31.02
5-14-1.5-1 et seq.      30.15
5-14-1.5-4              30.26
5-16-9-1                72.32
                        72.20,
5-16-9-1 et seq.        72.27,
                        72.30,
                        72.32
5-16-9-2                72.24,
                        72.26
5-16-9-4                72.26
5-16-9-5                72.29,
                        72.31
5-16-9-9(c)             72.27
5-16-9-9(d)             72.28
5-22                    35.20
5-22-7                  35.21
6-1.1-41                35.13
6-3.6-9-17              35.14
6-3.6-9-17(h)(1)(A)     35.14
6-7-1-30.1              35.02
6-7-1-31.1              35.02
8-1-32.3-15(c)(1)       150.095,
                        150.096
8-1.5-3-3               32.76
                        52.005,
8-1.5-3-4               52.006,
                        52.066
8-1.5-3-8               52.095
8-1.5-4-1 — 8-1.5-4-9 52.001
8-1.5-4-2               52.060,
                        52.061
8-1.5-4-4               52.066
8-1.5-5                 32.75
8-1.5-5-1 et seq.       32.75,
                        32.76
8-1.5-5-2               52.095
8-1.5-5-7(b)            32.79
8-2.5-5-4(g)            32.76
Title 9                 Ch. 70
9-13-2-1 et seq.        70.01
9-13-2-1                90.01
9-13-2-69.7             77.01
9-13-9-2-105            72.23
9-14-5 (Repealed)       72.23
9-18-22 (Expired)       72.23
9-21-1-1 et seq.        Ch. 70
9-21-1-2                70.06
                        Ch. 72, Ch. 76,
9-21-1-3(a)(1)          Scheds. I and
                        II
9-21-1-3(a)(4)          Ch. 75, Sched. IV
9-21-1-3(a)(6)          Ch. 75, Sched. II
9-21-1-3(a)(7)          Ch. 75, Sched. III
9-21-1-3(a)(9)          Ch. 73
9-21-1-3(a)(11)         Ch. 75, Sched. I
9-21-1-6 — 9-21-1-8   70.04
9-21-5-6                Ch. 75, Sched. I
9-21-9-2                77.03
9-22-1-1 et seq.        90.15
9-22-1-11               90.17
9-22-1-26               90.22
9-22-1-27               90.22
9-25-4-4                77.05
9-30-2-1 et seq.        72.04
14-28-1                 153.34
14-28-1-26              153.34
22-9-1-12.1             Ch. 93
22-9.5-2-1              93.02
22-9.5-2-2              93.02
22-9.5-2-3              93.02
22-9.5-2-4              93.02
22-9.5-2-8              93.02
22-9.5-2-9              93.02
22-9.5-2-10 (Repealed)  93.02
22-9.5-2-11             93.02
22-9.5-2-13             93.02
22-9.5-3                93.03
22-9.5-3 et seq.        93.10
22-9.5-4-1              Ch. 93,
                        93.02
22-9.5-4-8              93.11
22-9.5-5                93.02
22-9.5-5-1              93.03
22-9.5-5-1 — 22-9.5-5-93.04
22-9.5-5-6              93.05
22-9.5-5-7              93.06
22-9.5-5-8              93.07
22-9.5-6                93.02,
                        93.11
22-11-14                Ch. 92
22-11-14-1 et seq.      130.02,
                        130.03
22-12-1-3               99.09
22-12-2-1 et seq.       Ch. 150
22-13-2-7               150.017,
                        150.026
22-14-3                 Ch. 92,
                        Ch. 110
22-15-3-1               150.041
22-15-4                 150.018
25-26                   130.07
25-28.5-1-1 et seq.     150.070
25-28.5-1-33            150.070,
                        150.072
25-37-1-1 et seq.       Ch. 115
25-37-1-2               115.01
                        Ch. 115,
25-37-1-11              115.18,
                        118.18
32-33-9                 72.05,
                        Ch. 76, Sched. II
32-33-10                72.05,
                        Ch. 76, Sched. II
33-36-1                 38.01
33-36-2                 38.01
33-36-3                 38.01
35-42-4-1 et seq.       117.16
35-43-1-2               95.28
35-46-3-7 — 35-46-3-1291.03
35-47.5-4               Ch. 92
35-49-1 et seq.         117.01
36-1-3                  35.14
36-1-3-4                Ch. 94
36-1-3-5                Ch. 94
                        Title XI,
36-1-3-8                115.18,
                        150.087
36-1-3-8(a)(5)          118.18
36-1-3-8(a)(10)         130.07
36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B)      51.35
36-1-6-2                72.30
36-1-8-11               37.04
36-1-8-11(e)            37.04
36-1-8-11(f)            37.04
36-1-8-11(g)            37.04
36-1-20.2               36.20
36-1-21                 36.20
36-4-4-2                32.01
36-4-5-2                31.15
36-4-5-3                30.12,
                        31.16
                        114.22,
36-4-5-5                115.25,
                        118.24
36-4-6-1 et seq.        30.01
36-4-6-3 — 36-4-6-5   30.02
36-4-6-4                30.01,
                        30.02
36-4-6-5                30.01
36-4-6-6                30.25
36-4-6-7                30.10
                        30.27,
36-4-6-8                30.28,
                        30.29
36-4-6-10               30.13
36-4-6-12               30.33
36-4-6-13               30.32,
                        30.33
36-4-6-14               10.19
36-4-6-16               10.19,
                        30.34
36-4-6-17               10.19
36-4-9-4                31.30
                        31.31,
36-4-9-8                32.01,
                        33.03,
                        34.03
36-4-9-8(c)             32.01
36-4-9-11               31.30,
                        31.32
36-4-9-12               31.33
36-4-10-2               31.45
36-4-10-4               31.46
36-4-10-4.5             31.46
36-4-11-2               32.01
36-7                    10.19
36-7-2-4                150.070,
                        150.073
36-7-4                  32.90
36-7-4-207              32.26,
                        32.27
36-7-4-211              32.91
36-7-4-212              32.31
36-7-4-214              32.26,
                        32.27
36-7-4-216              32.28
36-7-4-218              32.29
36-7-4-220              32.30
36-7-4-301              32.32
36-7-4-302              32.32
36-7-4-303              32.36
36-7-4-304              32.37
36-7-4-305              32.33
36-7-4-306              32.34
36-7-4-307              32.35
36-7-4-401              32.38
36-7-4-411              32.39
36-7-4-501              32.40
36-7-4-902              32.91
36-7-9                  150.001
36-7-9-1 et seq.        92.06
36-7-9-1 — 36-7-9-28  99.04
36-7-9-5                99.06
36-7-9-5(a)             99.06
36-7-9-7                99.07
36-7-9-8                99.07
36-7-9-9                99.08
36-7-9-12               99.09,
                        99.10
36-7-9-13               99.10
36-7-9-13.5             99.10
36-7-9-16               99.12
36-7-9-17               99.08
36-7-9-22               99.08
36-7-9-25               99.06
36-7-9-27               99.13
36-7-10-2               150.002
36-7-12-5               32.16
36-7-14-1 et seq.       32.51
36-7-14-1 — 36-7-14-4032.50
36-7-14-3               32.52
36-7-14-6.1             32.52
36-8-2-2                34.01
36-8-2-3                33.02,
                        Ch. 92
36-8-2-4                Ch. 50
36-8-2-6                Ch. 91
                        Title XI,
36-8-2-10               Ch. 110,
                        Ch. 115,
                        150.085
36-8-2-11               Ch. 118
                        34.03,
36-8-3-3                34.06,
                        34.07
36-8-3-4                33.05,
                        34.13
36-8-3-6                34.11
36-8-4-12               33.04
36-8-7-3                33.06
36-8-14                 35.13
36-9-2-4                Ch. 114
36-9-2-5                Ch. 96
36-9-2-16               Ch. 50
36-9-2-16 — 36-9-2-18 51.15
36-9-2-17               Ch. 50
36-9-6-2                Ch. 96
36-9-15.5               35.09
36-9-17-1 et seq.       35.01
36-9-23-2               51.01
36-9-23-3               51.01
36-9-23-25              51.46
36-9-23-30              51.17
36-9-36-4               96.61
36-9-36-8               96.62
36-9-36-17              96.63,
                        96.64
36-9-36-40              96.65
36-10-2-2               Ch. 95
                        Ch. 95 
36-10-3                 95.15,
                        95.16,
                        95.17
                        
 
REFERENCES TO 1979 CODE
1979 Code Section 1996 Code Section
1979 Code Section 1996 Code Section
1-2               10.02,
                  10.05
1-7               10.19
1-10              10.99
1-12              10.20
1-13              10.21
2-1               35.01
2-2               35.02
2-3               31.01
2-4               31.02
2-5               31.03
2-6               31.04
2-7               31.05
2-19              30.01
2-20              30.10
2-21              30.11
2-22              30.12
2-23              30.13
2-24              30.14
2-25              30.15
2-32              30.25
2-33              30.26
2-34              30.27
2-35              30.28
2-36              30.29
2-37              30.30
2-38              30.31
2-39              30.32
2-40              30.32
2-41              30.33
2-42              30.34
2-54              31.15
2-55              31.16
2-84              31.30
2-85              31.31
2-86              31.32
2-88              31.33
2-99              31.45
2-100             31.46
2-112             32.02
2-124             30.02
2-136             32.25
2-161             32.15
2-162             32.16
2-176             32.50
2-177             32.51
2-178             32.52
2-191             32.65
2-192             32.66
2-193             32.67
2-194             32.68
3-1               91.01
3-2               91.02
3-3               91.03
3-4               91.04
3-5               91.05
3-6               91.99
3-18              91.15
3-20              91.16
3-23              91.21
3-24              91.17
3-26              91.19
3-37              91.35
3-38              91.36
3-39              91.37
3-64              91.39
4-1               150.001
4-2               150.002
4-3               150.003
4-16              150.015
4-17              150.016
4-18              150.017
4-19              150.018
4-20              150.019
4-21              150.020
4-22              150.021
4-23              150.022
4-24              150.023
4-25              150.024
4-26              150.025
4-27              150.026
4-28              150.027
4-29              150.999
4-41              150.040
4-42              150.041
4-43              150.042
4-44              150.043
4-45              150.044
4-46              150.045
4-61              150.055
4-62              150.056
4-63              150.057
4-71              150.070
4-72              150.071
4-73              150.072
4-74              150.073
4-75              150.074
4-76              150.074
4-77              150.074
4-78              150.074
4-79              150.074
4-80              150.075
5-1               92.01
5-3               92.02
5-4               92.03
5-5               92.04
5-6               92.05
5-7               92.06
5-19              33.01
5-20              33.02
5-21              33.03
5-22              33.04
5-25              33.16
5-26              33.17
5-27              33.05
6-16              50.01
6-17              50.16
6-18              50.15
6-19              50.17
6-20              50.17
6-21              50.17
6-22              50.18
6-23              50.19
6-24              50.20
6-25              50.02
6-36              50.40
7-16              110.01
7-28              111.01
7-29              111.02
7-30              111.03
7-31              111.04
7-32              111.05
7-33              111.06
7-34              111.07
7-35              111.08
7-47              150.085
7-48              150.086
7-49              150.087
7-50              150.088
7-51              150.089
7-63              112.01
7-64              112.02
7-65              112.03
7-66              112.04
7-78              113.01
7-79              113.02
7-80              113.03
7-81              113.04
7-93              115.01
7-94              115.15
7-95              115.16
7-96              115.17
7-97              115.18
7-98              115.19
7-99              115.20
7-100             115.21
7-101             115.22
7-102             115.23
7-103             115.24
7-104             115.02
7-105             115.25
7-110             116.01
8-1               70.01
8-2               70.02
8-3               70.03
8-5               70.04
8-5.1             70.05
8-6               74.02
8-7               71.01
8-8               74.02
8-10              71.02
8-11              71.03
8-12              71.04
8-13              74.02
8-14              71.05
8-15              74.02
8-16              73.01
8-17              73.02
8-18              73.03
8-19              71.06
8-20              71.07
8-21              74.02
8-22              74.02
8-22.1            74.02
8-23              72.01
8-24              72.02
8-25              72.15
8-26              72.16
8-27              72.03
8-27.1            70.08,
                  70.99
8-27.2            70.09,
                  70.99
8-28              72.04
8-29              72.05
8-30              73.04
8-31              70.06
8-32              70.07
8-54              74.02
8-55              74.02
8-77              90.01
8-78              90.02
8-79              90.15
8-80              90.16
8-81              90.17
8-82              90.18
8-83              90.19
8-84              90.20
8-85              90.21
8-86              90.22
9-1               94.01
9-16              94.02
10-1              130.01
10-2              130.02
10-3              130.03
10-4              130.04
10-5              130.05
10-6              130.06
11-1              95.01
11-16             95.15
11-17             95.16
11-18             95.17
11-51             95.25
11-52             95.26
11-53             95.27
11-54             95.28
11-56             95.30
12-1              34.01
12-2              34.02
12-3              34.03
12-4              34.04
12-5              34.05
12-7              34.07
12-8              34.08
12-9              34.09
12-10             34.10
12-11             34.11
12-12             34.12
12-13             34.25
12-14             34.26
12-15             34.27
12-16             34.28
12-17             34.13
12-18             34.14
13-2              74.01
13-3              74.02
14-1              96.01
14-2              96.02
14-3              96.03
14-4              96.04
14-5              96.05
14-6              96.06
14-18             96.20
14-19             96.21
14-20             96.22
14-21             96.23
14-22             96.24
14-23             96.25
14-24             96.26
14-36             96.40
14-37             96.41
14-38             96.42
14-39             96.43
14-40             96.44
14-41             96.45
14-42             96.46
14-43             96.47
14-44             96.48
14-45             96.49
14-46             96.50
14-47             96.51
14-48             96.52
14-49             96.53
14-50             96.54
14-51             96.55
14-52             96.56
14-53             96.57
14-54             96.58
14-55             96.59
14-56             96.60
14-66             96.61
14-67             96.62
14-68             96.63
14-69             96.64
14-70             96.65
14-82             96.75
14-83             96.76
14-84             96.77
14-85             96.78
15-1              114.01
15-2              114.15
15-3              114.16
15-4              114.17
15-5              114.18
15-6              114.19
15-7              114.20
15-8              114.21
15-9              114.02
15-10             114.03
15-11             114.04
15-12             114.22
16-1              97.01
16-2              97.02
16-3              97.03
16-4              97.04
16-5              97.05
16-6              97.06
16-7              97.07
16-8              97.08
16-9              97.09
16-11             97.11
16-12             97.12
16-21             97.25
16-23             97.27
16-24             97.28
16-25             97.29
16-26             97.30
17-16             52.001
17-17             52.060
17-18             52.061
17-19             52.062
17-20             52.063
17-21             52.064
17-23             52.065
17-24             52.066
17-25             52.080
17-26             52.005
17-27             52.006
17-28             52.081
17-29             52.003
17-30             52.004
17-37             52.015
17-38             52.016
17-39             52.017
17-40             52.018
17-41             52.019
17-42             52.020
17-43             52.021
17-44             52.022
17-45             52.023
17-46             52.024
17-47             52.025
17-48             52.026
17-49             52.027
17-50             52.028
17-51             52.029
17-52             52.030
17-53             52.031
17-54             52.032
17-55             52.033
17-56             52.034
17-64             52.095
17-65             52.096
17-66             52.097
17-67             52.098
17-68             52.099
17-69             52.100
17-70             52.101
17-71             52.102
17-72             52.045
17-73             52.046
17-74             52.047
17-75             52.048
17-76             52.049
17-77             52.002
17-78             52.103
17-80             52.104
17-81             52.105
17-84             52.115
17-85             52.116
17-86             52.117
17-87             52.118
17-88             52.119
17-89             52.120
17-90             52.121
17-101            51.45
17-102            51.46
17-103            51.47
17-104            51.48
17-105            51.49
17-106            51.50
17-107            51.56
17-108            51.01
17-111            51.51
17-112            51.52
17-151            51.53
17-153            51.02
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.            Date Passed Description
311                 5-11-65     35.02
                                52.020,
335                 8-10-65     52.025,
                                52.026
450                 10-8-68     92.02
                                90.01,
455                 3-25-69     90.02,
                                90.15 -
                                90.22
491                 11-25-69    52.096 -
                                52.102
535                 2-22-72     Ch. 75, Sched. II
538                 5-23-72     92.01
550                 11-14-72    95.01 
577                 11-27-73    71.03
611                 2-25-75     32.16
621                 5-27-75     Ch. 76, Sched. I
656                 5-25-76     73.01
674                 1-26-77     70.08,
                                70.99
686                 7-27-77     52.018
687                 8-24-77     Ch. 75, Sched. I
703                 2-14-78     52.018
714                 4-11-78     70.05
735                 9-26-78     Ch. 76, Sched. III
                                91.01 -
                                91.05,
768                 7-10-79     91.16,
                                91.19,
                                91.99
796                 4-22-80     52.097 -
                                52.101
798                 4-22-80     52.096
833                 12-9-80     32.16
                                Ch. 75, Sched. I,
837                 2-24-81     Ch. 75, Sched. III,
                                Ch. 76, Sched. I
870                 10-13-81    30.01
873                 10-27-81    34.14
903                 6-8-82      30.02
                                52.001,
                                52.004,
                                52.005,
931                 12-14-82    52.006,
                                52.060 -
                                52.066,
                                52.104
                                52.017,
951                 7-26-83     52.025,
                                52.104
13-1985             5-14-85     Ch. 76, Sched. I
25-1985             10-8-85     Ch. 75, Sched. III
32-1985             10-22-85    52.017
45-1986             3-11-86     Ch. 75, Sched. II
56-1986             7-8-86      92.01
80-1986             12-30-86    70.09,
                                70.99
                                51.01,
108-1987            11-10-87    51.45 -
                                51.52,
                                51.56
111-1987            11-10-87    52.096 -
                                52.102
112-1987            11-10-87    52.115 -
                                52.121
114-1987            11-10-87    51.02,
                                51.53
2-1988              1-26-88     51.18
                                51.16,
18-1988             8-9-88      51.45,
                                51.49
29-1988             12-13-88    95.15 -
                                95.17
30-1988             12-13-88    150.001
                                150.015 -
                                150.027,
31-1988             12-13-88    150.040 -
                                150.045,
                                150.999
7-1989              2-28-89     90.01
                                52.017,
23-1989             6-13-89     52.025,
                                52.102,
                                52.104
5-1990              2-13-90     Ch. 75, Sched. II,
                                Ch. 75, Sched. III
9-1990              4-10-90     32.50 -
                                32.52
8-1990              4-10-90     52.096 -
                                52.102
                                97.01 -
                                97.09,
                                97.11,
12-1990             5-22-90     97.12,
                                97.25,
                                97.27 -
                                97.30
15-1990             7-10-90     52.105
36-1990             12-24-90    30.01,
                                30.02
3-1991              2-26-91     52.018
4-1991              2-26-91     Ch. 75, Sched. III
5-1991              2-26-91     Ch. 75, Sched. II
6-1991              4-23-91     32.65 -
                                32.68
10-1991             6-12-91     T.S.O., Table VI
12-1991             6-25-91     T.S.O., Table VI
21-1991             10-9-91     T.S.O., Table I
22-1991             11-12-91    T.S.O., Table VI
23-1991             11-26-91    T.S.O., Table V
28-1991             11-26-91    T.S.O., Table I
31-1991             12-30-91    T.S.O., Table V
3-1992              1-28-92     T.S.O., Table V
6-1992              3-10-92     T.S.O., Table VI
17-1992             6-9-92      T.S.O., Table VI
32-1992             11-10-92    T.S.O., Table VI
                                93.01 -
                                93.08,
1-1993              1-12-93     93.10,
                                93.11,
                                93.99
3-1993              1-26-93     32.26 -
                                32.40
5-1993              2-23-93     T.S.O., Table VI
6-1993              3-9-93      T.S.O., Table VI
13-1993             8-11-93     T.S.O., Table VI
16-1993             9-14-93     T.S.O., Table VI
17-1993             10-26-93    T.S.O., Table VI
18-1993             10-26-93    T.S.O., Table VI
22-1993             12-28-93    52.097 -
                                52.100
23-1993             12-28-93    51.47,
                                51.49
3-1994              4-12-94     T.S.O., Table V
5-1994              5-10-94     T.S.O., Table VI
6-1994              5- -94      T.S.O., Table V
7-1994              5-24-94     T.S.O., Table V
22-1994             8-8-94      T.S.O., Table VI
23-1994             8-23-94     T.S.O., Table III
24-1994             10-25-94    T.S.O., Table III
25-1994             11-22-94    T.S.O., Table III
26-1994             9-13-94     T.S.O., Table VI
27-1994             9-13-94     T.S.O., Table VI
28-1994             9-27-94     T.S.O., Table VI
29-1994             9-27-94     T.S.O., Table V
30-1994             9-27-94     T.S.O., Table III
31-1994             9-27-94     T.S.O., Table V
33-1994             11-8-94     T.S.O., Table VI
34-1994             11-8-94     T.S.O., Table VI
37-1994             11-22-94    35.03,
                                35.04
38-1994             12-13-94    T.S.O., Table VI
46-1994             12-27-94    T.S.O., Table VI
1-1995              3-28-95     T.S.O., Table IV
2-1995              3-28-95     T.S.O., Table VI
3-1995              3-28-95     T.S.O., Table VI
6-1995              5-9-95      T.S.O., Table VI
                                150.018,
7-1995-A            6-27-95     150.020,
                                150.040
8-1995              6-13-95     T.S.O., Table III
11-1995             7-11-95     T.S.O., Table VI
12-1995             7-11-95     T.S.O., Table VI
13-1995             7-11-95     T.S.O., Table VI
14-1995             7-11-95     T.S.O., Table VI
19-1995             9-12-95     T.S.O., Table II
20-1995             9-26-95     T.S.O., Table I
21-1995             10-10-95    T.S.O., Table VI
23-1995             11-14-95    52.018
25-1995             11-28-95    T.S.O., Table II
26-1995             11-28-95    T.S.O., Table VI
27-1995             11-14-95    T.S.O., Table III
28-1995             11-28-95    T.S.O., Table III
32-1995             12-11-95    T.S.O., Table IV
33-1995             12-12-95    36.06,
                                36.07
01-1996             2-27-96     T.S.O. IV
2-1996              6-11-96     51.15 -
                                51.33
03-1996             6-25-96     Ch. 38
04-1996             6-25-96     T.S.O. VI
09-1996             6-25-96     73.01
11-1996             7-23-96     T.S.O. VI
13-1996             8-13-96     73.15
18-1996             8-13-96     T.S.O. VI
19-1996             8-13-96     T.S.O. VI
15-1996             8-20-96     T.S.O. VI
16-1996             8-20-96     T.S.O. VI
17-1996             8-20-96     T.S.O. VI
22-1996             9-10-96     T.S.O. VI
24-1996             9-24-96     T.S.O. II
29-1996             10-22-96    T.S.O. I
30-1996             10-22-96    T.S.O. I
28-1996             11-12-96    T.S.O. VI
06-1997             4-8-97      94.01
07-1997             4-8-97      94.02
08-1997             4-8-97      94.03
09-1997             4-22-97     T.S.O. VI
12-1997             6-24-97     T.S.O. VI
13-1997             7-8-97      71.06
14-1997             7-8-97      72.15
18-1997             7-8-97      51.54,
                                51.55
20-1997             7-7-97      T.S.O. III
21-1997             7-8-97      T.S.O. III
22-1997             7-8-97      T.S.O. V
23-1997             8-12-97     T.S.O. III
27-1997             8-12-97     Ch. 75, Sched. III
                                97.01 -
                                97.09,
                                97.12,
24-1997             8-26-97     97.13,
                                97.25,
                                97.27 -
                                97.30
25-1997             8-26-97     34.05
26-1997             8-26-97     Ch. 76, Sched. I
28-1997             8-26-97     T.S.O. II
31-1997             9-9-97      37.02
32-1997             9-23-97     70.10
34-1997             - -97       T.S.O. II
36-1997             11-12-97    T.S.O. II
37-1997             11-12-97    T.S.O. II
38-1997             11-12-97    T.S.O. II
39-1997             11-25-97    T.S.O. V
41-1997             12-23-97    30.26
42-1997             12-23-97    32.03
05-1998             3-10-98     T.S.O. VI
06-1998             3-24-98     T.S.O. V
08-1998             3-24-98     T.S.O. III
09-1998             3-24-98     T.S.O. III
10-1998             4-6-98      T.S.O. III
11-1998             4-14-98     T.S.O. III
12-1998             4-28-98     T.S.O. VI
13-1998             4-28-98     T.S.O. VI
15-1998             5-4-98      T.S.O. III
16-1998             5-12-98     T.S.O. III
18-1998             6-23-98     T.S.O. I
20-1998             6-23-98     T.S.O. I
22-1998             7-14-98     35.20,
                                35.21
29-1998             7-14-98     T.S.O. VI
30-1998             7-14-98     T.S.O. V
31-1998             7-14-98     T.S.O. V
32-1998             7-28-98     T.S.O. I
33-1998             7-28-98     T.S.O. I
27-1998             7-29-98     95.31
34-1998             8-11-98     T.S.O. V
35-1998             8-25-98     T.S.O. V
39-1998             9-8-98      Ch. 98
40-1998             9-22-98     T.S.O. VI
41-1998             9-22-98     T.S.O. VI
42-1998             10-13-98    T.S.O. VI
43-1998             10-12-98    T.S.O. II
44-1998             10-13-98    T.S.O. II
45-1998             10-27-98    Ch. 95
49-1998             11-24-98    T.S.O. V
51-1998             11-24-98    T.S.O. VI
53-1998             11-24-98    Ch. 76, Sched. I
1-1998              12-7-98     T.S.O. II
01-1999             - - 99      T.S.O. VI
02-1999             2-23-99     Ch. 96
03-1999             2-23-99     T.S.O. III
04-1999             2-23-99     T.S.O. II
05-1999             3-9-99      35.03
06-1999             3-9-99      T.S.O. VI
07-1999             3-9-99      T.S.O. VI
08-1999             3-9-99      T.S.O. III
09-1999             4-13-99     T.S.O. VI
10-1999             4-13-99     Adopting Ordinance
11-1999             4-27-99     35.05
12-1999             5-11-99     Ch. 76, Sched. I
13-1999             5-25-99     Ch. 75, Sched. IV
16-1999             7-13-99     T.S.O. VI
18-1999             8-24-99     32.26,
                                32.27
21-1999             8-10-99     T.S.O. VI
24-1999             9-28-99     T.S.O. V
26-1999             9-28-99     154.001
29-1999             11-9-99     Ch. 76, Sched. I
30-1999             11-9-99     Ch. 75, Sched. I
31-1999             11-9-99     52.035
03-2000             2-22-00     35.06
05-2000             - - 00      T.S.O. VI
07-2000             7-25-00     T.S.O. V
08-2000             3-28-00     Ch. 75, Sched. III
09-2000             3-28-00     Ch. 75, Sched. IV
11-2000             5-23-00     152.001
12-2000             5-23-00     151.001
13-2000             7-11-00     97.07
15-2000             7-11-00     38.04
16-2000             8-8-00      38.04
18-2000             7-25-00     T.S.O. V
21-2000             10-10-00    Ch. 117
22-2000             10-24-00    34.07
                                91.01 -
                                91.03,
                                91.05,
                                91.15 -
26-2000             11-28-00    91.19,
                                91.35,
                                91.39,
                                91.70 -
                                91.72,
                                91.99
03-2001             2-27-01     T.S.O. V
04-2001             2-27-01     70.05
07-2001             5-8-01      T.S.O. I
09-2001             5-22-01     T.S.O. V
                                99.01 -
14-2001             9-25-01     99.13,
                                99.99
16-2001             10-9-01     T.S.O. VI
                                51.01,
                                51.31,
                                51.45 -
18-2001             11-13-01    51.49,
                                51.51,
                                51.52,
                                51.54,
                                51.55
19-2001             11-13-01    52.096 -
                                52.102
21-2001             11-13-01    96.90 -
                                96.92
22-2001             11-27-01    32.75 -
                                32.78
26-2001             1-8-02      35.07
02-2002             2-12-02     T.S.O. VI
05-2002             4-9-02      95.15 -
                                95.17
06-2002             5-14-02     52.007
07-2002             4-9-02      34.14
08-2002             4-9-02      Ch. 76, Sched. I
15-2002             7-9-02      T.S.O. III
16-2002             7-23-02     T.S.O. III
19-2002             9-10-02     30.32
20-2002             8-27-02     T.S.O. IV
21-2002             9-24-02     T.S.O. VI
22-2002             9-24-02     T.S.O. VI
02-2003             1-14-03     T.S.O. VI
                                118.01,
                                118.02,
04-2003             2-11-03     118.15 -
                                118.24,
                                118.99
20-2003             8-26-03     35.08
02-2004             1-13-04     T.S.O. V
03-2004             1-13-04     T.S.O. V
09-2004             8-24-04     T.S.O. I
11-2004             7-13-04     35.06
12-2004             7-13-04     37.05
14-2004             7-27-04     T.S.O. V
16-2004             9-14-04     T.S.O. V
17-2004             11-23-04    32.90
20-2004             12-7-04     T.S.O. I
21-2004             10-26-04    52.096-
                                52.102
22-2004             10-26-04    51.47-
                                51.49
Res. 25-2004        10-26-04    T.S.O. IV
26-2004             10-26-04    Ch. 75, Sched. III
28-2004             10-26-04    Ch. 75, Sched. III
03-2005             4-12-05     T.S.O. VI
06-2005             6-14-05     32.91
07-2005             7-26-05     35.09
Res. 10-2005        8-9-05      35.10
12-2005             11-8-05     T.S.O. I
13-2005             9-27-05     T.S.O. III
Res. 14-2005        9-27-05     T.S.O. III
16-2005             10-25-05    Ch. 75, Sched. IV
18-2005             11-8-05     T.S.O. III
Res. 25-2005        12-13-05    31.47
01-2006             1-10-06     T.S.O. V
Res. 03-2006        3-28-06     T.S.O. III
05-2006             6-13-06     T.S.O. V
09-2006             8-22-06     52.017,
                                52.104
17-2006             1-9-07      51.99
02-2007             2-27-07     T.S.O. VI
06-2007             5-8-07      96.93
11-2007             7-24-07     34.14
12-2007             7-24-07     38.04
17-2007             11-27-07    154.001
18-2007             11-27-07    151.001
19-2007             11-27-07    152.001
20-2007             11-27-07    152.001
                                153.01 -
                                153.13,
                                153.20 -
04-2008             6-24-08     153.36,
                                153.45-
                                153.51,
                                153.99
05-2008             6-24-08     92.07,
                                92.99
12-2008             11-25-08    91.01,
                                91.02
17-2008             1-13-09     52.081
03-2009             5-12-09     Ch. 76, Sched. VI
04-2009             3-10-09     92.07
10-2009             8-25-09     130.04
11-2009             8-25-09     T.S.O. V
12-2009             9-23-09     52.096 -
                                52.102
13-2009             9-22-09     51.47 -
                                51.49
17-2009             10-27-09    T.S.O. V
07-2010             10-12-10    T.S.O. II
                                97.01 -
                                97.13,
14-2010             12-14-10    97.25,
                                97.27 -
                                97.30
03-2011             3-8-11      35.12
Res. No. 06-2011    3-22-11     T.S.O. IV
04-2011             3-29-11     35.11
Res. No. 04-04-2011 4-4-11      T.S.O. IV
08-2011             5-24-11     32.76,
                                32.78
09-2011             8-9-11      T.S.O. V
11-2011             9-27-11     35.03,
                                35.04
01-2012             2-28-12     70.05
                                153.01 -
                                153.13,
                                153.20 -
                                153.22,
02-2012             4-24-12     153.30 -
                                153.37,
                                153.45 -
                                153.51,
                                153.99
04-2012             4-3-12      T.S.O. V
06-2012             5-22-12     T.S.O. V
07-2012             6-12-12     36.20
08-2012             7-10-12     30.10
                                115.01,
09-2012             8-28-12     115.18,
                                115.22
11-2012             8-28-12     97.07,
                                97.28
12-2012             9-25-12     51.50
17-2012             10-23-12    Ch. 75, Sched. I
18-2012             10-23-12    130.04
                                150.015,
03-2013             4-23-13     150.058,
                                150.076
04-2013             4-23-13     52.018,
                                52.104
05-2013             5-28-13     T.S.O. V
06-2013             5-28-13     T.S.O. II
07-2013             6-17-13     35.09
08-2013             9-24-13     Adopting Ordinance
09-2013             9-24-13     37.04
13-2013             10-22-13    150.024,
                                150.999
Res. 14-2013        11-26-13    T.S.O. IV
01-2014             2-25-14     Ch. 75, Sched. III,
                                V
03-2014             5-27-14     97.02
Res. 04-2014        5-27-14     T.S.O. III
04-2014             5-27-14     50.01,
                                50.15
Res. 05-2014        6-24-14     T.S.O. III
06-2014             6-3-14      91.03,
                                130.04
07-2014             7-22-14     T.S.O. V
Res. 11-2014        9-3-14      T.S.O. III
11-2014             11-25-14    Adopting Ordinance
12-2014             11-25-14    Ch. 76, Sched. I
Res. 14-2014        10-28-14    T.S.O. III
                                93.01 -
15-2014             1-27-15     93.11,
                                93.99
01-2015             1-27-15     38.04
02-2015             1-27-15     91.02
03-2015             1-27-15     97.28
Res. 03-2015        2-24-15     T.S.O. III
04-2015             1-27-15     91.05
05-2015             1- -15      Ch. 76, Sched. II
Res. 05-2015        4-22-15     36.20
06-2015             2-24-15     T.S.O. V
08-2015             4-22-15     115.22,
                                115.25
Res. 09-2015        5-26-15     T.S.O. III
09-2015             6-23-15     35.13
Res. 10-2015        6-23-15     T.S.O. III
Res. 11-2015        8-25-15     130.07
11-2015             10-27-15    94.01
01-2016             2-1-16      130.07
03-2016             5-17-16     150.024,
                                150.999
04-2016             5-24-16     35.40 -
                                35.44
05-2016             7-26-16     Ch. 75, Sched. III
06-2016             7-26-16     35.14
Res. 07-2016        5-12-16     T.S.O. III
                                153.01 -
                                153.13,
                                153.20 -
                                153.22,
07-2016             8-23-16     153.30 -
                                153.37,
                                153.45 -
                                153.51,
                                153.99
Res. 08-2016        5-12-16     T.S.O. III
08-2016             8-23-16     97.40
Res. 09-2016        5-24-16     T.S.O. III
09-2016             9-6-16      52.035
Res. 10-2016        - -         37.01
10-2016             9-27-16     130.06
14-2016             12-27-16    35.50,
                                35.51
01-2017             1-24-17     96.53,
                                96.80
Res. 01-2017        - -         T.S.O. VI
Res. 04-2017        - -         T.S.O. VI
Res. 05-2017        4-25-17     T.S.O. III
Res. 06-2017        4-27-17     150.095 -
                                150.098
Res. 07-2017        7-6-17      150.095 -
                                150.098
03-2017             7-25-17     98.01,
                                98.04
04-2017             8-22-17     Adopting Ordinance
Res. 10-2017        - -         T.S.O. VI
08-2017             10-24-17    T.S.O. V
09-2017             11-28-17    52.018
10-2017             10-24-17    97.02
Res. 12-2017        10-24-17    T.S.O. III
12-2017             11-28-17    98.01,
                                98.04
14-2017             12-19-17    Ch. 75, Sched. IV
01-2018             4-24-18     Ch. 75, Sched. II,
                                III
Res. 04-2018        4-24-18     35.15
Res. 05-2018        4-24-18     35.16
02-2018             6-26-18     T.S.O. V
03-2018             6-26-18     72.20 -
                                72.32
4-2018              7-24-18     Ch. 75, Sched. V
                                119.01,
11-2018             11-27-18    119.02,
                                119.99
Res. 09-2018        11-27-18    T.S.O. III
Res. 10-2018        11-27-18    152.001
01-2019             2-26-19     T.S.O. V
02-2019             4-23-19     Ch. 75, Sched. III
03-2019             5-28-19     52.104
04-2019             7-23-19     51.57,
                                51.58
05-2019             7-23-19     97.25
06-2019             8-27-19     Adopting Ordinance
01-2020             2-25-20     Ch. 75, Sched. III
Res. 08-2020        10-27-20    T.S.O. III
Res. 11-2020        12-22-20    T.S.O. III
05-2020             1-26-21     T.S.O. V
01-2021             1-26-21     T.S.O. II
                                51.47,
Res. 0218-21        2-18-21     51.49,
                                51.57
                                51.47,
02-2021             3-9-2021    51.49, 
                                51.57
Res. 02-2021        4-27-21     T.S.O. III
03-2021             3-23-21     T.S.O. II
Res. 03-2021        5-25-21     T.S.O. III
04-2021             3-23-21     35.03
Res. 04-2021        7-27-21     151.001,
                                152.001
07-2021             4-27-21     35.17
                                52.017 -
                                52.018.1,
                                52.025,
10-2021             8-24-21     52.095,
                                52.097 -
                                52.101,
                                52.104
11-2021             7-27-21     Ch. 75, Sched. I
15-2021             11-23-21    51.14 -
                                51.36 
01-2022             1-25-22     Ch. 76, Sch. I
Res. 01-2022        1-25-22     T.S.O. III
02-2022             8-23-22     52.018
03-2022             9-27-22     T.S.O. V
Res. 04-2022        4-26-22     30.40 -
                                30.42
Res. 05-2022        5-24-22     T.S.O. IV
Res. 07-2022        6-28-22     35.17
Res. 08-2022        8-23-22     151.001,
                                152.001
Res. 09-2022        9-8-22      T.S.O. IV
01-2023             2-28-23     T.S.O. V
Res. 02-2023        3-28-23     35.09
Res. 03-2023        4-25-23     35.17
                                77.01 -
02-2023             5-23-23     77.06,
                                77.99
05-2023             6-27-23     35.60 -
                                35.67
06-2023             7-25-23     99.01
Res. 08-2023        11-28-23    151.001,
                                152.001
07-2023             12-19-23    52.018
08-2023             12-19-23    51.47 -
                                51.49
09-2023             12-19-23    35.21
10-2023             12-19-23    35.30 -
                                35.36
01-2024             1-23-24     94.03
02-2024             1-23-24     35.30 -
                                35.36
03-2024             1-23-24     35.21
10-2024             4-23-24     52.018
11-2024             4-23-24     52.025,
                                52.104
12-2024             6-25-24     Ch. 75, Sched. IV
13-2024             6-25-24     T.S.O. V
Res. 15-2024        6-25-24     T.S.O. III
16-2024             8-27-24     70.11
17-2024             8-27-24     Adopting Ordinance
20-2024             8-27-24     119.02
21-2024             9-24-24     T.S.O. V
23-2024             8-27-24     T.S.O. V
Res. 24-2024        8-27-24     T.S.O. III
Res. 30-2024        10-7-24     T.S.O. II
33-2024             2-25-25     152.001
34-2024             10-22-24    T.S.O. II
41-2024             11-26-24    32.18
                                52.017,
                                52.018,
                                52.018.1,
                                52.025,
42-2024             12-17-24    52.027,
                                52.098,
                                52.099,
                                52.100,
                                52.104
45-2024             12-17-24    T.S.O. I
46-2024             11-26-24    70.05,
                                97.25
47-2024             12-17-24    32.79
                               
 
 
